      PRSPs AND BUDGETS
A SYNTHESIS OF FIVE CASE STUDIES


Rosa Alonso, Lindsay Judge and Jeni Klugman
1.      Introduction

This paper synthesizes the findings from a series of case studies on the interaction between the PRSP
process and the budget. The five studies, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Tanzania and Vietnam aim to
assess the extent to which public finance management and budget allocations reflect the principles and
content of the PRSP, hence providing insights into progress in PRS implementation. The cases also shed
light on whether the PRSP process itself has fostered more accountable, efficient and pro-poor budget
processes and allocations as of 2003. 1

Public finance management and the PRSP process can mutually re-enforce each other. Public sector
reforms and reforms aimed at improving the pro-poor focus of public expenditure have often suffered
from unsupportive political and institutional environments, which the reforms have failed to address.
Absence of champions and processes to foster the proposed reforms have often led to weak
implementation and sustainability of reforms. The PRSP process, with its focus on data and information
for evidence-based policy-making, open and participatory policy-making processes, poverty results and
country-led donor coordination, alignment and harmonization has the potential to significantly improve
the pro-poor focus and general accountability of budgeting processes. Also, by taking a “process” or
“repeated-game” approach to reform with a focus on changing incentives, it has a greater chance to work
than the “single-game” approach with high stakes of public sector reform projects, especially in
unsupportive political environments. 2

The reverse is also true. The PSRP process necessitates sustainability of its key principles and objectives
through the implementation phase via budgetary processes. Unless budget processes themselves use,
produce and publicize quality data, become more open to representatives of the interests of the poor
within and outside government, lead to more pro-poor resource allocation and service delivery, and
donors adjust their policies to long-term, reliable support to country-driven priorities established in
PRSPs, the latter cannot be successfully implemented. PRSP processes and public finance management,
hence, need each other.

The cases confront a number of methodological challenges. First, in some countries and sectors, lack of
appropriate data constrained the extent to which the research questions could be fully answered. Second,
the PRSP remains a relatively recent innovation in all the countries studied and we recognize that many of
our findings are preliminary, and require additional confirmation over time. Third, any assessment of the
value added of the PRSP approach needs to be cognizant of the initial conditions in country, both to avoid
ascribing successes to the PRSP which pre-date its existence, and to temper expectations about what the
approach can deliver in a relatively short space of time given the starting point of each country. To
address this last challenge, the case studies explicitly acknowledge the pre-existing situation in-country
and try to assess the value added of the PRSP process.

The four countries studied have a number of common features. For example, except for Vietnam, they are
all, relatively small-sized countries with a majority of the population in poverty, a stable macro-economic

1
  Lindsay Judge and Jeni Klugman, The PRSP and Budget Linkages: The Case of Bolivia, 2004; Rosa Alonso and
Jan Walliser, Fiscal Aspects of PRSP Implementation in Burkina-Faso; Jeni Klugman and Robert Taliercio, The
PRSP and Budget Linkages: The Case of Cambodia, 2003; Rosa Alonso and Robert Utz, Fiscal Aspects of PRSP
Implementation in Tanzania, 2003; Rosa Alonso and Hoa Ngo, Vietnam’s CRGS and the Budget.
2
  On the dismal performance of public sector reform projects in Sub-Saharan Africa, see B. Levy and P. Engeberg,
Building State Capacity in Africa. The paper finds that more technical, narrower, public expenditure management
reforms had a much higher chance of success than broad public sector reforms, especially in unsupportive political
environments.


                                                         2
situation, minimum public expenditure management “basics” in place, a high degree of aid dependence
(though with important differences from country to country), a strong partnership between a technocratic
government team and the donor community, an active civil society, a weak Parliament and a good pre-
existing basis for donor coordination. Likewise, they all face severe budget constraints: in Burkina Faso,
for example, fears about rising levels of indebtedness have lead to IMF-imposed caps on spending,
Cambodia has an exceptionally low tax-to-GDP ratio and Bolivia has run large budget deficits in recent
years and has faced political and social upheaval as it attempted to address them. Finally, and perhaps
most importantly, all five countries share a high-level political commitment to addressing poverty,
although the extent to which this commitment permeates throughout government agencies varies from
country to country.

The five countries, however, also display many distinctive features. Bolivia and Cambodia, for example,
both suffer from high degrees of political fragmentation, which in Bolivia has manifested itself as civil
unrest on a number of occasions in the last two years. Burkina Faso, Tanzania, and Vietnam, on the other
hand, benefit from more stable political systems and an inherited commitment to pro-poor policies from
socialist governments. Tanzania and Bolivia both have a recent track record of participatory processes,
compared with Burkina Faso, Cambodia and Vietnam which had relatively closed policy-making systems
prior to the advent of the PRSP process. Likewise, Tanzania, Bolivia and, to a lesser extent Vietnam, have
a history of ongoing PEM reform dating back to the 1990s, although, arguably, gains from these reforms
have been far greater in Tanzania. Finally, there are obvious temporal differences: Tanzania and Burkina-
Faso both completed their first PRSP in 2000 and are now close to finalizing their second strategies and
Vietnam and Bolivia produced their PRSPs in 2001 though, in Bolivia, a change of government and
political disruption has slowed its implementation to date; and Cambodia completed its strategy only in
late 2002, and therefore remains at an early point with respect to PRSP implementation.

This paper is structured in four parts. The first section looks at the production and availability of data, and
whether it has usefully informed budget processes in our sample countries. The second section considers
budget formulation processes and assesses whether the PRSP process has contributed to making them
more open and participatory, both within and outside government. The third section provides an overview
of actual budget allocations and the extent to which expenditures have become more aligned with PRSP
priorities in each country. Finally, the paper concludes with a section on the role of donor coordination
and alignment with PRSP priorities as well as on the predictability and variability of aid flows.


2.      Data Production, Availability and Use

The case studies analyze the extent to which the focus of the PRSP process on the production of good
quality data is leading to the availability to policy-makers of more timely, more disaggregated, better
quality data on poverty and social indicators to support the budgeting process. They also examine whether
the PRSP-led focus on country ownership, sector-wide approaches and general budget support is
contributing to improved availability and dissemination of fiscal data within government, to Parliaments,
donors and civil society. The orientation of the PRSP process to the achievement of poverty outcomes can
also provide an added incentive for results-based, or at least results-oriented, budgeting. The case studies,
thus, also aim to ascertain to which extent this added incentive is enhancing the results-orientation of
budgeting processes.

Data Production

The production of relevant, readable and timely data has an important bearing on the policy-making
process, as well as on government accountability for policy implementation. This section considers the



                                                       3
extent to which the PRSP process has fostered an improvement in the coverage, disaggregation and
timeliness of poverty and fiscal data and in poverty analysis.

Greater coverage and disaggregation of poverty and fiscal data. Generally, the case studies do show a
PRSP-supported increase in the coverage and disaggregation of poverty and fiscal data and poverty
analysis. In Tanzania, for example, the PRSP process has contributed to improvements in data on
development expenditure and ongoing efforts will greatly improve the ability to consistently identify and
track PRS priority sector expenditures in the budget. In Tanzania and Burkina-Faso, the PRSP process has
also added impetus to the elaboration and use of disaggregated poverty data, for instance through the
establishment of gender disaggregated targets in the education and health sectors. In both Tanzania and
Vietnam, recent and reliable poverty data is publicly-available and used to elaborate high-quality studies.
This improved data coverage facilitates monitoring progress in PRS implementation and, more generally,
in the evolution of the quality of public expenditure.

In all five countries, the PRSP process has underscored the problems caused by the unavailability
of adequate expenditure classifications for policy analysis, monitoring and evaluation. In particular,
in all case study countries, monitoring is rendered difficult by the incompleteness of the functional and
program classification of budgets and the lack of systematic and consistent identification of PRSP
expenditures.

All the countries studied organized budget information using multiple classifications but generally each
retained only one classification for widespread use by all agencies throughout the budget process. Bolivia
and Cambodia, for example, use line item classifications for most budget functions while Burkina Faso
employs administrative categories as well as a program budget, but only the former is used for budget
execution and monitoring purposes. While using one simple classification by all government agencies has
some clear advantages in terms of simplicity and control, there are also shortcomings to this system. In
particular, they do not allow a country to match spending allocations with expenditure priorities at the
budget execution stage beyond the very broad level of sector headings.

While all countries in the study seem to have recognized the weaknesses of such an approach, only
Tanzania is successfully utilizing other classifications, including economic, programmatic and functional
formats as well as disaggregating spending by geographic region and gender. 3 The successful
introduction and use of these classifications in Tanzania is probably due to a longer history of PFM
reforms, a strong focus on poverty-reduction by both the MF and the PRSP unit and pressure from the
donor community and civil society. Experience from Bolivia and Burkina Faso in particular would
suggest that, in other contexts, donors efforts to encourage the production of budget classifications which
would generate information more amenable to policy analysis have been successful. These classifications,
however, do not yet seem to be fully used by either government or donors for budget execution or
monitoring purposes. Much of the information provided in the new formats, moreover, is still incomplete,
classification headings are often changed from year to year thereby hindering comparisons over time, and
they are rarely used to inform future policy development. It is important to acknowledge that the
development and use of new information formats takes time and the Tanzanian example seems to imply
that sustained production and dissemination of these classifications in conducive policy environments has
good prospects for success in the medium-term.

Moreover, there is some evidence of the successful use of programmatic classifications in our sample. In
Cambodia, for example, programmatic categories are used for expenditures under the Priority Action

3
 The introduction of GFS coding, still incomplete for the development budget, will further strengthen the quality of
data available and allow its international comparability and its consistency with the integrated financial management
system.


                                                          4
Program and, in Bolivia, there is some evidence of their effective use in the context of SWAps in the
health and education sectors. Similarly, in Burkina-Faso, the education sector has developed the first full-
fledged programmatic budget with a medium-term horizon in the context of an education sector program.
The development of these “islands of excellence” has been noted in other studies, and usually occurs in
the context of programs which give them a degree of financing predictability within a longer-term time-
frame than a single budget year. 4 Clearly, with the right conditions and support, countries which have
traditionally organized their budgets by line item can generate information in more useful formats,
although, in contexts such as Cambodia (and, to a lesser extent, Burkina-Faso), it could be argued that
they lead to the development of parallel budget systems which do not tackle the core problems of the
PFM system.

The need to monitor budget execution for PRS monitoring purposes has also emphasized the
importance of the comprehensiveness of budget data. An area where the PRSP process seems to be
leading to clear improvements is the integration of external assistance. The general move toward
budget supported fostered by the PRSP process per se leads to the integration of external assistance into
regular budgetary processes and budgets. Outside the area of budget support, however, the degree of
progress in capturing aid in budgets has very much depended on government leadership and the capacity
of external financing units in Ministries of Finance. In Tanzania, great strides have been made in
integrating donor financing into the budget both due to a move toward budget support as well as through
better recording of in-kind and direct project support into government accounts. This progress has been
achieved chiefly owing to the role played by the external assistance unit of the MoF, which led efforts to
harmonize donor reporting requirements and developed a comprehensive database of donor finance in
fy02 which was subsequently used to establish the resource envelope for the fY04 budget. On the other
hand, in Cambodia, no one agency has responsibility for coordinating donor inputs and, consequently,
much external finance goes untracked. In some other countries, even when external aid is recorded, it is
often compiled in formats that are incompatible with the rest of the budget. In Burkina Faso, for example,
few donors separate out capital and current expenditures, and many provide funding directly to the local
level, circumventing all systems designed to capture comprehensive information on spending patterns.

Similarly, information on budget execution at the local level is without exception weak and is usually
captured, if at all, by primitive systems that suffer from significant time lags. As a result, a large
percentage of expenditures remain untracked in any meaningful sense, especially in highly decentralized
fiscal contexts such as Bolivia. Tanzania provides an example of ongoing efforts to tackle this problem, as
it publishes local government expenditures on a quarterly basis, although to date only at an aggregate
level. 5 A further difficulty noted in some cases is that a significant amount of spending is off budget and
is never reported at any point throughout the budget cycle. In Vietnam, for example, budget analysis is
hampered by its lack of comprehensiveness and, in particular, its exclusion of the significant quasi-fiscal
activities of State-owned Enterprises (SOEs) and extra-budgetary funds.

Data Availability

The focus of the PRSP process on evidence-based transparent and participatory policy-making and on
budget support as the preferred aid modality requires broad availability of information for all
stakeholders. Our case studies provide some evidence that the PRSP process is indeed contributing to

4
 John Roberts, ”Managing Public Expenditure for Development Results,” ODI Working Paper 203, Feb. 2003.
5
 There is no easy solution to this problem. In situations where efforts are being made to extend FMIS to local levels,
some PFM experts have questioned whether such complex and rigid systems as FMIS make sense in low capacity
environments. In particular, there is little encouragement for local governments to pilot systems such as SIGMA in
Bolivia which are not sufficiently flexible to allow agencies to vire across budget lines. Hence, improving incentives
for regular reporting by local governments is probably a better alternative.


                                                          5
improved availability and dissemination of strategy, poverty and fiscal data within government as well as
to Parliaments, donors and civil society. There is no doubt that the introduction of the PRSP in our five
countries has motivated additional interest in collecting poverty data and social indicators and, to a lesser
extent, carrying out benefit incidence analysis and program impact evaluations. At the same time, the
PRSP process is also highlighting the important remaining obstacles in this area. In particular, in order for
information to be usable, it needs to be available in formats that are readable and facilitate analysis,
allowing the tracing between inputs, outputs and results. Less progress has been made in this regard but
pressure for its provision is mounting, especially from civil society and the donor community.

Improved availability and dissemination of information on government’s strategic priorities. The
PRSP process seems to have improved the extent to which government strategies and policies are
available and actively disseminated to the public. This is true even in countries such as Tanzania where
much data and information was already public before the advent of the PRSP process. For instance, key
documents such as the pre-PRSP National Poverty Eradication Strategy were only available in their
technical version and in English. The PRSP, on the other hand, was made public in summary form and in
Kiswahili. Moreover, in all countries reviewed, the PRSP process has been accompanied by an extensive
dissemination campaign by both government and civil society organizations. In Vietnam, the CPRGS was
widely disseminated, including in summary form to local government, communities and civil society as
well as through radio and television. Similarly, in Burkina-Faso, the PRSP process has fostered debate
about the country’s development strategy and has created an expectation that the PRSP should be linked
to sector strategies and budgets. The stakeholders most engaged in this debate in Burkina-Faso, however,
are donors and, to a lesser extent, government ministries, civil society and the private sector, with the
National Assembly still playing a rather marginal role.

Greater availability of and demand for budget execution data. The amount of budget information that
is currently available publicly varies considerably between our five case study countries. On the one hand,
much budget information is disclosed in Tanzania as part of its participatory public expenditure review
(PPER) process, with this exercise providing a forum for stakeholders to engage in discussion on the
available data as well as express their need for additional types of information. In Burkina-Faso, on the
other hand, public availability of budget data is more limited. In particular, although budget documents
are published in the official gazette and posted on the Ministry of Finance’s website, difficulty in
obtaining budget data was identified as a problem in the CFAA and the ROSC and was confirmed by our
interviews with members of the donor community and civil society.

In Cambodia and Bolivia, the readability of data is a problem, as web interfaces provide the public with
access to budget information, but in formats that are difficult to interpret. Moreover, without an
understanding of the budget process, much of the information that is disseminated is impossible to
interpret. For example, in Bolivia, central government health and education expenditures appear very low
online, mainly because transfers of funds to regional government to pay teachers and health personnel
salaries are not reflected under the relevant line agency budget. Without this kind of background
information, non-technical users would struggle to extract useful conclusions from the existing
information systems. This is, to a large extent, the situation in all our five countries.

Information availability on how government funds are actually spent is critical to monitoring the
consistency of budgets with government strategies as well as to curb misappropriations. The focus of the
PRSP process on data production, dissemination and budget and outcome monitoring has contributed to
progress in these areas. For example, significant improvements have been made in generating and
publicizing good budget execution data in the countries considered in this study and pressure for further
improvements is mounting. The introduction of integrated financial management systems in Bolivia and
Tanzania make real time information on actual expenditures available, while in Cambodia, execution
reports are produced on a monthly basis and aggregated annually. In Vietnam, the MOF produces


                                                      6
provisional monthly, quarterly and annual fiscal data on government operations shortly after the end of
the reference period and final data for the year are posted on the MOF’s website since 2001. Less
progress, however, has been made in the dissemination of within-year data or year-end preliminary data.
In Burkina-Faso, for example, within-year data is not shared by the MOF with other ministries, the donor
community or the public despite the fact that it was a condition for budget support. This is one of the
ongoing discussions between the Burkinabe government and the donor community and it is indeed likely
to result in greater publicity of budget execution figures.

A similar situation exists in Vietnam where only final budget execution data are shared with the public
and only after the lengthy six-month period it takes for its production. The 2004 PER, however,
recommends that preliminary budget outturns be published and, given the eagerness of the Vietnamese
government to make progress in the area of transparency in PFM and the donor community’s emphasis on
this area before considering a move to budget support, progress on this front is likely. Overall, therefore,
despite the magnitude of obstacles still ahead, the PRSP process and its accompanying move to budget
supports appear to have resulted in efforts to improve the production and availability of budget data to
government ministries outside finance as well as to the public.

Linking Spending with Results

Evidence from the cases studies suggests that the PRSP approach has increased government focus
on assessing the impacts of expenditures on poverty reduction results. For monitoring purposes, good
information on inputs needs to be complemented by tracking of outputs and intermediate indicators. The
PRSP process has encouraged all the countries studied to spell out more clearly both targets and
indicators that could be tracked to demonstrate progress towards their poverty reduction goals. A number
of common shortcomings, however, are also observed. First, the links between some indicators and
poverty reduction outcomes is somewhat tenuous, and should be spelled out more clearly. Second, it is
not always clear which institution has responsibility for monitoring each indicator, nor how the collected
information should be used to inform future policies or allocations. Third, indicators have often been
selected without taking account of government capacity to collect relevant information. Moreover, there
is a general over-reliance on survey data while routine administrative data remains weak and under-
exploited.

The PRSP process has clearly fostered greater emphasis on monitoring and evaluation. However,
much of this effort remains at an incipient stage with few effective systems yet being operational.
Tanzania is the best example in our sample of a solid monitoring and evaluation system with strong links
to the PRSP and budget processes while, in Bolivia, the agency tasked with tracking results has yet to
become fully functional. In all five countries, results information in most ministries is still collected in an
ad hoc manner. In all the countries studied, the Ministries of Education and Health were the most
advanced in the establishment and monitoring of targets and indicators. This good performance seems due
to the fact that these ministries often have sectoral programs with associated monitoring frameworks, that
they are priority sectors for their respective poverty-reduction strategies and that it is easier to define and
monitor meaningful targets and indicators in these sectors than in others (e.g. productive sectors).

While valuable information on impacts is increasingly being collected on a systematic basis, weak
coordination among collecting agencies and insufficient use by policy-makers means that their full
potential is not yet utilized. Moreover, relevant information is often not available at appropriate points in
the budget cycle and line ministries have little guidance on what information they are expected to compile
as part of their budget reporting. That said, there is some emerging good practice. In Tanzania, for
example, poverty data is being used for the determination of fiscal transfer formulas to local government
while, in Cambodia and Burkina-Faso, innovative mechanisms for the joint monitoring of sectoral results
frameworks have been developed including an annual review of sector performance reports. In Cambodia,


                                                      7
moreover, these reports – for education and health -- feed in to the production of revised financing
frameworks for the MTEF.

The results-orientation of donor budget support programs seems to be increasing the attention paid
by the Ministry of Finance to the links of budget inputs with outputs and intermediate indicators.
For example, in 2003 in Burkina-Faso, the failure of the MF to provide a budget allocation for the
Ministry of Basic Education to be able to produce routine data on school enrollment led to missing a key
benchmark with the European Union. Partly as a result of this failure, the variable tranche of the EU’s
budget support program was not disbursed, causing strain in budget management. This crisis, however,
seems to have significantly increased the awareness of Ministry of Finance officials of the importance of
budgeting for results and of documenting and accounting for those results in a timely manner.

In order for increased data availability to result in improved policy-making it needs to be used by
government, Parliament and civil society. Encouragingly, the studies also showed that the PRSP process
has motivated new interest in how funds are spent and what results they are having. In Burkina-Faso, for
example, the growing participation of civil society in the PRSP process has created expectations of
increased involvement in other aspects of policy-making, including in the budgeting process. Non-
governmental organizations are particularly keen and increasingly pressuring government for, at least,
improved availability of budget information and, at most, increased involvement in the budgeting process.
Our case studies, however, also point to the need for capacity building to increase the budget literacy of
civil society (as well as Parliament and government officials). Although greater budget literacy should
increase the ability of stakeholders to hold governments accountable, a recent survey of monitoring and
evaluation systems carried out by GTZ finds that the main channel for increased accountability is through
greater political pressure on government by stakeholders (a channel that is not exclusively dependent on
“capacity”).

Over time, it is expected that this greater demand for information both from within and outside
government will lead to changes in how budget data is presented as well as disseminated as well as to
greater consistency be als, targets, indicators, outputs and inputs, the PRSP process has enhanced the
results-orientation of the tween strategies in budgets. In Tanzania, for example, by emphasizing the need
for links between go PPER process and there is now greater pressure by civil society organizations to link
outputs from the PPER to the budget and the PRS cycles.

Emerging Policy Lessons

Our studies, thus, suggest that the PRSP process is fostering the increased production and use of
strategy, poverty and fiscal data that provide the incentives for greater results-orientation and
enhanced government accountability.

It also suggests that further improvements are needed in order for the full potential of the process to bear
fruit. For example:

    •   The production and publication of comprehensive, sufficiently disaggregated, readable and timely
        budget data needs to be further improved, and effective incentives or sanctions developed to
        ensure that all levels of government account fully for their spending. At the local level, this is
        likely to require capacity building as well as streamlining of reporting formats.

    •   More work is needed to develop appropriate budget classifications to allow government to track
        inputs in a way which usefully informs the policy cycle. In particular, the elaboration of full
        functional classifications and the expansion of programmatic budgeting would allow agencies to



                                                      8
         strengthen the strategic and pro-poor focus of their resource allocations. Once program budgets
         are elaborated, they should be tracked and used by government, donors and civil society.

     •   PRSP expenditures need to be properly and consistently identified in the PRSP, PRSP progress
         report, the MTEF, the budget and executed budget data in order to allow proper monitoring of
         their evolution.

     •   Information on inputs should be complemented with more systematic efforts to develop useful
         indicators and collect information on results. This would need to be complemented by capacity
         building within line agencies to interpret monitoring results and use these results to inform
         relevant analytical work. Moreover, line agencies could be required to report key performance
         data as part of their budget submission. Similarly, capacity-building for sectoral experts at the
         Ministry of Finance is needed to allow the ministry to properly interpret the performance data
         submitted by line ministries.

     •   There is a need to stimulate better understanding of the budget basics by the legislature and civil
         society groups. In addition, budget information could be presented to potential users in formats
         such as pamphlets and periodic newsletters, thereby reaching a broader audience who do not have
         access to web technology. Events such as the annual presentation and discussion of the
         government’s budget organized by civil society groups in Tanzania is a good practice that would
         be very useful elsewhere.


3.       Budget Formulation and the PRSP—Has the PRSP Process Increased the Openness
         and Transparency of the Budget Process?

The PRSP process aims to foster greater openness and transparency in policy-making, which is expected
to be valuable in at least two senses. First, openness/participation and transparency are of intrinsic value,
as they increase the welfare of citizens by increasing their access to information on how they are
governed and they ability to participate in government decision-making. Second, it is assumed that
openness and participation will eventually lead to more efficient, accountable and pro-poor decision-
making due to the involvement of the poor and other representative groups in monitoring and, even, in
directly informing government decisions. While the ways and extent to which this potential is realized
varies enormously across countries, one would expect to see the emergence of both a more strategic
approach and greater participation in budget formulation as a result of the PRSP exercise.

This section assesses the extent to which this has indeed been the case in our four countries. It looks at the
processes associated with preparing annual budgets and, where applicable, medium term expenditure
frameworks (MTEFs), and how these have been linked to, and informed by, PRSP processes.
Specifically, the roles played by the Ministry of Finance, sector ministries, civil society, local government
and the legislature in deciding resource allocations are examined, and the main synergies and key
disconnects between the budget formulation and the PRSP process are reviewed.

The Importance of Initial Conditions in Public Expenditure Management

There are significant differences in the initial PEM conditions in the countries in our sample. Whereas
Burkina-Faso and Tanzania underwent significant reforms in their PEM systems in the 1990s, these
reforms are more recent in Vietnam and only incipient in Bolivia and Cambodia (Table 1). The differing
degrees of soundness of PEM systems has a significant impact on the extent to which the budget process
is a meaningful process for resource allocation. Hence, it also significantly affects the ability of this


                                                      9
resource allocation process to become increasingly strategic as a response to the PRSP process. Tanzania
and Burkina-Faso have sound PEM systems and associated budget processes that have become more
strategic with the advent of the PRSP process while this impact has been weaker in Bolivia and
Cambodia. Countries with a stronger degree of social cohesion and government control (Burkina-Faso,
Tanzania and Vietnam) have also done much better at imposing fiscal discipline on the PRSP process
than countries with higher degrees of social fragmentation and weaker government control (Bolivia and
Cambodia).

Table 1: Key Characteristics of Budget Formulation




                                                                                                          Protected priority expenditures
                          Separate preparation of capital




                                                                                                                                                                                               History of inaccurate aggregte
                                                                                                                                                                     Medium Term Expenditure




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Fragmented line ministry
                                                                              High level of off budget




                                                                                                                                            History of incremental
                          and current accounts




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           High level of fiscal
                                                            O&M as residual




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           decentralisation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                responsibilities
                                                                              expenditures




                                                                                                                                                                     Framework



                                                                                                                                                                                               projections
                                                                                                                                            bugdeting
 Bolivia
 Burkina Fas o

 Cambodia

 Tanzania



Improvements in Public Expenditure Management and the PRSP Process

Dual budgeting and costing. An important weakness of the budgetary process in Bolivia, Cambodia and
Vietnam is that these countries have not integrated the preparation of capital and current budgets. In
Vietnam, moreover, the current and capital budgets are prepared not just by different units but by
different ministries. As a result, disconnects are observed, and forward projections for current
expenditures are often inappropriately low. In Cambodia for example, necessary allocations for operations
and maintenance (O&M) are typically underestimated, treated as a residual and suffer from large cuts in
cases of revenue shortfalls. As a result, the sustainability of earlier investments is compromised.
Moreover, high levels of off budget donor-funded capital expenditures exacerbate this problem. The
PRSP process, with its focus on results, is placing increased pressure on governments to use an integrated
planning process as the only way to assess sector program costs to achieve specific targets. Costing has
received great impetus under the PRSP process and, in Tanzania and Burkina-Faso, for example, the
costing of the PRSP continued after the initial estimates of the paper. In Vietnam, however, the impact
has been smaller as the PRSP process seems to play a less important role in government processes,
including budgeting. There, it is the incipient building of an MTEF that has more potential to bring about
the integration of the budget process.

Strategic planning. Tanzania, Vietnam and, to a lesser extent, Burkina-Faso seem to have a more
strategic approach to planning and budgeting than the other three countries in our sample. In all three
countries, this strategic approach has also translated into the protection of expenditure priorities in times


                                                                                                         10
of budget crunch. Moreover, in Tanzania, the PRSP process led to the establishment of a system of
quarterly releases to PRS priority sectors which has freed priority ministries from the strictures of the cash
budgeting system. Beneficiary ministries and local authorities report this system has greatly enhanced
their ability to plan and manage their available resources.

In Cambodia and Bolivia, on the other hand, mid-year expenditure increases or cuts were routinely made
across the board without any attempt to make strategic choices by identifying priorities. Some good
practice, however, was observed even in these two countries, especially in the health and education
sectors, which often receive a degree of protection due to the existence of sector-wide approaches
(SWAPs). The greater the reliability and protection of budget allocations, the greater the incentive for line
ministries and other stakeholders to invest time in good budget preparation. The reverse, of course, is also
true. Namely, if line ministries know that cash flows to the sector will not reflect the budget, they are
unlikely to invest time in the preparation of budget submissions. This was especially the case in Bolivia,
where the budget is not a regarded as a binding document and hence few could see the value of engaging
substantively at the budget formulation stage.

In order to increase the strategic orientation and reliability of budget allocations, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Tanzania and Vietnam have, to varying degrees, introduced MTEFs in recent years. There has
been good progress on some fronts: in Cambodia, for example, a rolling three-year expenditure plan has
been developed and, in Burkina Faso, 2003 saw the introduction of bottom up planning for a sectoral
MTEF in the education sector. Similarly, Vietnam is currently working on the introduction of MTEFs in
four priority sectors. However, there is still much distance to go before effective MTEFs are securely in
place: in Burkina Faso they are undermined by lack of financing predictability both because of inaccurate
growth estimates and large levels of undisclosed donor finance; in Tanzania, links between the annual
budget and the MTEF remain weak; while in Cambodia, the MTEF is not yet comprehensive, currently
excluding vital parts of the government’s budget such as the medium term wage bill and external finance.
In addition, there is no guarantee that the MTEF will reflect PRSP priorities: the 2004-2006 MTEF for
Burkina Faso, for example, demonstrated no discernible alignment with the PRSP.

Improved ability to forecast and manage public expenditure in PRS priority sectors. In Tanzania,
the establishment of a system of quarterly releases to PRS priority sectors has freed priority ministries
from the strictures of the cash budgeting system. Beneficiary ministries and local authorities report this
system has greatly enhanced their ability to plan and manage their available resources. In Burkina-Faso,
on the contrary, the special treatment of HIPC resources leads to a complex accounting system separating
regular budget resources, HIPC resources and consolidated budget. It also fosters a dual-accounting and
dual-responsibility mentality according to which poverty-reduction activities are funded by donors
through specific funds while the rest of the budget does not necessarily have to focus on these objectives.


Role of Various Actors—Are Budget Processes Becoming More Open and Participatory?

Ministry of Finance

The Ministry of Finance (MoF) has a critical role to play in ensuring links between PRSPs and budgets. A
traditional weakness of previous development strategies was that they remained strategies on paper, with
extremely weak links to either sector strategies or budgets. Strategies were prepared by and “owned” in
other parts of government while Ministries of Finance typically elaborated and implemented budgets with
little consultation to line ministries and little regard to strategic considerations. Hence, ownership of the
PRSP by the Ministry of Finance is critical to its successful implementation. Moreover, by shaping the
process of budget preparation and implementation, the MoF plays the key role in determining whether the
PRSP principle of “participation” in policy-making, including by line ministries, Parliaments and civil


                                                     11
society organizations is reflected in the budget process. Conversely, we would expect the Ministry of
Finance to be more likely to “own” the PRSP when it has been closely involved in its elaboration.

In our sample countries, the MoF was generally engaged in but did not have a leadership role in the
elaboration of the PRSP. In both Bolivia and Burkina Faso, although the unit responsible for the PRSP
was initially housed in the MoF, it was subsequently moved to ministries focused on planning or external
finance. Likewise in Cambodia and Vietnam, the PRSP was managed by the planning ministry, while in
Tanzania it was the responsibility of the Vice President’s Office.

An institutional home other than the MoF does not preclude strong links between the PRSP and the
budget, as is evidenced by the case of Tanzania where the budget and the PRSP processes are increasingly
aligned. Even in Burkina-Faso and Vietnam, where the PRSP and the budget processes were housed in
different ministries, budget allocations show an increasing alignment with the PRSP. In the case of
Burkina-Faso, the fact that donor budget support operations take the PRSP as its basis plays an important
role in focusing the Ministry of Finance on the strategy. However, experience from our other cases
suggests that there is a risk that the PRSP remains divorced from key allocation decisions if the
institutional links are not strong enough. In particular, we observed that the PRSP was sometimes seen
only as having traction on external finance (Bolivia) or the investment budget (Cambodia). Similarly, in
Burkina-Faso, the government proposed to focus donor monitoring not on the PRSP but on “the parts of
the budget financed by donors.”

Although some substantive congruence is observed between budgets and PRSP priorities, in practice the
processes are usually quite distinct. In Bolivia, Burkina Faso and Cambodia, different timetables were
followed and as a result, useful inputs from both processes (such as costings from the budget or strategic
priorities from the PRSP) were unavailable at critical points in both cycles. Tanzania, however, suggests
that practice can be improved over time with its successful alignment of the preparation of its PRSP
Progress Report with its annual budget cycle

Line Ministries

Our case studies provide evidence that the iterative and collaborative nature of the PRSP process
has strengthened the collaboration between the Ministry of Finance and line ministries and in both
planning and budgeting. A recent study of Bolivia, for example, concluded that “the [PRSP] preparation
process opened up a certain level of inter-sectoral dialogue between ministries and government
institutions that normally do not have a strong tradition of cooperation...and has drawn attention to need
for inter-sectoral coordination at both a local and central level”. 6 Likewise, in Tanzania, the PRSP
motivated the resurrection of sector working groups as part of the PPER exercise, a key forum for
dialogue between the Ministry of Finance, line ministries, donors and civil society.




6
 Entwistle, Janet, Country Ownership of Poverty Reduction Strategies: The Experience of 5 Countries, forthcoming,
World Bank


                                                       12
                    Fostering Intra and Inter-Ministerial Cooperation in Burkina-Faso

   In Burkina-Faso, the PRSP process is improving the dialogue within ministries during budget
   elaboration. Traditionally, budget funding requests from line ministries to the Ministry of Finance were
   elaborated by their financing departments (DAFs) without much input from the planning departments
   (DEPs). This practice significantly impaired links between sector strategies and sector budgets. The focus
   of the PRSP process, related sector strategies and donor financing on results, however, requires strong
   intra-ministerial coordination. This focus on results has led to a noticeable improvement in the
   coordination between planning and financing departments, in particular in priority sectors, in order to
   ensure enhanced coherence between planning and financing strategies. According to the Ministry of
   Finance, this improved coordination has increased the quality of the financing requests prepared by line
   ministries and the strategic orientation of budgets.

   Coordination between line ministries and central ministries is also improving. This improvement is
   also a consequence of the focus on results of program budgets, MTEFs and the PRSP process. The
   elaboration of program budgets and MTEFs has led to the organization of inter-ministerial workshops to
   discuss and, in principle, decide on proposed allocations for ministries. This inter-ministerial workshops
   include a key group of ministries –the Ministries of Economy and Development, Finance, Basic
   Education, Health and Agriculture. According to Ministry of Finance officials, this inter-ministerial
   dialogue has improved since the advent of the PRSP process in 2001 and the PRSP has formed the
   strategic framework for the 2002-2005 MTEF.1

   R. Alonso, The PRSP Process and the Budget in Burkina-Faso


However, a strategic approach to budgeting by line agencies continues to be undermined by some key
practical issues. In Bolivia and Cambodia, for example, ministries do not receive their budget envelopes
from the MoF in time to prepare realistic budget submissions. Timetables are often out of sync and key
analytical inputs from line agencies are not available at the appropriate point in the budget cycle. For
example, in Tanzania before the alignment of the PPER and budget cycles, much sector analytical work
undertaken for the PRSP, MTEF and PPER remained divorced from the annual budget process and
similar disconnects continue to be observed in Cambodia. As a result, much of the good analytical work
now being undertaken by line ministries is not well exploited, and points to the need to rationalize roles
and processes.

Local Government

Although practice varies between countries, local governments have typically not been significant
participants in the PRSP elaboration process, with consultations focusing on grassroots communities and
non-governmental organizations. As a result, a tension is observed: the PRSP is informed by local level
inputs from civil society and is aggregated at a national level, but many of its policies (especially in the
area of basic service delivery) need to be implemented by local governments who did not play an
important role in the process. This disconnect reduces the chances of buy-in to the strategy from local
government and principal-agent problems arise in the implementation phase.

Similarly, local government appears to have little leverage over the preparation of the national budget,
despite the fact that decisions at this level can have serious impacts for local authorities. For example, in
Tanzania, a number of local taxes were abolished in the fY04 budget with little consultation with local
government. This lack of responsiveness is sometimes underpinned by practical issues: in Bolivia, for
example, the format for budget preparation at the local level is not standardized, resulting in numerous
incompatible submissions to national government. Moreover, there is rarely a process which facilitates
local government-line ministry dialogue and, as a result, sector plans are elaborated without the input of


                                                        13
those who may execute much of their content. In Cambodia, for example, the MoF has parallel
negotiations with the line ministries and local government, resulting in divergences between sector plans
and actual spending.

In Tanzania, Bolivia and Vietnam, the three countries studied with the most extensive levels of
decentralization, there does not seem to be evidence that the PRSP process has so far fostered closer
collaboration between central and local government. In Tanzania and Vietnam, for example, there
seems to be a disconnect between the budgeting processes at the local and national levels. Whereas
budgeting at the national level aims to link to PRS priorities and sector strategies, local government
proceeds in a bottom-up approach starting at the village level and there is no guarantee that both sets of
priorities will match up. Moreover, local government is impaired by a limited knowledge and
understanding of the strategic priorities of the PRSP. Overall, despite its importance, the inter-face
between planning and budgeting for strategies and policies at the central and local government levels is
not as closely coordinated as it should be. Moreover, local government is not very much involved in the
central government’s budget process which is of concern, in particular since local governments depend
heavily on resource transfers from the center and decisions on local governments’ own resources are also
made at the central level. Finally, there does not seem to be a forum where local and central government
can discuss the role of local governments in the elaboration and implementation of sector plans.

In Bolivia, the PRSP process catalyzed a significant devolution of resources to the local level,
invigorating the decentralization process. In particular, the National Dialogue Law (2001), a result of the
PRSP process stipulates that HIPC II resources should be transferred to the municipalities according to a
pro-poor formula, and spent on health, education and other “poverty related” expenditures. As a result,
the relative size of municipalities expanded by about 40 percent, to around 13 percent of total
expenditure, while prefectures have maintained their share. On the other hand, decentralization seems to
have led to a reduction in the share of expenditures being allocated to PRS priority sectors. Indeed, an
analysis of municipal expenditures undertaken in our case study found that health, education, housing and
sanitation and rural roads all suffered drops as a share of the total municipal budget between 1998 and
2001, despite being designated as “strategic priorities” in the PRSP. This development appears to cast
some doubt on the “pro-poor” impact of decentralization; this question, as well as the potentially poor fit
between national priorities and actual expenditures at the local level in decentralized countries, warrants
further attention.

Civil Society Engagement

Many have acknowledged that the PRSP has increased civil society participation in policy dialogue and
that it has provided many stakeholders with an opportunity to influence the setting of poverty reduction
priorities. 7 Although pressure and expectations for increased participation are building up quickly, the
actual progress in increasing civil society participation in the budget process in Burkina-Faso, Cambodia
and Vietnam is very small. In Bolivia and Tanzania, on the other hand, the process is far more advanced
both due to the existence of a more active and well-organized civil society as well as a more receptive
government. As a result, the Mecanismo de Control Social in Bolivia and the NGO Policy Forum in
Tanzania represent the views of their members in budget discussions with government.

In Burkina-Faso, Cambodia and Vietnam, the scope for CSOs to engage in technical budget discussions
and hence wield influence in the budget process is still very limited. Although NGOs tend to have
stronger knowledge of the sectors in which they are directly engaged, their capacity in the public finance
and macro-economic areas tends to be significantly weaker. Moreover, in countries where there is much
informality throughout the budget cycle, such as Bolivia, entry points for participation are often hard to

7
    See, for example, David Booth, 2004, ODI


                                                    14
identify and, the build-up of societal demands can be hard to control. In fact, the case of Bolivia provides
a stark example of the need for clear “rules of the game” to govern CSO engagement in the budget
process if macro-economic stability and social conflict are to be avoided.

Tanzania, on the other hand, provides a welcome example of how CSOs can work with the Ministry of
Finance, line ministries and the donor community to increase the pro-poor focus and accountability of the
budget process without creating social instability. In fact, CSOs place high value on the PPER, seeing it
as their main window of opportunity for influencing the budget, sharing views and forging and sustaining
alliances with actors in government and the donor community.

   Box 1: The Participatory Public Expenditure Review and the PRSP Process, Tanzania

   The Participatory Public Expenditure Review (PPER) was introduced in Tanzania in 1997 in recognition of
   the fact that the traditional Public Expenditure Review exercise conducted by the Bank and the government
   allowed for scant engagement by domestic stakeholders and hence had little ownership. The PPER has three
   main objectives: it provides a forum for information sharing on budget issues; it identifies and undertakes
   joint analytical work on macroeconomic, sectoral and structural issues of interest to its members; and it
   facilitates the emergence of constituencies which seek to ensure the actual budget reflects poverty reduction
   concerns.

   Lead by the Ministry of Finance, the PPER team comprises CSOs and donors as well as other members of
   the government from, for example, line ministries and the local level. Working Groups meet bi-weekly,
   developing a work program and delivering a report intended to inform the actual budget. At this point, an
   “external evaluation” of the PPER outputs takes place. Chaired by the World Bank, all non-governmental
   participants such as CSOs and donors review the PPER recommendations, and the process is finalized with
   the publication of a report, ready to feed in to the formal budget cycle.

   The PRSP process has been able to build on the accomplishments of the PPER and the PRS is now the point
   of reference for the PPER process, which strengthens its focus on poverty-reduction and results. Moreover,
   in FY03, with the impulse of the PRSP process for increased dialogue in the priority sectors, PPER sectoral
   working groups –which had been discontinued-- were re-established. These sectoral working groups are one
   of the key mechanisms to strengthen alignment of sector budgets with the PRS.

   Source: Fiscal Aspects of PRSP Implementation in Tanzania, Rosa Alonso and Robert Utz, 2003


Role of the Legislature

Although, in principle, the legislature has a mandate to approve and monitor the budget in each of our five
countries, in practice, its role in budget formulation was limited in all cases. A number of practical
constraints in their role were observed. First, the budget was often presented to parliament with very little
lead time, and thus there was insufficient opportunity for parliamentarians or any specialist committees to
analyze and review the budget proposals. Second, there was an evident lack of technical capacity among
Parliamentarians to understand the budget. Third, in countries where the budget was not perceived as a
binding instrument, as in Bolivia, the incentive to engage in a serious discussion was minimal as all
recognized that the executed budget was unlikely to bear much resemblance to the approved version.

Moreover, there was little evidence that Parliaments owned PRSP priorities. In fact, there is no evidence
that, where parliamentarians did engage with the budget and demanded amendments, the resulting
allocations were more in line with the PRSP. In Burkina Faso, for example, analysis showed that over the
last five years, Parliament-introduced changes to the budget have consistently increased resources to non-
priority sectors while reducing priority expenditures. Interviews with high-ranking members of
Parliament’s Finance Committee revealed that a perception that basic health and basic education are


                                                        15
already provided for by the donor community and, hence, are over-endowed with resources. Similar
regressive amendments were also observed in Tanzania.

Despite these shortcomings, the PRSP process does seem to be generating both an increased interest in
poverty issues by parliamentarians and a growing awareness of the critical role they could potentially play
in budget formulation. In Cambodia, for example, the Parliamentary Commission on Banking and
Finance has spent time visiting poorer areas of the country and sensitizing its members to key PRSP
themes. Likewise, in Bolivia members of the legislature made clear that they would like support to build
their capacity to analyze and influence the budget. Similarly, in Vietnam, the degree of involvement of
individual Parliamentarians in the budgetary process and the breadth and transparency of discussion on
budget allocations have increased over the past two years. The members of the National Assembly of
Vietnam are increasingly questioning ministers during their appearances at the legislature and proposing
amendments to proposed legislation, including budgets. For example, members of Parliament have raised
questions on the efficiency of capital expenditure as well as regarding governance and corruption issues.
Moreover, during the last budget cycle, the National Assembly significantly increased the policy focus
and allocations devoted to HIV-AIDS. This progress is regarded as particularly important by those who
have noted that the emphasis to date in the PRSP has been on civil society’s role with respect to the
budget, and that this has sometimes lead to a sidelining of elected representatives.

Emerging Lessons

Overall, the PRSP process seems to have fostered improved openness in budget formulation and appears
to be facilitating better dialogue between all stakeholders, both within as well as outside government.
Moreover, there is also a growing recognition that both national and local budgets need to be better
connected to the government’s strategic priorities and goals and greater scrutiny of the links between the
former and the latter. However, ensuring that the principles of the PRSP process and, in particular,
openness and transparency, further inform the budgeting process will depend on continued support of the
PRSP process by governments, civil society and the donor community. If the PRSP process becomes
institutionalized and its principles are increasingly espoused by all stakeholders, there will be significant
potential for continued improvement in budgeting processes. Moreover, strengthening of the links
between the budget formulation and the PRSP process are contingent upon clarification of both processes
and improved synchronization of both cycles.

In countries with weak budget processes, the budget as an instrument needs to gain credibility in order to
increase the coherence between elaborated and executed budgets and hence ensure the predictability of
financing to spending units and enhance the incentives of all stakeholders to engage in the budget process.
This is clearly a challenging agenda which depends on governance and public expenditure management
reforms. Without progress on this front, the possibilities for linking budget allocations to strategic
priorities will remain limited in the countries where it is most needed. Some specific suggestions include:

    •   Foster the joint work of planning and financing units within line ministries (or consider merging
        them). This is automatically done by increasing the results-orientation of budgets, as these units
        will need to cooperate in budget planning in order to ensure the delivery of results.

    •   Foster dialogue between line ministries and the Ministry of Finance. Again, this is fostered by
        increased results-orientation of budgets (fostered by MTEFs and PRSPs) as well as by lending
        instruments that focus on results (such as budget support).

    •   Enhance the capacity of the legislature to engage on budget issues and foster dialogue between
        governments and Parliaments by encouraging governments to submit readable and realistic
        budgets to Parliament with proper time allowed for discussion.


                                                     16
     •   Consider the establishment of working groups along the model of Tanzania’s PPER with the
         assignment of channeling dialogue among stakeholders as well as examining links between
         PRSP, MTEFs, sectoral strategies and budgets.

     •   Hold budget hearings or develop other forums for civil society and other stakeholders to express
         their opinions on planned budgets. Such arrangements, however, should be based on clear and
         agreed rules of engagement to ensure expectations are managed and the scope for unconstructive
         conflict is limited. The model of publicity and discussion forums of annual budgets in Tanzania
         hosted by research institutes with good ties to both government and civil society is the best
         example of such hearings in our case studies. On the other hand, the expectations created in the
         case of Bolivia proved dangerous and should carefully be avoided.

     •   Align PRSP and budget timelines. Both the strategic priorities of the PRSP and results from
         monitoring need to be available at a time which is relevant to the annual budget process for both
         inter and intra- sectoral allocations as well as medium term adjustments. Over time, PRSP
         progress reports should be timed so as to inform the budget process and could usefully become
         background papers to national budget documents.

     •   Streamline and integrate the multiple budget processes such as the PPER, MTEF and annual
         budget in Tanzania or the PIP, MTEF and annual budget in Cambodia and Vietnam, and work
         towards the integrated preparation of capital and current accounts in Cambodia, Vietnam and
         Bolivia.

     •   Strengthen links between the PRSP process and the MTEF through its integration to the MoF’s
         institutional framework and sector budget/planning cycle routines. Ensure MTEFs reflect the
         strategic priorities of the PRSP and, conversely, that PRSPs take as their basis the overall budget
         envelopes determined by MTEFs. The policy orientation of forward expenditure planning
         requires a range of new skills, such as policy analysis, costing and programming. Experience
         from Africa suggests that MTEF’s may be more effective where existing departments are
         complemented by new units who can fulfill these functions in order to provide the support
         necessary for implementation. 8

     •   Communicate budget ceilings and overall government priorities to all spending units within a
         reasonable time to allow for planning to be based on a realistic budget envelope. In addition,
         review the format of budget submissions and standardize the template for all spending units, and
         introduce incentives or sanctions for the use of this framework.

     •   In cases where macroeconomic stability is a particular concern, consider negotiating a fiscal pact
         with spending agencies which would ensure greater predictability of financing but at the cost of
         agencies recognizing that their bargaining opportunities diminish.


4.       Accounting for expenditures and results

The PRSP approach places strong emphasis on monitoring and on accounting for results. The key
mechanisms for fiscal accountability lie with the legislature, civil society, the donor community and

8
 Philippe Le Houerou and Rob Taliercio, “Medium term expenditure frameworks : from concept to practice -
preliminary lessons from Africa”, World Bank Africa Region Working Paper Series No. 28, 2002


                                                      17
internal and external audit institutions. This section aims to assess whether the PRSP has given added
impetus to these institutions, as well as increased the accountability for government spending decisions to
a broader range of stakeholders. It begins with a survey of the problems encountered in our case studies
during budget execution and then turns to review the performance of various actors in enhancing
accountability. The role of the legislature is considered along with that of auditing bodies; civil society’s
contribution to ensuring accountability is then assessed; and the section concludes with an overview of
the role played by development partners in requiring governments to account for both expenditures and
results.

Initial Conditions in Budget Execution and Impact on Accountability

The technical ability (and political will) of governments to execute budgets as planned varies greatly
among our sample countries with an ensuing impact on accountability. In some of our sample countries
(such as Tanzania), gaps between planned and executed budgets are relatively small, in others (such as
Vietnam), executed expenditures have consistently been above projections while in others (such as
Bolivia), gaps have been large, negative and highly variant across ministries. In Bolivia, for example,
while the government has largely maintained aggregate control on spending, expenditures by ministries in
2001 varied from only 20% to over 300% of planned allocations. Deviations on this scale demonstrate the
failure of the budget to perform as a planning tool, and the disconnect between planned and executed
budgets seriously undermines the former as an instrument for implementing the government’s strategy
and policies. It also discourages any attempt at building in participation and accountability at the budget
elaboration stage, as stakeholders rightly recognize the lack of binding character of the process.

The reasons for such large deviations are numerous and vary across countries. Revenue forecasts are often
inaccurate and expenditure levels typically need to be downwardly revised over the course of the fiscal
year. Poor revenue forecasts are due to a number of reasons ranging from high volatility of prices and
quantities of crops and weak technical capacity in macro-economic forecasting and revenue
administration agencies to political pressures for high expenditure levels. Governments often deal with
such uncertainties by establishing cash budgeting systems. Tanzania and Vietnam, which have not tended
to overestimate revenue and hence have not suffered from serious cash flow problems, have a system of
quarterly transfers --to PRS priority ministries in Tanzania and to all ministries in Vietnam. Burkina-Faso,
Bolivia and Cambodia, on the other hand, typically over-estimate revenue and expenditure levels and
need to use cash budgeting as a way to ration available funding over the course of the fiscal year. While
this system facilitates control, it undermines the ability of line agencies to plan and undermines the
overall credibility and accountability of the budgeting system. In some cases, these weaknesses are
jeopardizing PRSP implementation. For example, in Cambodia the education strategy contained in the
PRSP has been lauded as comprehensive and coherent, outlining a range of excellent actions from
decreased user fees to increased maintenance spending and teacher salaries. However, slow and unreliable
cash flows to the Ministry of Education have undermined implementation and, as a result, many of the
promises of the strategy have yet to be fulfilled. Similarly, in Burkina-Faso, the combination of the
expenditure cuts typically implemented at the mid-year budget review and the cumbersome budget
execution procedures, lead to large gaps between budgeted and executed amounts, including in PRS
priority sectors.

Another reason for gaps between budgeted and executed expenditures is limited absorptive capacity. In
Burkina Faso, for example, the Ministry of Finance was reluctant to increase resources to key social
sectors as it felt that low execution rates in those ministries demonstrated constraints on their absorptive
capacity. Staff from the line agencies, however, complained that delays in transfers and excessively tight
control by the MoF on all transactions constrained their ability to spend effectively.




                                                     18
Finally, decentralization can lead to important variance between national strategies and actual
implementation at the local level. As discussed in Section 3, local government often has the powers to
spend their funds in ways that are at variance with the approved budget. While in Tanzania the
government maintains a degree of control over expenditures at the local level through conditional grants,
it is expected that, as decentralization proceeds, its ability to influence spending at this level will
diminish. In Bolivia, efforts have been made to ensure that municipalities spend funds in line with overall
national priorities. As Box 2 shows, however, this has not been without its challenges.


   Box 2: Incentivizing pro-poor spending at the local level, Bolivia

   In 2001 as a result of the PRSP process, various social funds in Bolivia were reformed and merged to create
   two consolidated funds. It was envisaged that one of these, the FPS, would play a critical role in ensuring
   the implementation of the PRSP through spending executed by the local level. It was envisaged that the FPS
   would set an allocation for each municipality based on a progressive formula, and municipalities could then
   apply for grant finance up to this ceiling so long as they could show that they had sufficient counterpart
   funding to implement the project. Thus, the FPS was expected to provide incentives to municipalities to
   spend their resources in a way consistent with poverty reduction objectives that are encoded in the PRSP.

   In practice, however, the FPS has been subject to many problems. Its procedures are complex and often
   contradictory, reflecting the various requirements of the contributing donors. Many municipalities often lack
   the capacity to navigate its systems efficiently. As a result, disbursement rates are low – in 2002, for
   example, only 54% of the agency’s budget was executed. The problems encountered in accessing FPS
   support have an additional negative impact on municipal finance: HIPC resources remain unspent as they
   are held back for counterpart finance. In addition, the grants actually made by the FPS are not aligned
   particularly well with the PRSP and they do not follow a clear progressive pattern.

   Source: PRSP and Budget Linkages: The Case of Bolivia, Lindsay Judge and Jeni Klugman, 2004




Overall, our studies point to the contribution of the PRSP process to a strategic approach to budget
execution but also underline the need to continue to improve macro-economic and revenue forecasting
and budget execution systems if accountability is to be strengthened and the potential of the PRSP
process realized.

Legislature and Audit Bodies

The key mechanism through which the government is expected to account for expenditures is the
legislature. However, in most of our case studies, the oversight role played by Parliament was limited, and
its supervision of accounts perfunctory. In part, this stems from weak capacity of members of Parliament
to conduct budget analysis, but also suggests a lack of incentives to fulfill this valuable role. That said,
there is some evidence that the PRSP process has stimulated the interest of parliamentarians and that they
are now demanding capacity-building to help them undertake more detailed budget analysis.

Effective auditing of accounts would assist legislators with such analysis, but line ministry audits are
usually weak and untimely. Even in Tanzania, which met 8 out of 15 benchmarks of expenditure
accountability set in the HIPC tracking system, line agencies’ internal audits did not meet the standards.
In Burkina-Faso, an external audit office has been created, but it is not yet functional. In Bolivia, on the
other hand, the independent auditor was regarded as technically competent, although its ability to
scrutinize resource use across government was constrained by its own lack of budget. However, the
reports it did produce were not passed on to Parliament, and it has few powers to enforce its own findings.


                                                        19
In short, both the role of Parliament and other formal auditing mechanisms remain weak in our sample
countries (as in most low income countries) and the PRSP process does not seem to have made a visible
impact on them.

Civil Society Oversight

Precisely because of the implicit recognition of the weakness of formal accountability mechanisms, the
PRSP process bets heavily on the accountability brought to bear by civil society organizations and
external partners. In fact, the PRSP process has provided new opportunities for CSOs to hold
governments accountable, especially through participatory monitoring and evaluation mechanisms. In
Tanzania, for example, the PRSP process has added new strength to the role played by CSOs in the PPER
process, which now focuses on strengthening links between the PRSP, sector strategies, MTEFs and
budgets. In addition, CSOs are seeking to strengthen their budget analysis skills and taking an leading
role in public expenditure tracking surveys and in assessing service delivery.

While expenditure tracking at the local level is generally poor with weak sanctions for local governments
who do not report in a timely and comprehensive fashion, in Bolivia local level groups called Comites de
Vigilancia have been given power of oversight with respect to municipal budgets. In particular, they have
the ability to request that central government freeze transfers if misappropriations are detected. However,
as discussed in the previous two sections, civil society ability to engage in detailed budget analysis is still
limited, both by capacity and lack of user-friendly budget information. CSOs have more successfully
found a role in monitoring the PRSP more broadly, and in scrutinizing whether the government has
delivered on its action plan. According to a recent study of monitoring and evaluation systems, it is this
kind of general political monitoring that is most effective in increasing government accountability. 9
Finding the appropriate balance between government and civil society scrutiny, however, is difficult. For
instance, some have suggested that, in Bolivia, the balance has tipped too far in favor of CSOs, with the
result of marginalizing core government oversight functions. It is also clear that CSOs, auditors and
legislators do not collaborate effectively in any of our studies, and that there are clearly unexploited
synergies between the work of all with respect to monitoring government policies, expenditures and
impacts.

Accountability to External Partners

In the context of traditional project support, external finance is treated separately from the budget and
accountability for donor funds is a relatively simple accounting exercise, albeit with negative
consequences for the long-term development of government systems. However, as the importance of
direct budget support increases in the context of the PRSP, both accounting for, and isolating the specific
impacts of donor contributions becomes more difficult. Because money is fungible –especially when
provided as general budget support--, the PRSP process has focused on general accountability in public
finance management and on monitoring of performance. This is an enormous improvement upon the
previous narrow focus for accountability of moneys spent on a myriad of projects. As a result, the focus
of both government and donors is increasingly on government systems and overall results. This is a strong
finding in our case studies. In Burkina Faso, for example, there is evidence that the move to budget
support has promoted a more results-oriented culture in the Ministry of Finance, while in Tanzania the
government is using its PRSP Progress Report to good effect in accounting to both internal and external
stakeholders. In Vietnam, the government used the 2004 PER to show progress towards improved
transparency and accountability in order to increase the willingness of donors to provide budget support.


9
    GTZ, Governance and Democracy Division, “National Monitoring of Poverty Reduction Strategies/PRSPs,” 2004


                                                       20
Progress on harmonization of PFM and monitoring requirements, however, is still limited. In most
countries, donors continue to use their own targets and performance benchmarks despite the emphasis
placed by the PRSP process on homegrown points of reference. In some cases, however, there is progress.
In Cambodia, for example, the Consultative Group (CG) has developed benchmarks, most notably in
areas of special concern to major partners. While largely limited to policy actions as opposed to the
outputs or outcomes picked up in the PRSP, some question whether it is optimal to have separate
accountability mechanisms for donors in the face of limited capacity and a nationally defined set of
actions set out in the PRSP. More recently, a joint donor-supported PFM strengthening program in
Cambodia has been developed.

Emerging Lessons

It is clear from our studies that the PRSP process has led to increased scrutiny of budget expenditure as
well as greater focus on monitoring service delivery and overall accountability. However, in countries
with poor budget execution, improvements in the PEM systems are needed in order for the budget to be
the key instrument of strategic policy implementation it is meant to be and to allow the exercise of proper
accountability in its scrutiny by both internal and external actors. Given this, a number of suggestions are
made:

       •    It is important to improve budget execution at both the central and provincial levels through
            better macro-economic and revenue forecasting, and improved cash management leading to more
            reliable and strategic budget allocations to line agencies.

       •    Increase the capacity of all stakeholders –internal and external audit, the legislature and civil
            society organizations to enable it to better understand the budget process, analyze information and
            scrutinize accounts more effectively. Improved capacity for performance analysis is also sorely
            needed to increase capacity to exercise accountability for results, starting in Ministries of
            Finance.

       •    Synergies among various accountability agents/mechanisms should be explored, in particular
            between auditing bodies, Parliament and civil society.


5.          Costing and Consistency with Overall Macro-Economic Framework

Ideally, a PRSP should provide a comprehensive cost estimate for the programs it contains, including
disaggregation by sector and economic classification. 10 This costing should be consistent with a realistic
overall macro-economic framework. In addition, the paper should indicate which programs are priorities
providing the government with guidance as to where cuts should fall in the case of revenue shortfalls and
which additional programs should receive funds if growth and revenues surpass expectations. This ideal,
however, had not been realized at any point prior to the PRSP process in most PRSP countries and, hence,
it is not a realistic expectation that it should be fully included in a first PRSP. Moreover, in some
countries (such as Bolivia or Burkina-Faso), a common shortcoming of the first PRSP was that it took a
“new project” approach and focused on costing incremental activities (linked to HIPC funding).

Taking account of initial conditions, therefore, what is interesting to ascertain is whether the PRSP has
added to the impetus for better program costing and prioritization within a consistent macro-economic
framework. In all our five countries, the PRSP indeed came closer than previous initiatives to a
comprehensive costing of government objectives and programs. More importantly, as a consequence of

10
     See JSA Guidelines available at http://poverty.worldbank.org/files/jsa%20guidelines.pdf


                                                                 21
the PRSP process, a focus on costing sectoral strategies needed for the achievement of established targets
continued after the initial paper was elaborated.

For example, in Cambodia, the PRSP built on progress made through health and education sector
strategies resulting in comprehensive and well-costed programs for these two key areas: the PRS process
succeeded in further raising the profile, and highlighting the gains, in these important areas; in Bolivia,
important efforts were made to link poverty reduction objectives with financing requirements including
the programming of capital and some current expenditures; and in Tanzania, although the costing
estimates in the initial PRSP were not particularly strong, subsequent PRSP Progress Reports have refined
and expanded those estimates. In Burkina-Faso, on the other hand, challenges to sound costing continue,
as the second PRSP includes a much- expanded list of priorities without a concomitant estimate of their
costs.

There is less evidence of an effective inter-action between the PRSPs’ needs-based approach and macro-
economic fiscal programming. Ideally, there should be mutual feedback between PRSPs and macro-
economic projections, with the former affecting the latter in medium-term plans (e.g. leading to plans to
increase revenue collections to fund needed expenditure in poverty-reduction programs) and the latter
prevailing over the former in the short run (e.g. revising targets, programs and expenditure levels included
in PRSPs to reflect actual resource availability). In our case studies, however, we find little evidence of
this inter-action. In particular, the domestic revenue side has been treated as a hard constraint in all the
PRSPs reviewed, with the focus heavily placed on using PRSPs as tools to increase donor funding.
Similarly, although hard budget constraints as reflected in MTEFs and budgets have tended to prevail
over PRSP needs in the short run, there has been no well-defined feedback loop into adjusting PRSP
targets and expenditure programs. The issue of the proper fit between PRSPs and macro-economic –and
in particular, revenue and expenditure—projections is one that deserves further attention if identified
PRSP needs are to be taken seriously while macro-economic stability is preserved.


5.      Pro-poor Budgeting—Has Resource Allocation Become More Aligned with PRSP Priority
        Sectors?

Assessing whether any budget is progressive is inherently complex given the methodological challenge of
isolating the impact of particular programs, and the significant time lags between spending and likely
poverty outcomes. In several of our countries, this challenge was more acute due to lack of information
for both inputs and outcomes. Consequently, in this section we limit our assessment to ascertaining
whether spending allocations have been re-aligned toward PRS priority sectors and do not seek to pursue
whether expenditures have translated into more pro-poor outcomes. We also do not seek to ascertain
whether PRS priority sectors are actually pro-poor in the countries studied. Although this approach does
have its limitations, we are comfortable with this definition of ‘pro-poor expenditure” since the sectors
identified as priorities in most countries PRSPs are those that benefit incidence analysis typically finds to
be most progressive (e.g., primary health, primary education, rural roads) and, equally importantly, they
are the sectors perceived by the poor themselves to be of most benefit to them, as determined through
consultative processes. Ascertaining the degree of alignment of budgets with PRS priorities is also a
valuable exercise in determining whether PRSPs are strategic documents that find their reflection in
actual budget allocations or whether, like many previous development strategies, they are vague
declarations of government intent.

We begin by considering the extent to which the PRSP in each of our countries provides direction for
realignment of expenditures. Second, we analyze the actual allocations to a number of priority sectors in
recent years and look at expenditure projections, assess whether allocations as a share of the budget have
increased, and where possible, whether current expenditures have been aligned with capital to any


                                                     22
significant effect. Third, this section looks at whether there is any evidence that allocations have shifted in
favor of poorer regions in our case study countries.

The PRSP as a Strategy for Budget Allocations

Each of our five countries PRSPs identified priority sectors (e.g. education and health care) and, in some
cases, core priority areas (e.g. primary education and primary health care) and indicated that allocations
should be redirected to these sectors and areas. Although data difficulties were encountered in all
countries (details provided in each case study), we were nevertheless able to provide a good view as to the
evolution of resource allocations and the degree of consistency of these allocations with PRSP priorities.

Sectoral Allocations

All our five case studies found that, since the advent of the PRSP, there has been a significant increase in
funding in absolute real terms for PRSP priority sectors. In Burkina-Faso and Tanzania, for example, real
per capital allocations to PRS priority sectors and core priority areas are estimated to have double
between fY99 and fY04.


                                            Figure 1: Tanzania--Real Per Capita Expenditures in Priority Sectors

                                           3 5 ,0 0 0 .0 0


                                           3 0 ,0 0 0 .0 0
          Per capita public expenditures




                                           2 5 ,0 0 0 .0 0


                                           2 0 ,0 0 0 .0 0
                                                                                                                                  P r io r it y B r o a d
                                                                                                                                  P r io r it y N a r r o w
                                           1 5 ,0 0 0 .0 0


                                           1 0 ,0 0 0 .0 0


                                            5 ,0 0 0 .0 0


                                                     -
                                                             99



                                                                      00



                                                                               01



                                                                                        02



                                                                                                 03



                                                                                                           04



                                                                                                                    05



                                                                                                                             06
                                                             Y



                                                                  Y



                                                                           Y



                                                                                    Y



                                                                                             Y



                                                                                                       Y



                                                                                                                Y



                                                                                                                         Y
                                                         F



                                                                  F



                                                                           F



                                                                                    F



                                                                                             F



                                                                                                       F



                                                                                                                F



                                                                                                                         F




                                                                                                  23
Figure 2: Burkina-Faso--Real per Capita Expenditure in Priority Sectors and Core Priority Areas


                   18000
                   16000
                   14000
                   12000
                   10000
                                            8000
                                            6000
                                            4000
                                            2000
                                               0
                                                        1998                    1999                     2000              2001                            2002

                                                                                       Priority Broad           Core priority


The distribution of increases across priority sectors, however, varies greatly. The education,
agriculture/rural development and transport sectors seem to have benefited the most from expenditure
increases. Health care, on the other hand, seems to have received a much smaller increase although it is
hard to ascertain due to the move to vertical off-budget global programs in the sector.


       Figure 3: Tanzania--Per Capita Spending by Priority Sector Between FY99 and FY03

                                             16000       14724

                                             14000
          T.Sh. (at constant FY03 prices)




                                             12000

                                             10000
                                                                                                                                                                  FY 9 9
                                              8000     7029
                                                                                                                   6205                                           FY 0 3
                                              6000                     5130

                                              4000                   3091                                       2846
                                                                                    1742         1864
                                              2000                                                                            709
                                                                                  612         636                                                  465
                                                                                                                           237              0
                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                HIV/AIDS
                                                         Education




                                                                       Health




                                                                                                Agric. R&E




                                                                                                                   Roads




                                                                                                                                Judiciary
                                                                                   Water




                                                                                               24
        Figure 4: Burkina-Faso Real Per Capita Spending in Priority Sectors FY99 to FY02
                                       (In Million CFAF)


            8000

            7000                                           6714
                                                                                    6095
            6000

            5000                                   4729

            4000
                                 3186
            3000          2712
                                                                             1828
            2000

            1000

                0
                             Health                 Education           Rural Development

                                                   1999      2002


Prioritization within sectors (to core priority areas) has also varied significantly. Primary education has
tended to benefit the most from the increases in education sector spending, receiving, for example, 80
percent of the total sectoral increase in Burkina-Faso. Primary health care, on the other hand, has not
always received priority within the sector and, in some cases, it has even lost relative ground. In Burkina-
Faso, for example, the share of the total health budget devoted to primary health since the advent of the
PRSP decreased from around 56 percent in 1999 and 2000 to 46 percent in 2001 and 2002. In all our five
countries, in fact, the increase in budget allocations to health care and within health to primary health,
have been quite modest, especially by comparison to the progress made in (primary) education. These
varying in trends (which are reflected in different progress in outcomes) could be related to the different
role played by the international community in both sectors—the Education for All initiative versus
vertical global health programs—as well as to the recent evolution of sector policies –with increased role
of state provision in education and reduced role in health--. Although answering these questions falls well
beyond the scope of this paper, our case studies do provide some room for optimism in recent progress in
the education sector and raise concerns in the lack of progress in health. Finally, rural roads seems to be
the most under-funded core priority area. In Tanzania and Burkina-Faso, for example, the sub-sector only
received 4 and 3 percent of sectoral allocations respectively.

Absolute increases in expenditure, however, can be the result of a general increase in resource availability
and do not necessarily represent a change in priorities. Hence, in order to ascertain whether these sectors
have received priority through the budget allocation process, our case studies also examine relative shares
of the budget devoted to PRS priority sectors and compare expenditure increases in priority and non-
priority sectors. Cambodia presents the most positive picture. As Table 2 below shows, health, education,




                                                     25
agriculture and rural development have all benefited from an increased share of current expenditures
between 2000 and 2002 while the share designated for security and defense is expected to decline. 11

Table 2: Share of Current Expenditures, Cambodia (by Percentage)

                                                   fY00    fY01     fY02        fY03        fY04           fY05
Health                                               8.4    9.5      10.9        12.0        12.5          12.9
Education                                           14.0    16.2     18.2        18.5        19.5          20.0
Agriculture and rural development                    2.9    4.6      3.8          3.4         3.8          6.4
Security and defence                                37.1    30.1     24.7        22.0        20.8          19.4

Note: Figures for fY03 onwards are projected

In Burkina-Faso, we also find evidence of government prioritizing PRS sectors as the share of priority
sector expenditure in total discretionary spending 12 seems to have increased gradually since 1998 (see
figure 5 below) with a slight setback in 2001 due to a delay in the disbursement of foreign aid and the
concomitant decrease in primary education and primary health expenditure.

     Figure 5: Burkina-Faso--Share of Priority and Non-Priority Expenditure in Total Discretionary
                                               Spending



                                   100%
                                    90%
          % of total expenditure




                                    80%
                                    70%
                                    60%
                                    50%                                                             Non Priority
                                    40%                                                             Priority Broad
                                    30%
                                    20%
                                    10%
                                     0%
                                          1998   1999      2000       2001          2002




In Tanzania, on the other hand, priority sectors do not seem to have consistently received priority in
budget allocations. Whereas percentage expenditure increases for priority sectors and core priority areas
exceed increases in non-priority expenditures in FY00 and FY02, the situation is the reverse in FY01 and
FY03.



11
   These findings, however, must be seen in the light of two considerations--the broad definition of priority
expenditures and the post-conflict nature of Cambodia’s situation. Regarding the first consideration, we need to take
into account that, in Cambodia, a proportion of the education budget is spent on sport (not strictly part of the core
priority area). Regarding the second, we must make allowance for the fact that re-allocation is relatively easier in a
stabilizing post-conflict situation such as Cambodia’s (where the share of the budget initially allocated to security
was unusually high) than in more stable situations like those of our other sample countries.
12
   Discretionary spending is defined as government’s own resources plus general budget support.


                                                             26
        Figure 6: Tanzania--Percentage Change in Priority and Non-Priority Expenditures


                           % c h a n g e in p r io r ity a n d n o n p r io r ity s e c to r e x p e n d itu r e


            6 0 .0 %

            5 0 .0 %

            4 0 .0 %

            3 0 .0 %

            2 0 .0 %                                                                                           Pr io r ity Na r r o w
                                                                                                               Pr io r ity B r o a d
            1 0 .0 %
                                                                                                               No n - Pr io r ity
              0 .0 %
                        FY 0 0   FY 0 1      FY 0 2      FY 0 3      FY 0 4      FY 0 5     FY 0 6
           - 1 0 .0 %

           - 2 0 .0 %

           - 3 0 .0 %



It is often argued that one of the main advantages of budget support is that it can result in a more balanced
distribution between capital and current expenditures as opposed to the heavy emphasis on capital
expenditure caused by projects. Our case studies found no consistent evidence of increased expenditures
on operation and maintenance since the introduction of the PRSP, though an incipient trend seems to be
emerging in some countries. In Burkina-Faso, almost the whole increase in priority sector spending over
2000-2002 is due to increases in development/investment spending, with only very small increases in
recurrent spending. This is a worrying trend as some of the direst needs (in particular in the social sectors)
are in non-wage current expenditure (operations and maintenance and school and health center materials).
Similarly, in Cambodia, the PRSP does not yet seem to have helped ministries plan their O&M
requirements more strategically, although there is some evidence of good practice in education and health.
In Bolivia, on the other hand, the share of the budget directed to the National Roads Authority, which is
responsible for the maintenance of the main and trunk roads, has indeed received increases in recent
years.

Finally, the PRS process seems to be contributing to increased prioritization in the implementation
of budget cuts. Four out of our five case studies show strong evidence that, as expenditure cuts are
effected, PRS priority expenditures have been protected. In Tanzania, protection of PRSP priority sectors
from budget cuts is official policy and part of the benefits entailed in the definition of being a ‘priority
sector.” In Burkina-Faso, we found the government substituted own funds to (partly) compensate for aid
shortfalls and hence, to the extent possible, protect overall allocations in priority sectors. In Vietnam,
revenue over the past four years has consistently over-performed and, hence, there have been no
shortfalls. However, during the East Asian crisis, the government clearly protected allocations to what
would later be PRSP priority sectors, whose share in the budget increased during the crisis (as other
sectors’ shares dropped). In Cambodia there were not any budget cuts during the period under review. In
Bolivia, on the other hand, budget cuts do not seem to have been made with strategic objectives in mind.




                                                                    27
Regional Targeting of Expenditures

In three of our case cases it has been possible to consider the regional distribution of expenditures and
come to some preliminary conclusions on whether funds have become more progressively allotted in
geographic terms since the advent of the PRSP. In Cambodia, an analysis of health and education
expenditures per capita and provincial poverty data showed that in 4 out of the 14 poorest provinces
funding was above the national average, but in the remaining 10 it was either average or below. Given the
historical nature of budgeting, however, this is not surprising as increases currently accrue to those
wealthier areas with higher numbers of facilities and personnel.

Bolivia provides similar conclusions. Although increased municipal expenditures for housing and
sanitation did map broadly to poorer prefectures, no straightforward progressive relationship could be
determined in the health and education sectors, despite the fact that HIPC funds devoted to these sectors
are allocated according to a pro-poor formula. In addition, a recently introduced social insurance scheme
for maternal and child health was also criticized for poor targeting as it provides universal coverage for a
range of secondary as well as primary healthcare services. However, more positive examples of
successful targeting can be found: in Burkina Faso, for example, a new primary education development
fund focuses on the 20 provinces with the lowest enrollment rates, while transfers to new local councils in
Cambodia are based on a formula that factors in a measure of need.

Moreover, the Tanzanian government has used data from the 2002 household budget survey and census as
well as analysis from its poverty monitoring system to elaborate a poverty map as well as a fiscal transfer
system that takes account of regional diversity in poverty and social indicators. Similarly, the government
of Vietnam plans to use a study of the geographical allocation of expenditure based on the 2003 poverty
map to continue increasing the resources allocated to poorer areas in the coming years.

Overall, it seems fair to conclude that although the geographical distribution of expenditure is not being
systematically taken into account when budgets are programmed, there is a general trend toward
increased presence of poverty considerations in geographical allocations than was the case prior to the
PRSP process. As Box 3 shows, international experience suggests that further progress can be made by
explicit including considerations on poverty impacts in budget submission guidelines in order to ensure
that line ministries consider the consequences on marginalized groups and regions.

   Box 3: Poverty criteria as a guide to budget allocations, Uganda

   In recent years, the Government of Uganda uses seven criteria to assess the poverty focus of Budget
   Framework Papers submitted by line agencies, namely (i) addressing needs of the poorest 20%; (ii)
   addressing gender inequalities; (iii) addressing geographical inequalities; (iv) HIV/AIDS; (v) environment;
   (vi) empowerment of communities; and (vii) addressing inter-sectoral linkages.

   However, in order to increase focus and reduce workloads for Sector Working Groups the Guidelines have
   been amended and simplified over time. For the financial year 2002/2003, the questions were narrowed
   down. As a result, line agencies had to ask themselves whether they had addressed the needs of poor people
   in their sector; addressed geographical inequalities; and designed measures to empower the poor people in
   their budget submissions.

   Moreover, a Poverty Eradication Working Group reviews and make recommendations on the overall
   allocation of resources and intra-resource allocations within sectors. It also considers other budget policies
   that have an impact on the poor and which sectors qualify as “priorities” (to be under the Poverty Action
   Fund), as well as advises the Sector Working Groups in applying the PRSP crosscutting principles to the
   Budget Framework Papers.

   Source: The PRSP and Budget Linkages: The Case of Cambodia, Jeni Klugman and Rob Taliercio, 2003


                                                         28
EmergingLessons

A key goal of the PRSP process was to encourage increased expenditure in pro-poor priority sectors and
core priority areas. All our five case studies find strong evidence that the process has been successful in
this regard and that there have been strong real expenditure increases in PRS priority sectors and core
priority areas. There is also evidence (in Burkina-Faso, Tanzania and Vietnam), that these sectors do
receive protection in times of budget crunch, bearing testimony to real prioritization by governments. Our
case studies also show that, although poverty considerations are not consistently considered in
determining the geographical distribution of expenditures, there is a trend toward greater consideration of
these issues in all our five countries. These are very important achievements.

Some priority sectors have been more consistently well-endowed (e.g. education, transport, agriculture)
than others (health) and some priority areas have received much larger increases (primary education) than
others (primary health and rural roads). These divergences seem to stem both from the behavior of the
international community as well as from the true degree of ownership of priorities by governments.

There is less consistent evidence about whether these prioritization will be sustained in the medium term.
In Cambodia, medium-term projections do show a continued trend toward increased budget shares to RPS
priority sectors. In Burkina-Faso and Tanzania, however, MTEF projections for 2004-2006 reveal a
stagnation and even a decline in the relative shares devoted to PRS priority sectors. This trend is
worrying, as resource requirements in PRS priority sectors as established by careful costing work show
important shortfalls in Tanzania. Similarly, in Burkina-Faso the new PRSP contains an expanded list of
priorities which can only lead to reduced allocations to original PRS priority sectors and this is reflected
in the MTEF.

While data limitations make any analysis at this stage preliminary, our findings point both to important
achievements (especially for such a short period of time) as well as to the need for greater congruence
between resource allocation and the PRSP. This could be facilitated by:

    •   Avoiding the over-expansion of the list of priority sectors and core priority areas included in
        PRSPs. The sectors, areas and programs that are considered priorities should be informed by the
        messages emerging from PRSP consultations and ratified by Parliamentary approval.

    •   Defining which specific programs and expenditures will be considered priority spending and
        consistently identifying them in PRSPs, MTEFs and budgets. The process of identification should
        include agreement on the criteria for assessing whether a particular program should be regarded
        as a priority. Ideally, the identification of specific PRSP priority programs should be led by the
        MoF but would involve substantive line agency engagement as well as feedback from civil
        society, development partners, and possibly parliamentary review and approval.

    •   Developing transparent, technical criteria for the prioritization of major spending proposals across
        sectors (which could be complemented by sector-specific guidelines) for use in the annual and
        medium term budgeting processes (as is currently done in Uganda). Since the extent to which
        effective prioritization can take place significantly hinges on the existence of program-based
        budgeting, we would like to stress the need to expedite progress on this front.

    •   Re-examining existing programs in terms of consistency between identified priorities for poverty
        reduction and resource allocations and complement this with other kinds of analysis, such as cost-
        effectiveness analysis.



                                                    29
     •   Using priority criteria to guide capital spending, thereby increasing the transparency and
         accountability of public resource allocations.

     •   Using the results of the poverty mapping work to check proposed allocations and executed
         expenditures against regional measures of deprivation.


6.       Donor Coordination and Alignment with PRS Priorities and Predictability and Variability
         of External Financing

As noted at the outset of this paper, four of our five countries are highly aid dependent (Vietnam being the
exception). In Cambodia, for example, external financing exceeds domestically-mobilized public
resources by about 30 percent while in Bolivia and Tanzania in 2001-2002 the share of the capital budget
that was externally financed amounted to 49 and 90 percent respectively. In countries with such high aid
dependency ratios, the cooperation of the donor community is essential in order for the PRSP approach to
be successful. In particular, aid coordination to avoid the fragmentation of expenditures and systems
reporting, the alignment of aid instruments with PRSP priorities and the predictability and low variability
of financing are essential to allow governments to implement their PSRPs. Our case studies examine the
extent to which the donor community has delivered on these fronts.

Efforts to improve partnership between government and donors often pre-date the PRSP. In Tanzania, for
example, the Tanzania Assistance Strategy and the PPER exercise were in place before the advent of the
PRSP while, in Bolivia, the New Relationship Framework launched in 1999 sought to ensure alignment
with government priorities as well as manage donors in a more coordinated manner. This final section
considers whether the PRSP has provided additional impetus to such initiatives, whether it has proven a
useful tool for governments in managing external finance better to deliver on its pro-poor priorities, and
how this potential could be exploited further.

Donor Alignment and Aid Modalities

Most donors in our case study countries have indicated their commitment to supporting PRSP priorities
and their willingness to align their assistance accordingly. In some cases, there is evidence that this is
indeed occurring. In Cambodia, for example, a move away from funding core government functions and
economic development to supporting the social sectors has been observed for some years, and there is
evidence from the health sector that external finance is distributed progressively in regional terms.

However, as discussed in the forgoing section, in all our five countries, PRSP priority areas are so broadly
defined as to make alignment a relatively easy task for donors at least in nominal terms. In Bolivia, for
example, the ministry responsible for external finance estimated that 99 percent of donor funding was
aligned with the PRSP pillars in 2002. However, not all activities under each pillar could be regarded as
pro-poor and this figure also obscured the fact that aid was not ideally distributed between the various
priority sectors. Further analysis of donor programming for the periods 1998-2002 and 2003-2006 in
Bolivia was more illuminating. This analysis showed that few donors were prepared to commit even new
project support to PRSP priority sectors which the government regarded as under-funded, and generally
tended to crowd into more popular areas.

While this lack of flexibility can be explained in part by historical commitments to specific sectors or
issues, it clearly militates against closer alignment between the PRSP and external finance. The
significance of this lack of donor alignment with a country’s agreed priorities becomes even more
apparent when one considers the requirement of domestic counterpart funding for many donor-funded


                                                     30
projects. Estimates from the 2003 Bolivian budget suggest that almost 20 percent of internal finance is
linked to foreign financing. Thus, where donors do not program explicitly to deliver on PRSP priorities,
the domestic budget is also directed away from these vital activities making overall alignment of the
budget to PRSP priorities extremely challenging.

The PRSP approach places a premium on moving towards aid modalities that minimize transaction costs
for the recipient country as well as give the government more control over how funds are spent.
Therefore, another way to ascertain the degree of alignment of donor financing with the PRSP is to trace
the evolution of budget support. A move towards budget support, however, is only feasible and desirable
when a number of preconditions providing confidence in a government’s ability and willingness to
manage resources effectively are in place. These conditions typically include a stable macroeconomic
situation, strong country ownership of the PRSP with clearly articulated structural and sectoral policies
and programs and evidence of momentum toward implementation; good progress in “getting the basics
right” in public expenditure management; and confidence in the area of governance and public finance
management transparency and accountability. As much of the forgoing analysis will have shown, these
conditions are not always in place in our sample countries, hence hindering progress with respect to
moves towards budget support.

In addition, it has not always proven easy for donors to agree on the shared conditionalities, monitoring
frameworks and procurement plans needed to facilitate budget support and basket funding arrangements.
In Burkina Faso, for example, tensions were observed between various donors with respect to which
triggers should be used to unlock funding, while in Bolivia, the performance of the social funds testifies
to a lack of progress with respect to harmonizing procedures. However, practice suggests that with time,
donors can reach compromises and that the benefits for the recipient country of streamlined aid modalities
are significant.

Our case studies on Tanzania and Burkina-Faso, however, provide some evidence that the PRSP approach
has indeed increased donor confidence in these governments’ ability to manage resources for poverty
reduction, as is confirmed by large increases in the amounts of external assistance provided in the form of
budget support in recent years. As a result, between 1999 and 2002, program grants and loans as a
percentage of GDP witnessed significant increases in both countries, rising from 1.8 to 3.2 percent in
Tanzania and from 2.9 to 4 percent in Burkina-Faso. In Bolivia, we also observed both increased donor
commitments to fund via budget support as well as indications that the number of projects would decline
in the period 2003-2006 while in Tanzania SWAps have been established in health, education and
agriculture and several thematic basket funding arrangements are in place. At the same time, however, as
of 2003, there seems to be a decline in the share of budget support in overall grants and loans in both
Tanzania and Burkina Faso as some large projects in the infrastructure and rural development sectors get
under way.

Predictability of External Finance

In the aid-dependent countries of our study, timely and predictable disbursements of donor commitments
are critically important for effective public expenditure management and PRSP implementation. Our case
studies show mixed performance in this area. In Tanzania, for example, the PRSP has given additional
impetus to government efforts to collate information on donor funding, and there has been progress in
capturing in-kind transfers, direct support to local governments and funding from NGOs. Conversely, in
Burkina Faso, there appears to have been little progress on developing a comprehensive overview of
donor finance and, thus, the understanding of the full parameters of the budget is still limited. From our
case studies, it seems that the PRSP process provides additional impetus and rationale for to recipient
country governments to solicit improved provision of information on aid projections and disbursements,



                                                    31
but that only when the units responsible for external financing are strong enough to provide leadership (as
in Tanzania) is this potential actually realized.

Moreover, even when approached by an external financing unit providing specific details on the
information needed, the frequency of the provision and the format necessary, development partners have
problems in supplying such information, especially for projected expenditures. Few donor countries
themselves have medium term budgeting and hence are unable to make firm commitments beyond the
annual horizon. As a result, efforts by recipient countries to develop MTEFs are undermined as resource
envelopes can not be estimated accurately in the absence of foreign financing commitments.

Donor flows seem to be extremely volatile. Evidence from Tanzania shows high year-to-year variability
in donor flows, which prove to be much more volatile than domestic resources. Similarly, in Burkina-
Faso, we find that foreign aid has varied significantly from year to year, compounded with poor
predictability in the flows as HIPC aid delayed for almost a full year from 2000 to 2001. We found no
clear-cut evidence as to what types of aid were more volatile. In Tanzania, for example, program aid had
historically been more variable than project aid, but the situation was reversed in 1998/99 when major
bilateral donors switched to budget support.

Even within a year, aid flows are hard to predict, which significantly impairs the ability of governments to
properly plan and execute budget expenditures. Analysis from Bolivia suggests that, in 1998-2002, the
best performing donors disbursed only 70 percent of their committed aid while the poorest performers
could only provide 33 percent, with the large multi-laterals tending to fall into the latter category.
Similarly, evidence from Burkina-Faso and Tanzania finds important gaps between commitments and
disbursements.


                  Figure7: Tanzania--Projected and Disbursed External Assistance


                                  200
                  Tshs. billion




                                                                               A c tu a l
                                  100
                                                                               C o m m it t e d


                                    0
                                        Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4    Q1   Q2

                                              FY 0 2          FY 03




Evidence from Burkina-Faso also pointed to irregular flows throughout the fiscal year with a tendency for
external financing flows to bunch during the last quarter of the fiscal year.




                                                        32
                              F ig u re 27. B u d g et S u p p o rt: Q u arterly
                                            D isb u rsem en ts

                            80%
                            70%
           % Disbursement



                            60%
                            50%
                            40%
                            30%
                            20%
                            10%
                             0%
                                       1             2                  3                  4
                                                            Q uarter

                             1999     2000      2001          2002          Average 96-02



Emerging Lessons

This section has highlighted the significance of donor financing for PRSP implementation and improved
PEM. In particular, the above analysis points to the need for:

     •   Greater self discipline on the part of donors to ensure all aid is on budget and aligned first and
         foremost with recipient governments’ rather than donors’ objectives.

     •   Synchronizing aid disbursements with recipient countries’ budget cycle to support good planning
         and public expenditure management.

     •   Improved forward planning on the part of donors allowing them to make better estimates of their
         contributions over the medium term.

     •   Improvements in channeling aid through the treasury and in reporting external finance in the
         budget.

     •   Accelerated progress on harmonizing procedures.

     •   More realistic common understanding between donors and recipient countries on conditions for
         aid disbursement to help minimize gaps between committed and disbursed amounts.


7.       Conclusions

Evidence from our five case studies suggests that the PRSP process is having a significant impact on
budget processes and budget allocations. The accomplishments are particularly impressive given the


                                                       33
difficult nature of the changes envisaged and the short period of implementation. Moreover, the PRSP
approach attempts to affect results by influencing incentives and, in particular, through affecting the
environment in which policies are made and the actors involved in policy-making processes, an approach
which bodes well for sustainability but does not necessarily yield immediate results. In particular, our
case studies show the following trends:

Accomplishments

     •   Greater production, use and dissemination of strategy, poverty and fiscal data and increased
         expectations for the data to inform policy-making;

     •   Greater dialogue between planning and financing units within ministries and between line
         ministries and ministries of finance;

     •   A more active involvement of civil society in budget elaboration and/or budget monitoring
         processes;

     •   (Significantly) increased allocations to PRSP sectors and core priority areas in real per capita
         terms;

     •   A move toward general and sector budget support and greater recognition of the need for donors
         to align aid with recipient country priorities.

Shortcomings

    •    Weak evidence that data and monitoring and evaluation results systematically affect policy-
         making;

    •    Weak role of Parliaments in the PRSP process and weak ownership of PRSP priorities by
         Parliaments;

    •    Uneven increases in resource allocations across priority sectors (with education, transport and
         rural development fairing well and health fairing less well);

    •    Uneven increases in resource allocations within priority sectors (with more consistent evidence of
         prioritization of primary education than primary health and very poor performance in rural roads);

    •    Continued high levels of donor financing off-budget, poor forward aid commitments, poor
         predictability and high variability of aid within-year.

Overall, our findings are highly encouraging as the PRSP process in a short period of time has succeeded
in difficult areas where traditional public sector reform initiatives had failed. In particular, we find
evidence that it has increased the transparency, openness and pro-poor character of budgeting processes.
We also find that these reforms have a much larger impact when implemented in a context where the
public finance management basics are in place. Hence, the types of reforms the PRSP process encourages
are supplements not substitutes for improvements in basic public expenditure management.

The PRSP process has also contributed to highlighting areas where important gaps still exist and has
created expectations of further progress. Although some observers consider this to be a shortcoming, in
our view, it is one of its strengths, as greater pressure for plans to fit budgets, for greater transparency,


                                                      34
participation and accountability are the engine for further progress in the future. The process has also
created greater awareness of the need for capacity-building in line ministries, Parliaments and civil
society if they are to be well-informed actors in budget processes. This is also to be celebrated. Further
progress on all these fronts, however, is needed and highly dependent on the continued ownership of the
PRSP process by recipient governments and donor community alike.


wb214506
N:\Alonso\Fiscal-CaseStudies\synthesis paper.draft 3 jan 7 04.doc
January 18, 2005 2:23 PM




                                                                    35
