 TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2016




TDRP Quarterly Report
 FY15-16: JANUARY–MARCH 2016




                                            1
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2016


Table of Contents

Acronyms............................................................................................................................................................... 3
Summary of Activities ............................................................................................................................................ 4
Technical Assistance and Financing of Reinsertion/Reintegration Operations ........................................................ 4
  African Union DDR Capacity Program ................................................................................................................ 4
  Central African Republic .................................................................................................................................... 5
  Democratic Republic of Congo .......................................................................................................................... 5
  Republic of Mali ................................................................................................................................................ 6
Knowledge Management ....................................................................................................................................... 7
  Nigeria Non-State Armed Groups Study ............................................................................................................. 7
  Libya Armed Groups Mapping and DDR Approach ............................................................................................. 8
Program Management and Status of Trust Fund.................................................................................................... 8
  Proposal for No-Cost Extension ......................................................................................................................... 8
  World Bank Staff and Consultants...................................................................................................................... 9
  Status of Trust Fund and Disbursement Rate ..................................................................................................... 9




                                                                                   2
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2016


ACRONYMS

 AfDB        African Development Bank
 AUDDRCP     African Union DDR Capacity Program
 CAR         Central African Republic
 CMU         Country Management Unit
 DDR         Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
 DDRR        Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and Reinsertion
 DfID        Department for International Development
 DRC         Democratic Republic of Congo
 EC          European Commission
 ESMF        Environmental and Social Management Framework
 IDA         International Development Association
 MDTF        Multi Donor Trust Fund
 MINUSCA     United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
             Republic
 MINUSMA     United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
 MIS         Management Information Systems
 MONUSCO     United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 NSAG        Non-State Armed Groups
 PAD         Project Appraisal Document
 RBPA        Recovery and Peace-building Assessment
 SDTF        Single Donor Trust Fund
 ToR         Terms of Reference
 UNDPKO      United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations
 UEPNDDR     Unité d’Exécution du Programme National de Désarmement, Démobilisation et Réintégration




                                                  3
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2016


I.      Summary of Activities

During the third quarter, TDRP activities covered technical assistance, operational and financial support in
Central African Republic [CAR], Democratic Republic of Congo [DRC] and Republic of Mali, in addition to the
ongoing assistance provided to the African Union [AU] Peace and Security Department in coordination with the
United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

Activities delivered through the African Union DDR Capacity Program [AUDDRCP] centered on coordination for
Phase II of the program and preparation for the Experts’ Workshop on New Priorities and Emerging Issues on
DDR. In the Central African Republic [CAR], discussions are currently underway for Bank involvement through a
community-based socio-economic reinsertion program and a corresponding policy note has been produced for
the country wide CAR Policy Notes. Meanwhile, reinsertion processes are being operationalized in the
Democratic Republic of Congo [DRC] and Republic of Mali for their respective projects.

II.     Technical Assistance and Financing of Reinsertion/Reintegration Operations:

African Union DDR Capacity Program
A technical planning meeting on Phase I of AUDDRCP was held between the AU, the United Nations Department
of Peacekeeping Operations [UNDPKO] and the TDRP team of the World Bank on February 8-12, 2016 in Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia. The meeting convened to support AU’s efforts to continue to enhance coordination between
its partners and outline practical engagement in providing operational support to member states building upon
capacity generated during Phase I of the program.

As per the Assessment Report produced by the African Union-United Nations-World Bank core teams that met
in Addis Ababa during January-February 2016, a project document on the upcoming three-year phase of the AU
DDR program 2016-18 is currently being developed. This document will guide the planning and implementation
of DDR activities in the broader African Peace and Security Architecture framework in a structured and coherent
manner for the next three years.

Preparations are currently underway for the Experts’ Workshop on New Priorities and Emerging Issues on DDR
to be held during May 2016 in Addis Ababa. In order to consolidate initial stabilization of war-torn societies and
to lay groundwork for long-term development, DDR should be integrated into peace and stabilization processes
starting from negotiations, through peacekeeping and into recovery and development. In 2008, the UN
developed the Integrated DDR Standards to foster common understanding of DDR, its strategic objectives and
priorities; and to ensure consistency of approaches amongst multiple implementing partners. Yet, the changing
nature of conflicts —lack of clear political agreements, security sector reforms— require DDR practitioners to
develop innovative approaches to implement DDR programs. As a result, this workshop draws participants from
a growing list of partners involved with AUDDRCP. These include selected member states, Centers of Excellence,
Regional Economic Communities, AU Field and Peace Support Operations, and representatives from UNDPKO,
UN Office to the African Union, UN Inter-agency Working Group on DDR and the World Bank.

The core team is currently developing the AU DDR Progress and Practice Brief. This brief summarizes best
practices and lessons learned from the past three years of implementing AUDDRCP and will be shared amongst
key partners to guide the planning and implementation efforts of future DDR programming.

A Senior DDR Advisor was recruited and deployed to Addis Ababa on February 10, 2016 to provide technical
support to the Director of the AU Defense and Security Division during the phase out period of the WB support
to the AUDDRCP. The AU organized a coordination meeting on the Lord’s Resistance Army to discuss regional
coordination on the reintegration of returnees. The core team further developed an analysis of the South Sudan



                                                        4
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2016


Peace agreement to inform ongoing discussions on the implications of peace agreement on DDR as well as
potential role of the African Union Commission in these processes.

Central African Republic
In this quarter, TDRP continued to provide technical support to the DDR process in CAR. During March 8-15,
2016, a TDRP team undertook a mission to Bangui to convene with United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in CAR [MINUSCA], potential implementing partners, armed group signatories, national,
and local authorities. Participants discussed the status of the DDR Program, capacity-building support, and
collecting information for a concept note building the case for Bank engagement on community-based
reintegration program in CAR.

A preliminary concept paper has been shared with Bank staff on March 22, 2016. The concept note analyzed the
current status and ongoing drivers of conflict in CAR, relevant tenets from the “Republican Pact for Peace,
national reconciliation and reconstruction in the Central African Republic” and “Agreement on the Principles of
Disarmament, Demobilizations, Reintegration and Repatriation (DDRR).” MINUSCA is expected to lead the
disarmament and demobilization efforts with the government whilst the Bank, given its previous experience,
will would provide financing and technical support towards fulfilling the reintegration component. Community-
based socio-economic reintegration will target an estimated 7,000 beneficiaries as well as those from host
communities and local authorities through providing livelihoods support, rehabilitating economic infrastructure,
and supporting vulnerable groups.

The implementation of future DDR activities continues to be hindered by weak national and local capacity,
current political transitions, and knowledge gaps on the scope and objectives of DDR. As such, there is a need
for robust sensitization and technical assistance. The President-elect Faustin-Archange Touadéra has identified
DDR programming as a priority. To that end, detailed specification of criteria for eligibility and participants from
armed groups, conditions for reintegration into security forces and security arrangements for reintegration
activities and later development procedures need be confirmed to create optimum conditions for Bank
operations.

As requested by the Country Management Unit [CMU], the TDRP team will begin preparations for an IDA project
and develop a concept note for a new Multi Donor Trust Fund [MDTF], since IDA financing may not be sufficient
to cover costs for the entire program. Therefore, the African Development Bank [AfDB] has expressed interest
in contributing to the program and pre-existing TDRP financing may also be applied towards funding the project,
wherever possible.

Additionally, the TDRP team was tasked by CMU with drafting a policy note on community-based reintegration
titled, “DDR and Reintegration within the Broader Context of a Stabilization Program.” This paper identifies weak
governance and center-periphery divide, lack of social cohesion, informal economies and cross-border dynamics,
lack of public information and sensitization, as well as dwindling education and employment as major challenges
to bear in mind while implementing reintegration programming. Moving forward, the notes recommend
implementing common stabilization strategy; promoting state capacity-building, accountability and citizen
engagement; sensitizing host communities to reintegration processes and enabling employment and livelihoods
support towards beneficiaries.

Democratic Republic of Congo
The IDA assistance and TDRP grant accorded to the DRC Reinsertion and Reintegration Project became effective
on January 16, 2016 with the project itself becoming effective shortly afterwards on January 27, 2016. As of
March 8, 2016, approximately 5.3 percent of the 15M committed by IDA and 2.7M of the 6.5M USD provided
for by TDRP via the Swedish Government has been disbursed.



                                                         5
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2016


During February 24-27, 2016, a TDRP mission visited Kinshasa to officially launch the project and discuss the
operational framework and status of the Global DDR III Plan. Additionally, it provided technical assistance on
vulnerable groups, psychosocial and family livelihoods support to the Unité d’Exécution du Programme National
de Désarmement, Démobilisation et Réintégration [UEPN-DDR]. Together with UEPN-DDR, the team agreed to
utilize the Swedish contribution towards the family livelihoods support component of the project. Its budget will
be allocated for: [i] sensitization to reinsertion; [ii] life-skills training; [iii] livelihoods training; [iv] childcare
services; and [v] psychosocial counselling.

The first phase of reinsertion, comprising 4,800 demobilized ex-combatants, will be completed in July. Training
programs will reinforce pre-existing skills of beneficiaries and correspond to market dynamics through a
consultative process. Given majority of the vocations targeted —agriculture, animal husbandry, carpentry etc.—
are not highly technical, trainings are anticipated to take no longer than 3 months vis-à-vis 7 weeks as previously
suggested.

To promote gender-sensitivity in implementation, UEPN-DDR will identify and allocate resources towards
gender-centric aspects of family support activities. Activities listed will also be cognizant of childcare services
and UEPN-DDR will provide a database of all Nominated Household Members’ (NHM) children, their ages and
budget allocation for activities. Additionally, it has agreed to procure kits and work with a Logistics Consultant
to ensure quality and timely distribution in compliance with Bank regulations. So as to optimize service delivery,
it will conduct thorough sensitization to verify the ex-combatants and their families’ selection of NHM for project
support wherever possible.

The Project Implementation Manual, including the financial management and procurement manual, is pending
finalization, while the Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy has been finalized. The Terms of References [ToR] for
the baseline survey and the Family Livelihoods Support Strategy have been approved and those for psychosocial
support and support to vulnerable groups will be developed. Currently, UEPN-DDR is contracting all
implementing partners to provide vocational training at Centres de Préparation à la Réintégration. The TDRP
team is currently recruiting a firm to prepare the Environmental and Social Management Framework [ESMF] and
will create a training program for implementing partners.

Despite recent improvements in the security sector, the eastern regions remain largely volatile owing to the
influence of armed groups and incidences of violence in camps accommodating demobilized soldiers. The TDRP
team remains mindful of their impact on project implementation and possible mitigation measures. It continues
to operate within the mechanisms established by MONUSCO and collaborate with UEPN-DDR and CMU. To that
end, UEPN-DDR has established a plan of gradual transfer of 2400 newly trained and registered ex-combatants
for the first phase during March-July to Eastern DRC with logistical support from MONUSCO.

In order to finance and implement specific current and upcoming activities for the next phase of the project, a
Multi Donor Trust Fund [MDTF] and Single Donor Trust Fund [SDTF] has been established through which the
Department for International Development [DfID] and European Commission [EC] respectively channel their
contributions. The MDTF is anticipated at 23M USD, of which DfiD has already approved a grant of 3M GBP, with
possibility of further contribution and a further 4.8M Euros through its own SDTF.

Republic of Mali
This quarter, the TDRP team prepared the Project Appraisal Document [PAD] for a new IDA-financed operation
—Reinsertion of Ex-Combatants Project in Northern Mali. To prepare the PAD, the team undertook two missions
to Bamako, during January 22-29 and February 15-25 respectively. The TDRP team met with the Ministry of
Defense and Veteran Affairs, United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
[MINUSMA], and representatives from the armed groups. In addition, the TDRP commissioned a rapid survey on
armed groups to inform the design of the reinsertion project. The PAD has been circulated amongst colleagues

                                                           6
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2016


at the Bank for reviews prior to the decision meeting scheduled for April 8, 2016. The team will conduct an
appraisal mission during March 30-April 9 2016.

From January 22-29, 2016, the TDRP team met with MINUSMA, DDR Working Group, and armed group
signatories to discuss reinsertion approach going forward, Management Information Systems architecture and
MINUSMA-led cantonment process. Discussions also revolved around the National DDR Program document and
implementing the Community Violence Reduction projects to prepare surrounding areas for reintegration. The
Bank-supported National DDR Program document is currently being finalized and the TDRP team continues to
lend technical expertise towards preparing the MIS database.

During February 15-25, a TDRP mission visited Bamako, as agreed with the Government and MINUSMA, to offer
technical assistance and prepare for reintegration procedures. Meetings sought to finalize details on the
institutional framework, National DDR Program, planned activities, modalities of implementation and funding
for projects. The TDRP team commissioned New Horizons, a local NGO, to conduct a rapid survey on combatants,
armed group leaders, traditional and local communities in Timbuktu, Gao, Kidal, Taoudeni, Menaka and Mopti.
The team has also been requested to provide specific details on the estimated duration of reinsertion, cost per
ex-combatant and planned activities. Following this, the TDRP team prepared a ToR to conduct an assessment
of the labor market, particularly the productive sectors in the five Northern regions to determine reinsertion
activities and costed value of reintegration kits needed for ex-combatants.

DDR activities may begin as early as June 2016 across eight cantonment sites with a capacity of 750 each. Three
of those are expected to be finalized by late-April and the remainder by July. Cantonment processes will take no
longer than two months per ex-combatant. The first wave of ex-combatants for cantonment will be profiled
through questionnaires and data analysis via the MIS system, and biometric identification provided will be used
to prepare for the next phase. As is, implementation of the Bank operation is expected to begin in September
2016. The bank is unable to proceed with the project until the peace agreement is implemented, DDR
Commission established, and list of ex-combatants provided. In case of additional time required for the bank to
implement DDR processes and validate administrative procedures, the government may conduct some interim
activities until the reinsertion project takes off.

Given the scope of the planned DDR program, Bank funding alone will not be sufficient to cover the cost of
reintegration activities. The reinsertion phase is estimated to cost 40-45M USD, with 15M USD disbursed
through an IDA grant and the remainder potentially through a Multi-Donor Trust Fund.

III.    Knowledge Management

Nigeria Non-State Armed Groups Study
The TDRP team collaborated with the World Bank’s Recovery and Peace-building Assessment [RBPA] for North
East Nigeria team to develop a preliminary assessment report on the status of Non-State Armed Groups [NSAG]
in Northeastern Nigeria, particularly Boko Haram and the Civilian Joint Task Force self-defense militias. The
planned RPBA aims to support the Government in its short, medium and long term efforts towards peace
building and sustainable recovery in North East Nigeria, collaborating on, and contributing to, ongoing federal
and state-level initiatives, including the Presidential Initiative for the North East and the North East States
Transformation Strategy. The assessment on NSAGs aimed to provide a clear understanding of their size,
composition, origin, ideology, evolutions and capabilities, including sources of funding, resources, geopolitical
relationships, inter-linkages and external relationships. This knowledge regarding the NSAGs compliments the
ongoing RBPA in Nigeria by defining appropriate recommendations on how the World Bank and its partners can
productively engage in providing possible support and intervention. In assessing the effectiveness of current
[joint] military operations, victim support, and de-radicalization, the document identifies high levels of poverty,
illiteracy and marginalization as precursors of militancy in the region. In so doing, it advocates a field-based

                                                        7
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2016


follow-up assessment mission, political dialogue, institution-building, community engagement, grievance
redress mechanisms and dis-incentivizing of informal military involvement.

Libya Armed Groups Mapping and DDR Approach
TDRP commissioned an internal desk review on armed groups in Libya and applicable DDR approaches. The
assessment revealed that armed militias and ISIS influence continues to proliferate the nation, with majority
[52%] present in the Western region. Despite recent changes, armed groups have traditionally organized
themselves under overarching region-specific military structures and political entities. Disparities between
political support and military alignment can be attributed to local alliances and concerns, lack of confidence on
state institutions, personality-focused politics. Incentives to becoming revolutionists remain high, and when
missing, many leave to create new armed groups. Amidst the current political and security vacuum, it is more
crucial than ever to engage with internal dynamics within armed groups and auxiliary communities. Given the
Libyan context, DDR need not only be implemented following a negotiated settlement or accompany security
sector reforms; it is imperative to conduct socio-economic reintegration at community levels, through a multi-
sectoral and stakeholder approach. Implementing DDR in Libya requires both strategic [institutional] and tactical
[grassroots] involvement through enhancing confidence-building, channeling resources and adapting to the
evolving nature of violence in the country.

IV.     Program Management and Status of Trust Fund

Proposal for No-Cost Extension
TDRP Trust Fund had previously been scheduled and on track for closure on December 30, 2016 as agreed during
the Trust Fund Committee Meeting in Paris, France held on October 19-20, 2015. However, given emerging
needs, the current situation on the ground and client interest, there remains growing need amongst affected
countries for increased involvement and diversification into emerging priority themes and regions. As such, the
TDRP team has proposed a no-cost extension till December 30, 2018 to enable it to complete ongoing activities
and initiate proposed activities towards recently approved projects.
    I.        Some pipeline activities are currently awaiting for the DRC Reinsertion and Reintegration Project,
              African Union DDR Capacity Program and complementary stabilization programming in DRC,
              Republic of Congo and South Sudan.
    II.       Renewal of conflict in South Sudan and Burundi and current situation in CAR, Libya, Mali, and
              Somalia present a growing demand for a rapid response technical assistance mechanism.
    III.      Cross-cutting interactions between reintegration activities and sexual and gender-based violence,
              forced displacement, mixed migration and climate change calls for more comprehensive
              programming during the early stabilization period targeting broader beneficiary groups.

The extension will be primarily intended to support these two activities among others:
    I.      The Government of Sweden has committed 6.5M USD towards the DRC Reinsertion and
            Reintegration Project that has recently become effective in January 2016. Additional time beyond
            the upcoming fiscal year would be required to conduct planned programming activities.
    II.     The African Development Bank [AfDB] has already indicated non-objection and expressed interest
            in supporting ongoing National DDR Program in CAR through the TDRP funding mechanism and
            additional time will be required to further the discussion.




                                                       8
TDRP Quarterly Report January-March 2016


World Bank Staff and Consultants
 Staff Members
 Abderrahim Fraiji           TDRP Manager & Senior Operations Officer, Washington D.C.
 Benjamin Burckhart          Social Development Specialist, Washington D.C.
 Caroline Guazzo             Language Program Assistant, Washington D.C.
 Consultants
 Djeina Kalidi               Social Development Consultant, Bamako, Mali
 Faizaa Fatima               Social Development Consultant, Nairobi, Kenya
 Farwah Qasim                Junior Operations Associate, Washington D.C.
 Jinghua Zhou                Operations Associate, Washington D.C.
 Lina Abdullahi              Operations Associate, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
 Linda Kiriinya              Social Development Consultant, Nairobi,
 Murat Onur                  Operations Officer, Washington D.C.
 Olivier Mukarji             Senior Advisor, Copenhagen, Denmark

Status of Trust Fund and Disbursement Rate
During this quarter, contributions to TDRP trust fund remained at 42,583,887.89 USD, with disbursement
reaching 89.32 percent at 38,037,311.76 USD. The remaining balance of 4,680,200.79 includes much of the
Government of Sweden’s contribution to co-finance the DRC Reinsertion and Reintegration Project activities.




                                                    9
