                                  October – December 2015




Quarterly Report
  FY16: October – December 2015




                             1
                                                                                            October – December 2015



Table of Contents
I. Summary of Activities ............................................................................................3
II.        Technical Assistance & Financing of Reinsertion/Reintegration Operations .....3
       African Union DDR Capacity Program .....................................................................3
       Central African Republic ..........................................................................................4
       Democratic Republic of Congo ................................................................................5
       Republic of Mali ......................................................................................................6
III.        Program Management and Trust Fund Status ..................................................7
ANNEX: Trust Fund Committee Meeting (October 19-20, 2015 Paris, France)............8




                                                                2
                                                                            October – December 2015




I.      Summary of Activities

In this quarter, TDRP activities covered technical assistance in Central African Republic (CAR), Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC) and Republic of Mali, in addition to the ongoing assistance provided to the African
Union Peace and Security Department together with the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.

In CAR, TDRP provided technical support to the UN Peacekeeping Mission in Central African Republic and
the Transitional Government on the preparation of a new Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
(DDR) program as per the Bangui Accord of May 2015. The Bank technical missions visited Bangui and
worked with the UN, World Bank country office and the Government on the concept and design of the new
DDR program, focusing primarily on community reintegration activities. In addition, the technical team
prepared a proposal for funding from the World Bank – United Nations Partnership Trust Fund to support
the ongoing work program in CAR.

In the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Bank project task team continued to work with the national
implementing agency and the Government to accelerate the effectiveness of the Reinsertion and
Reintegration Project, which will be co-financed by a combination of World Bank and donor resources,
including Sweden and European Commission.

In Mali, the TDRP technical team continued to provide technical and advisory support to the Government
on the planned DDR program as stipulated in the Algiers Peace Agreement. At the request of the
Government, the World Bank started to prepare a project concept for supporting the reintegration
component of the overall DDR program. TDRP technical team prepared the Project Concept Note for the
Mali Reinsertion and Reintegration Project, which was endorsed by the Bank management in December.

TDRP trust fund committee meeting was held in October 2015. The participants expressed their satisfaction
with TDRP’s performance and agreed to close the TDRP trust fund at the end of this year. It was agreed
that the experience of TDRP should be built upon into a larger trust fund program that goes beyond DDR
in scope, and covers regions that have not been targeted sufficiently by the international community.
Contributions to TDRP trust fund reached US$ 42.5 million, with a disbursement of US$ 35.1 million. The
remaining balance includes Government of Sweden’s contribution (approximately US$ 6.5 million) to
finance the DRC Reinsertion and Reintegration Project activities.

II.     Technical Assistance and Financing of Reinsertion/Reintegration Operations

African Union DDR Capacity Program (AU DDRCP)

Strategic Review Meeting on Completion of Phase One

On 12 to 13 January 2016, the African Union (AU), United Nations (DPKO) and the World Bank (TDRP) met
in Addis Ababa to close phase one of the DDR Capacity Program (2013- 2015). The DDR heads from the
three organizations: Dr. Tarek A. Sharif (AU), Mr. Simon Yazgi (UN DPKO) and Mr. Abderrahim Fraiji (World
Bank- TDRP), together with their team, reviewed the results of the DDR Capacity Program and outlined key
steps on the way forward for phase two of the program, building on the successful gains of phase one.


                                                    3
                                                                              October – December 2015


The participants commended the AU on achieving the objectives set out in the project document and
expressed hope that the capacity created within the AU will be maintained and strengthened in the future.
Both the UN and World Bank stated that there continued to be a significant role for the AU to play in DDR
on the continent and further expressed their strong desire and commitment to work with the AU in phase
two which would have a strong emphasis on operational support to Member States.

As a way forward, in-order to solidify this tripartite collaboration between the organizations in the future,
the three parties agreed to sign a cooperation agreement which expresses their commitment to work
together, as well as identify the modalities for future cooperation. This co-operation agreement which will
be signed in February 2016 will look at ways of complementing DDR activities already included in the African
Peace and Security Architecture support program

The Sixth Meeting of the AU-Regions Steering Committee on SALW and DDR

From 17th to 18th November 2015, the African Union held its’ Sixth Meeting of the AU-Regions Steering
Committee on Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALW) & Disarmament Demobilization and Reintegration
(DDR) in Abuja, Nigeria. The meeting which provided an opportunity to review projects and initiatives
implemented from the last meeting by the members of the steering committee was attended by: COMESA,
EAC, ECCAS, ECOWAS, IGAD, RECSA, SADC and UNREC. The members reiterated the commitment to
providing strategic guidance in phase two of the DDR program and further called on AU to provide vital
supporting the new DDR context present such as South Sudan and DRC.

Sensitization Workshop on DDRR for Stakeholders in Central African Republic

From 25 to 26 November 2015, as part of the AU’s support to the stabilization efforts in the Central African
Republic (CAR), and as a follow-up to the conclusions of the May 2015 Bangui reconciliation Forum, the
AUC convened a DDR Sensitization Workshop for CAR stakeholders in Addis Ababa. Participants that
attended the workshop were drawn from the Ministries of Territorial Administration, Defense and Public
Security of the CAR, political parties, the media, academia, civil society and religious groups. The AU
Missions in CAR and Central Africa (MISAC) and for Mali and the Sahel (MISAHEL), as well as the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) were
also represented. The Workshop was aimed at forging a common understanding on the implementation
of DDR in CAR and resulted in participants agreeing on the importance of national ownership as a
cornerstone for the successful implementation of their DDR program. They also agreed on the need to link
DDR to Security Sector Reform (SSR) and to the overall efforts to stabilize the CAR.

Fifth Edition of the AU DDR Newsletter

The Fifth edition of the AU DDR Newsletter is finalized and ready for dissemination to its users. This issue
features news headlines and partnership between the African Union, the World Bank and United Nations;
showcases AU DDR engagement in the field as well as informs upcoming events and publications.

Central African Republic

In January 2015, the World Bank received an official request from the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary General (SRSG) in Central African Republic (CAR), calling for Bank (TDRP) technical
assistance to United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) on DDR. To date, the work to date has focused on: (i) advisory support on political and

                                                     4
                                                                           October – December 2015


technical aspects of DDR, (ii) technical assistance in the drafting of the DDR program outline and other
relevant documentation, and (iii) development of concepts and terms of references for socio-economic
assessments and other exercises to inform the design of community reintegration activities. TDRP’s
advisory support since January 2015 has yielded fruitful discussions and unanimity between MINUSCA DDR
and the Bank/TDRP with regards to the way forward on DDR. One of the key messages that have been given
to all concerned stakeholders has been that the new DDR program can be successful only if all the
concerned actors are willing to go for a DDR process and have the same understanding of DDR.

In this quarter, a TDRP mission visited Bangui to meet with stakeholders and to prepare a proposal for
funding from the World Bank – UN Partnership Trust Fund in November 2015. The TDRP team was also
asked by the Bank Country Management Unit to prepare a policy note on DDR for the IDA exceptional
turnaround window for possible IDA financing for the reintegration program. During the mission, the TDRP
and MINUSCA teams finalized the proposal for the WB-UN Partnership. As agreed with MINUSCA, the trust
fund resources will be used to support ongoing work of MINUSCA and the Bank and finance activities such
as socio-economic surveys and assessments, mapping of potential implementing partners, and design of
community reintegration activities and tools.

The TDRP mission together with the World Bank Country Manager in Bangui met with the new Special
Representative of the Secretary General (SRSG) and the Deputy SRSG to introduce the new DDR program
in the context of recovery, stabilization and development in CAR. It was agreed that DDR cannot address
CAR’s crisis as a standalone project, and therefore, should be planned as part of a global re covery and
development program.

While the national DDR program is still being developed, there is consensus that community reintegration
activities should attempt to bring together communities and ex-combatants around socio-economic
opportunities and interests that will contribute to recovery and development. This could help in changing
the culture of fear and fighting into a culture of community work, cooperation and social cohesion. With
regards to the success of the new program and particularly reintegration aspects, World Bank/TDRP and
MINUSCA DDR teams have agreed on the following main aspects:

    a) Political: As soon as there is an elected government, there needs to be political ownership of DDR
       by the government and the armed groups. To this end, the Bank/TDRP and MINUSCA teams agreed
       during the mission to organize a small workshop with the objective of bringing together all
       concerned parties immediately after a new government is formed;
    b) Technical: The program should be nationally-led, inclusive and build on the principles of
       transparency and accountability. However, the national capacity is very weak, and MINUSCA and
       the Bank will need to continue providing technical and advisory support to the government; and
    c) Financial: The reintegration phase is estimated to cost around US$35-40 million to cover the whole
       country.

Democratic Republic of Congo

TDRP technical team continued working on the effectiveness and technical support to the Reinsertion and
Reintegration Project (RRP), which will be financed by a combination of World Bank IDA, Sweden (through
TDRP), and European Commission funds. The World Bank task team carried out a number of missions to
Kinshasa between September and December 2015 as part of the ongoing technical support and preparation
for implementation. The overall objectives of these missions were to work with the implementing agency,
Unité d’Exécution du Programme National de Désarmement, Démobilisation et Réintégration (UEPNDDR),

                                                   5
                                                                              October – December 2015


and meet with development partners and the UN Mission (MONUSCO) to accelerate the project
implementation. The project is expected to become effective and begin operations in January 2016.

Republic of Mali

In August, the World Bank Country Management Unit requested the TDRP team to develop the concept for
a reinsertion project. As an integral part of the global DDR program, the project would provide reinsertion
support to disarmed and demobilized ex-combatants through a community-based approach. It is expected
that the new project will be co-financed by World Bank’s International Development Association (IDA) and
a new multi-donor trust fund to channel donor contributions.

In October, a TDRP mission visited Bamako to discuss the reinsertion project concept with stakeholders
including the Government, World Bank country team, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) DDR Unit and concerned development partners. The TDRP mission
met with officials from the Ministry of Defence noted that there is an urgent need for the establishment of
a mandated DDR unit/agency to act as a counterpart. The mission reiterated the readiness of the Bank to
provide technical support that might be requested in the process of institutional set-up. The mission also
met with a vendor that will carry out a rapid survey of Platform and Coordination armed groups. The
objective of this work is to provide an insight into the development of reinsertion activities.

The mission had a technical meeting with the DDR Working Group and discussed reinsertion options going
forward and noted that a rapid survey will take place to inform the planning for the reinsertion project. The
mission also underlined the need for a mandated DDR unit/commission to act as counterpart, which the
DDR Working group agreed to bring to the attention of their senior management. Further, the mission also
met with senior representatives from Platform and Coordination. It is understood that both groups
reiterated their willingness to implement the Peace Agreement in all aspects, including the integration of
some members of armed groups in the national security structures. The Meeting with MINUSMA partners
confirmed that the cantonment process could take place as outlined in the peace agreement, pending the
confirmation of proposed cantonment locations by the platform and coordination.

In this quarter, the TDRP team prepared the Project Concept Note (PCN) for a new IDA-financed operation,
Mali Reinsertion of Ex-combatants Project. The PCN was reviewed by the internal Bank team for clearance
to proceed with project appraisal. The review meeting underlined that the PDO and the rationale are clearly
formulated in the PCN and reflective of the Bank’s track record in reinsertion and reintegration operations,
the Mali Country Partnership Framework as well as the position of DDR in the Algiers Peace Agreement. It
was also agreed during the review meeting that the Bank’s involvement in DDR in Mali will be through the
reinsertion component while the UN will provide technical and financial support to the Disarmament and
Demobilization (DD) stage. The primary beneficiaries of the Bank-supported operation will therefore be
disarmed and demobilized ex-combatants, which means that the DD stage would have to be completed
before the Bank operation can start disbursing to commence reinsertion. To accelerate the DD stage the
Task Team (TT) and the Country Management Unit (CMU) will work together to coordinate with the
Government, MINUSMA and development partners.




                                                     6
                                                                            October – December 2015


III.    Program Management and Trust Fund Status

Trust Fund Committee Meeting and Mid-term Review (October 19-20, 2015)

The Trust Fund Committee held its regular meeting in Paris, France on October 19 and 20, 2015. Finland,
France and Sweden of the TDRP donors attended the meeting, which was chaired by Jan Weetjens (Practice
Manager, World Bank Social, Urban Rural and Resilience Global Practice). At the end of the meeting, the
TDRP donors expressed their satisfaction with program’s performance and agreed to close the TDRP. It was
further agreed that the experience of TDRP should be built upon into a larger, more inclusive program that
extends beyond DDR, includes a number of interrelated activities, and takes into consideration regions that
have not been targeted sufficiently by the international community. Financing for such a program would
require leveraging support from sources beyond traditional donor agencies. Emphasis should be placed on
creating a smart administration structure, which would ensure lean management and overhead
arrangements, and optimize the strengths of its components. The minutes of the TFC meeting and the
presentations are provided in the Annex.

World Bank Staff and Consultants

 Staff
 Abderrahim Fraiji                  TDRP Manager, Washington DC
 Harald Hinkel                      Sr. Social Development Specialist
 Caroline Guazzo                    Program Assistant, Washington
 Benjamin Burckhart                 Social Development Specialist, Washington
 Team of consultants
 Jonathan Sandy                     Sr. Advisor, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
 Olivier Mukarji                    Sr. Advisor, Copenhagen, Denmark
 Elisabeth Maier                    Sr. Operations Officer, Washington
 Murat Onur                         Conflict and Development Specialist, Washington
 Linda Kiriinya                     Social Development Consultant, Nairobi, Kenya
 Lina Imran                         Operations Associate, AU, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
 Kate Zhou                          Operations Associate, Washington
 Farwah Qasim                       Jr. Operations Associate, Washington

Trust Fund Status and disbursement rate

In this quarter, contributions to TDRP trust fund reached US$ 42,583,887.89, with a disbursement of
US$ 35,110,808.15. The remaining balance includes Government of Sweden’s contribution
(US$ 6,392,277.09) to co-finance the DRC Reinsertion and Reintegration Project activities.




                                                    7
ANNEX: Trust Fund Committee Meeting (October 19-20, 2015 Paris, France)



                                        Trust Fund Committee Meeting
                                             October 19-20, 2015
                                                 Paris, France


                                                   MINUTES

1. The TDRP Trust Fund Committee held its regular meeting in Paris, France on October 19 and 20, 2015.
Finland, France and Sweden of the TDRP donors attended the meeting, which was chaired by Jan Weetjens,
Global Practice Manager - Social, Urban Rural and Resilience. A full list of participants is provided in Annex

I.        Introduction

2. Jan Weetjens opened the TFC meeting by outlining the objectives: (i) to present the key findings of the
external TDRP evaluation; (ii) to discuss the strategic vision and future program concept; and (iii) to provide
an update on the TDRP implementation status, budget and disbursement.

II.       TDRP Evaluation: Strategic Vision

3. The external evaluator Anthony Finn presented the key findings of the evaluation. As per the TDRP
results framework, TDRP has demonstrated positive results across all areas of the portfolio, including
progress on enhancing institutional and organizational capacity of the African Union (AU) through the AU
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR) Capacity Program, and through other activities, the
program has positively affected lives of over 200,000 beneficiaries. TDRP has successfully completed most
Demobilization and Reintegration (D&R activities including in Rwanda and Burundi, while challenges remain
in the programs in Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and Central African Republic (CAR). TDRP has been
instrumental in preparing the DRC DDR III, South Sudan Pilot Reintegration Project, and has been responsive
to technical assistance requests from the Governments of Mali, Chad and CAR. These technical assistance
works have led to two new operations in the pipeline in Mali and CAR. Successes were also documented in
Cross-border Stabilization Program, in particular, the pilot program in the DRC and Northern Uganda, which
exceeded target beneficiaries and led to an increase in beneficiaries’ income. Further, TDRP has completed
the knowledge and learning component and shown coherence incorporating knowledge and experience
into project identification and design of new projects.

4. The external evaluator noted the challenges the Program has faced; including heavy influence of the
external environment on project performance and long term impact; ambitious timelines in some project
activities, and a small secretariat for the ongoing demand.

5. Key evaluation results are summarized as follows:

         TDRP has been a responsive, non-bureaucratic and rapid facility to address emerging needs.
         At country/regional level, activities have been aligned with country strategies, and at national level
          TDRP has assisted building national DDR institutions as well as the capacity of AU Peace and Security
          Department.
           TDRP has been instrumental in leveraging additional financing both in terms of IDA funds and Bank
            Budget; but also in terms of bilateral funds (i.e. from Sweden, European Commission).
           Through its partnership with UN agencies, including UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations
            (DPKO) and the AU, TDRP has managed to raise funds for successful South-South Knowledge and
            Experience Exchange activities.
           In total, TDRP has successfully targeted and delivered services to over 263,500 direct beneficiaries
            in Burundi, CAR, DRC, Rwanda, South Sudan and Uganda.
           If indirect beneficiaries are taken into account, this number would rise beyond 1.5 million.
           TDRP has implemented a comprehensive knowledge management component, which was used to
            inform identification and design of new projects as well as technical support.

Strategic Vision

6. The external evaluator Nat Colletta presented the results of the evaluation regarding the strategic
vision and outlook and expressed that TDRP has effectively been a demand-driven rapid response technical
assistance mechanism on DDR and stabilization programming. The closure of TDRP will enable a new, more
comprehensive approach to stabilization and resilience in Africa with a wider target group.

7. Given the factors shaping Africa today, such as climate change, pressures on natural resources that
lead to resource-driven conflict, forced migration, youth unemployment, violent extremism, etc., there is
a need address the demand in a more holistic and comprehensive manner.

8. It was noted that there is a need for a rapid response mechanism (like the TDRP has been) to deliver
technical assistance and capacity enhancement support, and undertake analytical and strategic assistance
for devising programming solutions with partners to address Fragility, Conflict and Violence (FCV) issues.

9. In this context, the evaluators recommended that the Stabilization and Development Program entail
the following aspects:

       a)   Ceasefire Mediation (provisions of incentives).
       b)   Technical and Advisory Support to DDR (design and implementation).
       c)   Assistance to SSR (mainly public expenditure analysis)
       d)   Displacement (integration and reintegration)
       e)   Sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV)
       f)   Resilient Communities (climate change, migration, and conflict)
       g)   Psychosocial Support (victims and perpetrators)
       h)   Early Post Conflict Stabilization (community driven rehabilitation; i.e. livelihood and social cohesion
            investments).

10. Three options are recommended going forward: (i) provide TA and Capacity Building Assistance; (ii)
provide TA and Capacity Building Assistance; and Design and Evaluate Pilot Programs; and (iii) to provide
TA, Capacity Building, and Pilot Programs; and Prepare and Finance Full Scale Program Operations.

III.        African Union DDR Capacity Program

11. Abderrahim Fraiji presented AU DDR capacity program results regarding the three program objectives:
(i) Institutionalization of African Union DDR Capacities, (ii) DDR Knowledge Development and Sharing, and
iii) AU Engagement in DDR Activities of Members States.
Component A: Institutionalize AU DDR Capacities
Enhanced DDR capacity within the AU and its regional architecture to support DDR activities

12. AU DDR capacity has been enhanced through DDR Advisor (UNOAU), Sr. Conflict and Development
Advisor, an Operations Consultant (World Bank/TDRP), and a Child Protection Officer (UNICEF). The AU has
recruited HQ and field staff (i.e. Somalia, Central African Republic). Other results include (i) the facilitation
of learning, training and sharing of knowledge and experiences; (ii) establishment and operationalization
of the Steering Committee for DDR and Small Arms and Light Weapons; (iii) development of the DDR
Guidance tools (i.e. guidelines on Reintegration, National Frameworks); and (iv) development of
Partnerships with development partners.

Component B: DDR Knowledge Development and Sharing
Established AU DDR knowledge management structure

13. To date, the results include: (i) Operationalization of the DDR Resource and Research Centre; (ii)
launching of DDR website, DDR Newsletter and electronic resources database; and (iii) development of
Operational Guidelines on Reintegration, National Frameworks, Women, Children and Detention.

14. The following activities are ongoing: (i) Africa DDR Compendium Project DDR Training Manual; (ii)
Operational Guidelines on Countering Violent Extremism and Foreign Fighters; and (iii) Cross-institutional
Advisory Body spanning APSA entities (RECS, RMS, PSOs, AU, and Centers of Excellence) and the UN, World
Bank and other international entities such as the IDDR TJ.

Component C: AU Engagement in DDR Activities of Members States
Engagement in DDR activities in Members States

15. One of the key results is that the AU has received requests from member countries for technical
support on DDR (e.g. Sudan, Libya and Comoros). Following the requests, joint DDR assessment missions
and follow-up implementation missions were conducted (i.e. Somalia, CAR, Sudan, South Sudan, Libya, and
Comoros). Another success has been the South-South Exchange: Conducted DDR mentoring missions for
knowledge and experience exchange amongst member states. Furthermore, the AU has also assisted AU
members in elaborating a financial mechanism (i.e. South Sudan) for DDR activities.

16.    In this context, continued support is required for the AU. As a next step, TDRP will conduct a joint
AU, UN and WB evaluation of the AU DDR support program to better identify the needs and future support.

IV.     Technical Assistance

Democratic Republic of Congo

17. DRC Reinsertion and Reintegration Project was approved by the World Bank Board in May 2015. The
TDRP team continued to provide technical assistance to the DRC DDR Commission (UEPNDDR) in terms of
the preparation of the Project Implementation Manual, Environmental and Social Management Framework,
M&E Plan, and other documents.
18.     The UEPNDDR provided an update on the preliminary activities of the Project related to
disarmament and demobilization: a total 4,189 person (including 89 female) have been demobilized at the
end of July in the CTA in Kitona and Kamina.

19.     In addition, the WB/TDRP continued to follow up with interested donors to contribute to the
established MDTF. A new contribution from the EU is expected for the month of October.

Mali

20. Following the signing of the Peace Agreement between the Government and the Platform Group on
May 15, the Coordination Group signed the Agreement on June 20, 2015. Consequently, the TDRP
conducted a mission based on the request of the Mali CMU to discuss the Bank’s position on DDR, to
revitalize the technical work with the Government and DDR Working Group, and to identify possible areas
for support.

21. Following the mission, team was requested by Mali CMU to develop the concept for a reinsertion
project which would provide reinsertion support to disarmed and demobilized ex-combatants through a
community-based approach. It is expected that the project will be co-financed by World Bank’s IDA and a
new multi-donor trust fund. In October, TDRP conducted another mission to Bamako to discuss the
reinsertion project concept with stakeholders including the Government, World Bank country team, the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) DDR Unit and
development partners.

South Sudan:

22. TDRP team has maintained an open dialogue with the South Sudan National DDR Commission (NDDRC)
throughout this crisis particularly regarding the country’s DDR strategy moving forward and has encouraged
the NDDRC to advise the peace talks on the implementation details of the agreement so as to avoid some
of the pitfalls which followed the CPA agreement.

23. TDRP team is in the process of briefing new World Bank country team management on these issues to
continue the positive momentum developed over the course of the DDR Pilot Reintegration Project. The
TDRP has been working with the NDDRC on a new strategic plan and also with 11 potential donors to
sensitize them to possible emergence of a future DDR program.

Somalia

24.      The TDRP team has provided support to advancement of DDR efforts in Somalia which included a
training workshop in Addis Ababa (convened by AU) in December 2014 on the AU DDR Guidance documents
and the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for the Reception and Handover of Children Separated from
Armed Groups in Somalia. Key activities that were proposed for support were (i) coordination (Government,
partners and bi‐laterals), (ii) knowledge management of governance arrangements regarding DDR, (iii)
capacity and institutional building, (iv) establishment of linkages with National Program for Disengaged
fighters including DDR and develop child sensitive procedures.

Central African Republic
25. TDRP support to the Development of National DDR Program with United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) included the development of a
joint proposal for financing support from the UN-World Bank Partnership Trust Fund, aiming to deepen
cooperation between the World Bank and the UN in fragile and conflict-affected situations. Next steps of
the collaboration are to develop terms of reference for socio-economic assessment of beneficiaries and
communities and mapping of potential implementing partners.

26. TDRP will continue supporting MINUSCA and the Government through continued coordination and
technical assistance during the pre-DDR process.

JSDF Project in South Sudan: Economic Empowerment Training

27.      The TDRP team developed and submitted a Project Concept Package for approval to the Japan
Social Development Fund. The proposed project objective is to provide an economic empowerment
training program for conflict-affected youth in three selected areas of South Sudan through development
of the curriculum, skilling of trainers and piloting the training. The approach is to develop the training
capacity through adjusting curriculum to be relevant for conflict-affected youth and former combatants
and expanding the pool of trainers to be utilized in a full DDR program. The pilot project will target 720
direct beneficiaries.

JSDF Projects in DRC and RoC

28.     The two proposed operations in the DRC (described below) and RoC were developed taking into
account lessons learned from the regional pilot on Socio-Economic Empowerment of Associations in LRA-
affected Areas and from consultative community studies in the DRC and RoC. Both concept packages were
submitted and are awaiting approval by the Japan Social Development Fund.

RoC: Support for Sustainable Livelihoods’ Promotion Project in the Pool Department

29.       The objective of the project is to improve access to sustainable livelihoods in the Department of
Pool, RoC. The proposed project aims to (i) stimulate socio-economic development through the
implementation of activities to enhance the governance capacity of local communities and strengthen
existing community leadership and organizations; (ii) facilitate the capacity for income generation through
the promotion of associative work, and increase income generation opportunities, particularly of youth and
women, in urban and rural settlements; and (iii) address local energy use, needs, and demand, provide local
training and capacity building, set up pilot initiatives, and engage in advocacy work. Expected results are:
(i) to provide support to 12,620 direct beneficiaries of which 50% are female; (ii) to support 12 pilot youth
associations operations; (iii) to increase the number of households using alternative sustainable sources of
energy for productive use by 34%; and (iv) to increase the beneficiaries’ income by 20%.

JSDF Project in DRC: Social Cohesion and Livelihood Support Project in Province Orientale

30.     The project objective is to improve access to livelihoods and social cohesion in communities
affected by conflict and violence in Province Orientale’s Dungu Territory, DRC. The project aims to (i) enable
members of approximately 2,500 households to generate income through associative work; (ii) to promote
sustainable livelihoods of the target households through the provision of production inputs and technical
support; and (iii) to build the capacity of communities to successfully withstand shocks related to changing
security or economic conditions by improving social cohesion and the perception of security. Expected
results are: (i) to provide support to 12,500 beneficiaries of which 50% are female; (ii) to increase the
monthly income of association members’ by 40%; (iii) to reduce the number of beneficiaries reporting
depression symptoms by 35% and those reporting anxiety symptoms by 35%; and (iv) to increase the share
of beneficiaries expressing trust in other association members by reporting shared assets with other
member by 30%.

V.        MDTF Budget and Disbursement

31. The total contributions to the trust fund amount to US$43.1 million (as of October 16, 2015). The total
disbursement is at US$41.2 million, which includes the funds for the DRC for the DRC Reinsertion Project.
Thus, the total disbursement rate is 97%.

VI.       Discussion

32. The discussions over the two day workshop covered the following areas: (i) suggestions and
recommendations on the final report and (ii) strategic vision for a new program and financial aspects.

Suggestions and recommendations on the evaluation report:

         With regards to AU DDR Capacity Program, it was suggested that the document should
          demonstrate where the AU has worked on DDR since the inception of the program, showing the
          progress compared to the baseline.
         There is a need to (i) explain limitations of what impact evaluations can measure and (ii) present as
          much quantified data on impact that is available. TDRP results emanate beyond measurable
          outcomes (AU’s expanded role, DRC DDR commission operating without international assistance,
          etc.). The report should seek to make reference to this and quantify impacts where possible.
         Knowledge Products: it was proposed to link outputs to their actual usage into projects. For
          consideration, it was noted that over 40 studies informed Bank operations and pilot programs; i.e.
          sport built into enhancing social reintegration programs (Burundi and Rwanda), migration (re-
          drafting targeting of communities, types of vocational training to take into account opportunities
          outside immediate reintegration area) and most recently, the family study (DRC, Mali). In addition,
          these influenced not just TDRP DDR projects, but DPKO/UNDP and programs in Asia-Pacific and
          South America. In addition, generated knowledge used to train Peace Keepers from Norway and
          Sweden and DPKO/UNDP DDR teams.
         There is need to explain more about the relationship of SSR and DDR and how the TDRP team has
          worked to bring these closer.
         It was recommended to be more explicit about the South-South exchanges and its successes.
         It was recommended to include more insight into internal and external coordination pertaining to
          work carried out by TDRP.

Strategic vision for a new program:

         The AU’s has a critical role in addressing the FCV challenges. In this context, it is crucial to
          strengthen AU capacity and resources to play a lead role in a faster pace.
              o It was noted that AU needs structural change and change is taking place (i.e. the AU is
                  playing critical role, e.g. in Mali or Darfur).
               o   An innovative suggestion was made to include the TF Secretariat within the AU and to keep
                   the fiduciary/management under the World Bank to mitigate risks.
          The strategic vision should elaborate more on forging new and potential partnerships, particularly
           with the AU, traditional development partners, national actors, and non-traditional development
           partners.
               o Carry out a mapping of non-traditional development partners (i.e. Islamic Development
                   Bank, the Arab League, Gulf States, Qatar, United Arab Emirates, India, China, and Turkey
                   etc.) to have an insight into their development portfolio/approach as well as their
                   relationships with the UN and other international organizations.
               o Strategically position existing partnership arrangements: a) mapping of partner
                   interventions b) breakdown of what partners bring to the table and how the potential
                   partners relate to the strategic vision and c) consider importance of coordinating partners
                   in a complementary fashion, with focus on making the TDRP ‘whole’ greater than the sum
                   of its parts.
          More attention is needed on forgotten regions and thematic areas:
               o Certain regions have gone under the radar of the international development community
                   such as Mauritania, Gambia etc. and should therefore be taken into consideration by TDRP.
               o Thematic areas for consideration include Horn of Africa climate change and forced
                   displacement; lagging regions. A proposal was made to introduce internal seed money on
                   forced displacement through GFDRR (community resilience program).
               o It was also noted that there is a need to articulate better the linkages to migration.
          There needs to be a clear breakdown of costs, especially related to administration and staff costs
           as well as include a better demonstration of the additional leveraged funds for DDR related
           interventions.
               o Concern was raised about the multiplication of overhead costs.
          With regards to DDR:
               o There is a need to bring DDR projects to scale: larger interventions that address broader
                   development and DDR as part of recovery & development efforts.
               o There needs to more focus on the work with families of ex-combatants (i.e. children do
                   poorly in school, and families are marginalized by the community)
               o There needs to be more focus on measures to break the recruitment cycle, i.e. broader
                   development, promoting employability, job creation, and etc.

VII.       Conclusion and Next Steps

33. The TDRP TFC members expressed their satisfaction with TDRP’s performance and agreed to close the
TDRP, however it was agreed that the experience of TDRP should be built upon into a larger, more inclusive
program that extends beyond DDR, includes a number of interrelated activities, and takes into
consideration regions that have not been targeted sufficiently by the international community. Financing
for such a program would require leveraging support from sources beyond traditional donor agencies.
Emphasis should be placed on creating a smart administration structure, which would ensure lean
management and overhead arrangements, and optimize the strengths of its components.

Next steps:

          External evaluators will finalize the Evaluation Report taking into account key points raised during
           the discussion.
       GSURR team will prepare a concept note on the planned Stabilization and Development Program
        that will be shared with potential donors. This concept and the document will also be discussed
        with non-traditional donors.

Annex I: Participants

 Finland                                            World Bank
 Ms. Olivia Packalén-Peltola                        Mr. Jan Weetjens
 Desk Officer, Pan-African Issues                   Global Practice Manager – Social, Urban, Rural &
 Unit for Southern Africa, ALI-30                   Resilience (GSURR)
 Department for Africa and the Middle East          jweetjens@worldbank.org
 Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland
 Olivia.Packalen-Peltola@formin.fi                  TDRP Team, external evaluators
                                                    Mr. Nat Colletta
 France                                             Consultant
 Grégory ROBERT                                     njcolletta@gmail.com
 Résilience, sécurité & développement
 DGM/DBM/GOUV                                       Mr. Anthony Finn
 Ministère des Affaires étrangères                  Consultant
 gregory.robert@diplomatie.gouv.fr                  anthony@anthonyfinn.com

 Sweden                                             TDRP Team
 Ms. Lena Schildt                                   Mr. Abderrahim Fraiji
 Deputy Head                                        Sr. Operations Officer
 Regional Cooperation                               GSURR, TDRP
 Embassy of Sweden, Ethiopia                        afraiji@worldbank.org
 lena.schildt@gov.se
                                                    Mr. Stavros (Aki) Stavrou
                                                    Senior Conflict and Development Specialist
                                                    GSURR, TDRP
                                                    sstavrou@worldbank.org
