Financial reporting matters

Strong financial reporting systems, reflecting the needs of
different types of businesses, support sustainable economic
growth. They make transparent and reliable financial
information available; help ensure regulatory compliance;
and support a business and investment climate conducive to
private sector development.

Appropriate financial reporting standards (such as the IFRS
for SMEs) can help high-potential SMEs secure venture
capital finance and reduce the barriers to an eventual
flotation.

 Adopting shared and internationally recognized reporting
 standards across Southeast Europe makes it easier for
 domestic businesses to expand to into regional and wider
 European markets – a key factor for growth.

Relevant financial reporting can help businesses better
monitor their activities and thus manage their operations
more effectively.

 Modern and effective financial reporting systems, if aligned
 with national tax systems, can help to reduce the burden of
 tax compliance.

The credibility provided by sound financial reporting gives
banks and other providers of external finance the
confidence to move beyond basing lending decisions solely
on the collateral available toward lending on the basis of
the business cash flows.



                              1
EU-REPARIS

As candidates, or potential candidates, for EU enlargement
the countries of Southeast Europe, including Albania, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Kosovo ∗, Former Yugoslav Republic (FYR) of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia, are integrating more
closely with the EU and the EU’s internal market, and aligning
their legislative frameworks with the EU acquis
communautaire.




EU-REPARIS has been designed to help and encourage this
process of integration. It (i) addresses the need for better
institutional frameworks, aligned with the acquis and
harmonized regionally; (ii) encourages the accounting
profession to offer enterprises, especially SMEs, effective
business support services and advice on accessing finance
and complying with regulatory requirements; (iii) helps
stakeholders better understand the relationship between
improved financial reporting and access to finance; and (iv)
develops supportive networks of institutions among the
countries of Southeast Europe, building sustainability and
improving awareness of the benefits and successful
approaches to corporate financial reporting reform.

∗
 This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with
UNSCR1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo Declaration of Independence.



                                           2
Program partners

EU-REPARIS is funded by the European Union. It is an
integral part of the Western Balkans Enterprise Development
and Innovation Facility (WB EDIF), which seeks to promote
SME development and financing as well as enhance the
associated regulatory frameworks in the region.




EU-REPARIS is implemented by the Centre for Financial
Reporting Reform, part of the World Bank Governance
Global Practice, and builds on work undertaken as part of
Road to European – Program of Accounting Reform and
Institutional Strengthening (REPARIS) from 2008 to 2014.



                            3
How it works

EU-REPARIS offers knowledge, analytical and advisory
services and capacity development support to partner
countries. This includes delivering targeted learning at face
to face workshops or through virtual seminars, with relevant
materials available from the CFRR website and ongoing
contact maintained via a regular newsletter. Peer sharing
and learning is an important element of the program,
bringing together contemporaries to share good practice and
learn from others’ experiences. CFRR professionals offer
their knowledge and experience to each of the partner
countries in support of policy development and
implementation.




                             4
Technical and practical support

EU-REPARIS supports Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Kosovo, FYR Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia with the
financial reporting aspects of this process of integration. EU-
REPARIS engages at three levels:

                    Providing knowledge, training and
 INDIVIDUALLY
                    technical assistance

                    Offering country-specific
  NATIONALLY
                    implementation support

                    Facilitating peer to peer learning and
  REGIONALLY
                    experience sharing and regional
                    cooperation


Program Beneficiaries

EU REPARIS works with a broad range of stakeholders in the
region, including those involved in designing and
implementing corporate financial reporting reform in
government; members of the accounting profession;
financial regulators; universities and other institutions
offering accountancy qualifications or ongoing professional
development; and local businesses, especially SMEs.
Activities are tailored to meet the varying needs of these
groups to foster their engagement in the reform process.




                              5
Approach and areas of focus

EU-REPARIS uses a unique cross-cutting approach to address
three key themes:




                            6
Corporate Financial Reporting Reform: Building accounting
and auditing frameworks compliant with the EU acquis and
which take into account the needs and constraints of SMEs,
support the application of International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS) and the IFRS for SMEs, and ensure
appropriate public oversight and quality assurance
arrangements for statutory audit.
Education and Capacity Development: Supporting the
modernization of accounting education consistent with
International Accounting Education Standards and the
educational requirements of the EU's Statutory Audit
Directive (i) at university level, (ii) for professional
qualification, and (iii) for continuing education of
professional accountants.
Access to Finance and Financial Sector Supervision:
Promoting easier access to finance through practical
guidance and solutions and building the capacity of financial
sector regulators to use financial reporting standards for
monitoring the financial sector.
Regional Cooperation: Sustaining reform momentum,
regional collaboration and active knowledge transfer among
stakeholders through regular high-level events and other
engagement including quarterly newsletters and web-based
activities.
Country-level Implementation Support: Providing technical
advice and just-in-time assistance in support of reform
implementation in participating countries.



                             7
About CFRR

The Centre for Financial Reporting Reform (CFRR), part of the
Governance Global Practice of the World Bank, is responsible
for corporate financial reporting activities across the Europe
and Central Asia region.

Based in Vienna, Austria since 2007, the CFRR has a broad
range of expertise, and extensive experience in using a
regional approach to help participating countries tackle
shared issues. This ensures regional consistency, enables
countries to learn from others’ experience and builds
sustainability through the development of supporting
networks of institutions.

CFRR offers advice and technical assistance to reform
financial reporting and auditing frameworks, aligned with the
World Bank’s mission of ending extreme poverty and
boosting shared prosperity.




                        Centre for Financial Reporting Reform (CFRR)
                        Governance Global Practice
                        The World Bank Group
                        Praterstrasse 31
                        1020 Vienna, Austria

                        Web: www.worldbank.org/cfrr
                        Email: cfrr@worldbank.org
                        Phone: +43-1-217-0700




                               8
