Centre for Financial Reporting Reform
Europe and Central Asia Region
The World Bank

Praterstrasse 31
1020 Vienna – Austria
T: +43 (0)1 2170-700
F: +43 (0)1 2170-701
cfrr@worldbank.org
www.worldbank.org/cfrr
Contents

Main Abbreviations and Acronyms ............................................................................ ii
Preface ...........................................................................................................................iii
Overview ........................................................................................................................ 1


I.     Background and Objectives ................................................................................. 4
     I.A     Country Context .................................................................................................. 4
     I.B     Overview of the Private Sector in Austria ........................................................ 6

II. Focus SMEs: Value and constraints of financial reporting practices in
Austria ............................................................................................................................ 8
     II.A    Background ......................................................................................................... 8
     II.B    SME Accounting and Reporting Practices in Austria .................................... 8
     II.C    Lending Practices to SMEs in Austria ................................................................ 9
     II.D    Conclusions ........................................................................................................ 10

III. Statutory Framework – Corporate Sector Accounting ...................................... 12
     III.A   The EU Acquis Communautaire ...................................................................... 12
     III.B   The Statutory Framework in Austria ................................................................ 12
     III.C   Accounting and Auditing Standard-Setting in Austria................................ 21

IV. The Accounting and Auditing Profession and Education ................................. 23
     IV.A Payroll-Accountants / Certified Accountants / Certified
     Management- Accountants ..................................................................................... 23
     IV.B Certified Public Accountants .......................................................................... 26

V. The Quality Assurance & Public Oversight System............................................ 29
     V.A     Statutory Framework - The EU Acquis Communautaire .............................. 29
     V.B     The Statutory Framework in Austria ................................................................ 30
     V.C     Quality Assurance ............................................................................................. 30
     V.D     Enforcement ...................................................................................................... 32
     V.E     Public Oversight................................................................................................. 33

References ................................................................................................................... 35
Annex - Methodology ................................................................................................ 36




                                                             ~i~
Main Abbreviations and Acronyms

AFRAC     Austrian Financial Reporting and Auditing Committee
AeQ       Committee for External Quality Inspections
AG        Stock Corporation (Aktiengesellschaft)
A-QSG     Audit Quality Control Law
A-QSRL    Audit Quality Control Directive
BMWFJ     Ministry of Economy, Family and Youth, the Ministry of Finance
BSBV      Industry Sector Bank and Insurance of the Austrian Federal Economic Chamber
CFRR      World Bank Centre for Financial Reporting Reform
FMA       Financial Supervisory Authority
GAAP      Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
GmbH      Limited Liability Company (Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung)
GVA       Gross Value Added
IAS       International Accounting Standards
IASB      International Accounting Standards Board
IFRS      International Financial Reporting Standards
IWP       Institute of Austrian Certified Public Accountants
KWT       Austrian Chamber of Public Accountants
LLC(s)    Limited Liability Company(ies)


OeNB      Austrian National Bank
OePr      Austrian Review Panel for Financial Reporting
PIE(s)    Public Interest Entity(ies)
QKB       Austrian Audit Quality Control Oversight Board
ROSC      Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes
REPARIS   Road to Europe: Program of Accounting Reform and Institutional Strengthening
SME(s)    Small and Medium Enterprise(s)
UGB       Entrepreneurial Code (Unternehmensgesetzbuch )
WKO       Austrian Federal Economic Chamber (Wirtschaftskammer Österreich)
WT-ARL    Directive on the Practice of the Public Accounting Professions
WTBG      Public Accountants’ Statute of Professional Practice




                                            ~ ii ~
Preface

This report was prepared by Bernhard Lindner, Operations Analyst at the Centre for
Financial Reporting Reform (CFRR) between March 2012 and June 2013. It describes
Austria’s institutional framework for corporate financial reporting. It does not seek to
assess their adequacy, and does not contain any recommendation.

The research was conducted through a participatory process involving various in-country
stakeholders, with the support of the Austrian Federal Economic Chamber, the Austrian
Chamber of Public Accountants (KWT), the Austrian Financial Reporting and Auditing
Committee (AFRAC), the Austrian Ministry of Justice, and Austrian academics and
representatives of the business communities.

The author is grateful to Henri Fortin (CFRR Head) for his advice and guidance, and to James
Francis Owen and Susan Schroeder for their editorial support.




                                           ~ iii ~
Overview

This report provides an introduction into Austria’s corporate financial reporting
environment, with a particular focus on SMEs and specific features of the Austrian
environment. It is intended for policy makers, regulators and practitioners in Central,
Eastern and Southeast Europe who seek examples of how to formulate or implement the
corporate financial reporting elements of the EU acquis communautaire.

Austrian SMEs and Their Experience of Corporate Financial Reporting

SMEs play a particularly important role in the Austrian economy, with commercial banks
acting as their main sources of external finance. Two surveys collected data on the Austrian
SME sector’s experience of corporate financial reporting practices, and banks’ requirements
and expectations regarding the scope and quality of financial information provided by SMEs
when applying for credit. The surveys found that Austrian SMEs value the role of financial
statements, both audited and unaudited, to help them in the financial management of their
businesses. In addition, Austrian SMEs believe financial statements play an important role in
facilitating their access to bank financing. The findings of the surveys highlighted aspects of
the Austrian financial reporting environment of particular interest for SMEs. These were
given special attention in researching this report and in semi-structured interviews with
authorities on the current Austrian framework for corporate financial reporting. They are
highlighted throughout the report.

The potential benefits for Austrian SMEs from financial reporting very much depends on the
striking of an appropriate balance between promoting improved financial information, and
not imposing an undue regulatory burden on reporting firms. The quality of the services
provided by the accounting and audit profession in relation to the financial information is
also a key consideration. In this respect, the surveys found that the assurance service
provided by the audit profession is generally well perceived by Austrian financial
institutions.

The Statutory Framework for Corporate Financial Reporting in Austria

Austrian commercial accounting rules impose bookkeeping obligations on all businesses,
with simplified systems for smaller enterprises. Those with an annual turnover exceeding
EUR 700,000 must prepare an “annual inventory and financial statement”. The financial
statements of all enterprises with supervisory boards must be audited. Auditors are
appointed by the supervisory board. Austrian Auditing Standards are set out in various
expert opinions. In Austria, the international standards on auditing (ISA) are not fully
implemented at present but all national provisions that contravene ISA regulation have
been suspended. In accordance with EU regulation, the non-application of ISA is possible in
Austria in exceptional cases that relate to the scope of statutory audits. Requirements may
thus vary according to the size of the enterprise.


                                             ~1~
Accounting and Auditing Standard-Setting

Authority to set accounting standards in Austria rests with the government. Austrian
Generally Accepted Commercial Accounting Principles (GAAP) are established in law.
Adjusted in accordance with tax legislation they also form the basis for the country’s tax
accounting rules. Although the Austrian GAAP and the principles in the framework of IAS /
IFRS are very similar, they differ in their fundamental objectives as well as their strategic
orientation and emphasis. The Austrian Financial Reporting and Auditing Association/
Committee (AFRAC) advises the government in standard-setting in accounting and auditing.
It plays an active role in promoting an understanding of international and Austrian
standards among the profession and the business community in general. AFRAC is made up
of key Austrian stakeholders in the field of financial reporting. All members can contribute
to the process of producing the AFRAC statements and recommendations on which policy
makers base their decisions.

The Accounting and Auditing Profession and Education System

There is a distinction in Austria between public accountants and self-employed accountants.
According to the law, self-employed accountants include Certified Management
Accountants, Payroll Accountants, and Certified Accountants. The public accounting
profession includes tax consultants and certified public accountants, the latter being
authorized to act as statutory auditors.

Self-employed accountants and accountancy practices must be officially registered. They
are required to meet certain work experience and other general requirements (capacity,
trustworthiness and financial stability), and to pass a written and oral examination. They
must undertake continuing professional development (22.5 hours each year). These
appointments are overseen by a so-called Joint Commission, with the authority to sanction
or withdraw permission to practice if requirements are not met.

Monitoring, Oversight and Enforcement

Austria recently implemented a two-tier monitoring system with a newly established
Austrian Review Panel for Financial Reporting (OePr) and Financial Supervisory Authority
(FMA). The review panel is charged with verifying that financial statements comply with IFRS
or other applicable accounting standards and the FMA mainly decides on enforcement
priorities and audit plans.

Quality assurance & public oversight systems are governed by a law equivalent to the EU
statutory audit directive. The Austrian system follows a “monitored peer review approach”.
The Committee for External Quality Inspections (AeQ) is responsible for the implementation
of the external quality assurance system.        An appointed inspector, selected among
practicing auditors, prepares a report assessing the adequacy of internal quality assurance
(QA) measures; the report is then submitted and evaluated by the AeQ. If these QA


                                            ~2~
measures are deemed adequate, a certificate to undertake audits is re-issued, sometimes
with recommendations for improvement. In certain cases, the AeQ can impose sanctions,
or the certificate can be revoked.

The Austrian Audit Quality Control Oversight Board (QKB) is responsible for the oversight of
the Austrian audit quality oversight system. Board members are exclusively non-
practitioners. One important role of the QKB is overseeing the appointment of inspectors,
who must be licensed auditors with some additional, specific qualifications.




                                           ~3~
I.       Background and Objectives

The purpose of this Report on Corporate Financial Reporting in Austria is to describe the key
features of Austria’s corporate financial reporting environment as well as its practical
application in regard to SMEs’ financial reporting practices in Austria.

Designed as a peer-learning activity for policy makers and government officials, this report
builds on the World Bank Accounting and Auditing Reports on Standards and Codes (ROSC)
methodology to give an overview of the Austrian corporate financial reporting system. It
selectively provides good practice examples that can give incentives to overcome
impediments to financial reporting reform. Based on the findings of two surveys conducted
among Austrian small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and Austrian financial institutions,
the report focuses particularly on aspects relevant to SME financial reporting.

In line with their European Union (EU) accession objectives, as well as the need to improve
their business environment, the strategic objective of this task is to support Central,
Southeast and Eastern European Countries in their efforts to develop or implement a
corporate financial reporting system aligned with the acquis communautaire.

The well-functioning of an economy is significantly dependent on the production and
availability of reliable financial information on businesses’ performance. Standard ized,
transparent, and credible financial information creates market confidence and is the basis
for any economic decision of business owners, managers, investors, banks, and other
stakeholders. A sound financial reporting system favors the development of efficient
markets with an optimized relationship between capital supply and demand and thereby
contributes to financial stability.

This report forms part of the activities of the CFRR within the Road to Europe Program of
Accounting Reform and Institutional Strengthening (REPARIS), which also provided funding.


I.A      Country Context

Austria is a stable, wealthy and prosperous nation in Central Europe. Following World War I,
and the end of the Habsburg dynasty, the country was established as a Republic in 1918. In
1938 Austria was incorporated into the German Reich. After World War II the country again
became an independent republic, although occupied by the allied forces until 1955.

Today’s Austria is a federal republic composed of nine autonomous federal states. Citizens
periodically elect the Federal President, the National Council, the Provincial Parliaments
(Provincial Diets and Municipal Councils), and the country’s representatives in the EU


                                            ~4~
parliament. The Austrian constitution also provides instruments of direct democracy
including referendums, popular initiatives, and public consultations.

The Austrian Parliament and the Provincial Diets pass laws and supervise their
implementation. The two chambers of the Austrian Parliament - the National and the
Federal Council - represent legislative power at the federal level. Draft-laws, most of which
come from the Federal Government in the form of a Government Bill, are first introduced in
the National Council.

Austria became a member of the EU in 1955 and in 1999 it was one of the eleven countries
that adopted the Euro as scriptural currency. With EU accession EU law was incorporated in
the hierarchy of the Austrian legal system. Today, no Austrian law may contradict applicable
law within the EU acquis communautaire.

Austria has a land area of 83.858 square kilometers1 and borders Germany, the Czech
Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia, Italy, Switzerland, and Lichtenstein. The country’s
official language is German.

The country had a population of 8.44 million at the beginning of 2012, of which about one
fifth was living in the country’s federal capital Vienna. 11.5 percent (0.97 million) of Austria’s
total population are of non-Austrian citizenship. Among the non-Austrian nationals 571.287
people are third country (non-EU, non-European Economic Area2, non-Swiss) nationals of
which 52 percent (296.377) come from the new states formed from the former Yugoslavia
(excluding Slovenia, which has since become member of the EU).3

In 2012 Austria had an employment rate4 of 72.5 percent in the 15 to 64 year age range and
an unemployment rate of 4.3 percent. The same year, the country’s gross domestic product
(GDP) growth amounted to 0.9 percent (2.8 percent in 2011) and the government deficit
(Maastricht indicators) amounted to -2.48 percent of the GDP
(-2.46 percent in 2011). 5

In both population and land area Austria ranks among the smaller member states of the EU,
but in key social and economic indicators it is often above average or among the top
performers in the EU-27.




1
  Austrian National Tourist Office, 2013
2
  Here referring to member states of the EU, except Croatia, plus Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway.
3
  STATISTICS AUSTRIA, 2012
4
  International Labor Organization (ILO) definition.
5
  STATISTICS AUSTRIA, 2012




                                                    ~5~
I.B        Overview of the Private Sector in Austria6

The Austrian economy is dominated by the tertiary sector (services) which accounts for
around 70 percent of the gross value added (GVA). Most employees in this sector work in
trade, followed by accommodation and food services. The secondary sector (production)
contributes almost 30 percent and includes the major industries, mining and quarrying
energy producing materials, manufacturing, electricity, gas and water supply, as well as
construction. Only less than 2 percent of the GVA comes from agriculture and forestry (the
“primary” sector).

Austria's foreign trade is a very important factor of the domestic economy. The county’s top
foreign trade partner is Germany. Other major EU-trading partners are Italy, Switzerland,
and the Czech Republic. Trade with EU member states accounted for 71.4 percent of total
imports and 69.7 percent of total exports in 2011. Trade with third countries amounted to
29.4 percent of the total foreign trade. Middle and Eastern European countries7 are also
very important markets for Austrian products and represented 14.4 percent of all imports
and 17.9 percent of all exports in 2011. The product group with the highest volume in trade
is machinery and transport equipment.

Austrian banks are characterized by a high degree of internationalization. Since the opening
up of Eastern Europe, Austrian banks have invested in the region. According to a publication
of the Austrian National Bank (OeNB)8, which regularly assesses economic and banking
developments in Austria, majority-Austrian-owned banks total international exposure
(claims) amounted to EUR 345 billion or 115 percent of Austrian GDP as at end-March 2012.
The Central, Eastern or Southeastern Europe9 (CESEE) area accounted for Austrian bank
total exposure of EUR 215.5 billion to at the end of June 2012, of which the South-East
European (SEE) region10 accounts for 19 percent (EUR 41 billion).

Austria has one of the highest bank-densities and also one of the highest branch densities in
international comparison. Banks contribute about 3.5 percent to the country’s GDP and
employ country-wide about 70.000 people. 11



6
  Data-source of information if not stated otherwise: STATISTICS AUSTRIA, 2012.
7
  Here referring to Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria,
Albania, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo, and Macedonia.
8
  OeNB, 2012
9
  Here referring to Central and East European (CEE) countries that joined the EU in 2004 and 2007 (new
member states), other South East European (SEE) countries outside the EU at the time of writing, and the
members of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
10
   Here referring to Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro, FYR Macedonia, Serbia, and
Turkey.
11
   BSBV, 2010




                                                     ~6~
Enterprises in Austria most commonly operate through one of the following legal forms:
   Stock Corporation (AG - Aktiengesellschaft)
   Limited Liability Company (GmbH - Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung)
   General Partnership (OG - Offene Gesellschaft)
   Limited Partnership (KG- Kommanditgesellschaft)
   Cooperative (Gen - Genossenschaft)
   Sole Proprietorship (Einzelunternehmer)


Focus on SMEs – Facts and Figures12


In Austria 99.7 percent of all enterprises in the “market-oriented economy” are SMEs. Of
these about 87 percent are micro-enterprises with less than 10 persons employed. Another
10.6 percent are small enterprises with 10 to 49 jobholders. 1.6 percent can be categorized
as medium-sized (50 – 249 persons employed).

SMEs are distributed fairly equally across the different industries in Austria. SMEs employ
almost 1.8 million persons, including around 0.3 million self-employed. This represents
almost 67 percent of all persons employed in the market-oriented economy in Austria.
Almost a quarter of Austrians employed in the market-oriented economy work in micro-
enterprises; about 23 percent in small enterprises; and nearly 19 percent in medium-sized
enterprises. Most self-employed people are to be found in the micro-enterprise sector.

Approximately 17 percent of the turnover of the market-oriented economy is generated by
micro-enterprises, 22 percent by small enterprises, and more than 23 percent by medium-
sized enterprises. In total, the contribution of the SME sector to the total turnover of the
market-oriented economy is 62.6 percent (about € 398 billion).




12
     CFRR, 2013




                                           ~7~
II.       Focus SMEs: Value and constraints of financial reporting
          practices in Austria

II.A      Background

For this report on Corporate Financial Reporting in Austria, the CFRR conducted two
surveys, in cooperation with Austrian partner organizations13, on i) the experience of the
Austrian SME sector with corporate financial reporting practices, and ii) banks’
requirements and expectations with regard to the scope and quality of financial information
provided by SMEs when applying for credit. The main findings that follow provide the basis
for selecting those aspects of the Austrian Financial Reporting environment that are of
particular interest for SMEs and therefore described in chapters III-VI of this report.14


II.B      SME Accounting and Reporting Practices in Austria
II.B.i   Partners, methodology & representativeness
A survey on SME Accounting and Reporting Practices in Austria, funded by the Economic
Policy Department and the Institute for Economic Promotion of the WKO, was jointly
conducted by the CFRR and the Austrian Institute for SME Research between October and
November 2012.

786 properly completed online surveys were used for the analysis. All results have been
weighted by industry and the number of employees, according to the basic company
population in Austria. The results of this survey are representative for the Austrian SME
sector.


II.B.ii   Key findings
SMEs use financial statements to improve financial management and to secure access to
finance
Austrian SMEs are required by law to draw up financial statements. 63% of Austrian SMEs
use their financial statements often or very often, and they consider financial reporting
useful to improve the financial management of their business. Half of Austrian SMEs use
their financial statements often or very often to secure supplier credit or a bank loan.




13
   Partner organizations in this project include the Economic Policy Department, the Institute for Economic
Promotion and the Industry Sector Bank and Insurance of the Austrian Federal Economic Chamber, as well as
the Austrian Institute for SME Research.
14
   For further reading on the key results and main conclusions please refer to the Annex of this report.




                                                   ~8~
Austrian SMEs face some challenges in relation to their accounting obligations
More than half of Austrian SMEs consider the complexity of accounting requirements (58%)
and the time required for preparing accounting and financial reports (57%) as very or rather
high. The cost of compliance with accounting requirements is regarded as (very or rather)
high by 56% of SMEs.

Most SMEs outsource the preparation of financial statements to specialist service
providers
Almost three-quarters of all Austrian SMEs outsource all the preparation of their financial
statements to specialist service providers. SMEs are generally very satisfied with the services
provided by these specialist firms. Only 8% of SMEs prepare their financial statements in-
house (i.e. without an external service provider) and more than half of these benefits from
the advice of their local business association and professional organizations for public
accountants and tax advisers.

Austrian SMEs see value in having audited financial statements beyond the legal
compliance aspect
In Austria, only AGs or GmbHs are legally required to have their financial statements audited
(partnerships and other forms are not). The majority of limited liability companies (LLCs)
participating in the survey see value in having their financial statements audited. Indeed,
they consider that audits (i) enhance the credibility of their financial statements (56% of
participating LLCs), and (ii) strengthen their internal controls (51%).

Banks are the single most prominent source of financing for Austrian SMEs
Banks are the most common source of investment-financing for SMEs. More than two-thirds
(67%) of Austrian SMEs with investment requirements in the past 3 years used bank
financing to meet their needs.

SMEs perceive an increase in banks’ documentation requirements when draw ing a credit
Most Austrian SMEs that have received bank financing for their investments over the past 3
years consider that banks’ documentation requirements became much (30%) or slightly
(28%) tougher during this period.


II.C         Lending Practices to SMEs in Austria
II.C.i  Partners, methodology & representativeness
The CFRR15 conducted a survey, via email questionnaire, of all Austrian credit institutions
between September 17th and October 19th, 2012.


15
     With the generous support of the BSIC




                                             ~9~
The total balance sheet of all participating credit institutions, according to annual accounts
after local generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), amounts to EUR 300.712 million
in 2011, i.e. 30% of the total balance sheet of all Austrian credit institutions (EUR 992.814
million).16

The total loan portfolio (loans and receivables to customers) of all banks participating in the
survey represents approximately 38% (EUR 165.997 million) of the total lending portfolio of
all Austrian credit institutions (EUR 442.267 million).17


II.C.ii Key findings
Banks see external auditing as a key process to ensure the accuracy of accounting
information
Audited financial statements are among the most frequently required documentation as
part of the loan application process for SMEs. Of all the impact factors that banks consider
when making a credit decision, audited financial statements, if available, are attributed the
highest importance. Whether a financial statement is audited or not, and which accounting
standards are used, are perceived by banks as important indicators of the quality and
accuracy of financial information, especially when medium-sized and larger companies apply
for credit. For Austrian banks the reputation of the firm carrying out an audit has a very low
impact on the usability of financial statements.

Financial statements play an important role in an SME credit application
Banks draw on information from financial statements in assessing an SME’s credit
application to gain insight into the applicants’ gearing/indebtedness and profitability, as well
as their liquidity and cash situation. The information in financial statements is often
compared with other financial information provided in a credit application.


II.D         Conclusions

The analysis of the data collected in the two surveys suggests that financial statements,
both audited and unaudited, play a valued role for SMEs; not only for tax purposes, but also
in helping SMEs improve the financial management of their businesses and facilitate their
access to bank financing as they play a key role in banks’ decision making process in the
course of an SME credit application.



16
     For comparison, statistical data from the OeNB (banks’ balance sheets) were used.
17
     See above;




                                                      ~ 10 ~
Preparing financial statements requires efforts and resources and, as might be expected, a
number of SMEs find bookkeeping and reporting obligations costly. At the same time, SMEs
are generally satisfied with the services provided by external service providers. The Austrian
audit profession has a good reputation for providing reasonable quality-assurance for
financial decision making among Austrian credit institutes.

The surveys show that SMEs potential use of financial reporting in Austria is very dependent
on the following two factors, which provide the framework for this report’s special focus on
SME financial reporting practices:

(i)    a system that strikes the appropriate balance between promoting improved
       financial information and lessening the regulatory burden; and

(ii)   the accounting and auditing profession’s capacity to provide reasonable assurance
       regarding the data accuracy of the financial information provided in a SME credit
       application.




                                           ~ 11 ~
III.         Statutory Framework – Corporate Sector Accounting

III.A        The EU Acquis Communautaire18

For further information on Accounting and Auditing regulation in the EU, please refer to
“Guide to Corporate Sector Accounting and Auditing in the Acquis Communautaire“, CFRR.


III.B        The Statutory Framework in Austria
III.B.i   Legal obligation to keep records
In Austria, the obligation for enterprises to keep books and to record business transactions
mainly arise from the country’s Entrepreneurial Code (Unternehmensgesetzbuch - UGB).
Whether and when accounting is compulsory, according to the provisions set out in the
UGB, depends on the entrepreneurial status (as defined in the UGB); the legal form of the
enterprise; and the type of income and amount of sales revenues.

LLCs are always obligated to maintain ledgers irrespective of their sales volume.

For all other forms of enterprises, §189 of the UGB defines the turnover thresholds that
regulate if an enterprise must meet the bookkeeping requirements as set in the UGB. If
these thresholds are exceeded, an enterprise also automatically has to apply double-entry
bookkeeping.

                                      Turnover-threshold per               Qualified turnover-
                                      year                                 threshold
 Amount                               EUR 700.000                          EUR 1.000.000
 Obligation to keep and               threshold has to be
                                                                           threshold has to be
 retain books and records             exceeded in two succeeding
                                                                           exceeded once only
 come into effect if                  years

Books and accounting records must be kept and retained for a seven year period.

Two additional acts cover the specific nature of accounting for the banking and insurance
sectors: the Austrian Banking Act (Bankwesengesetz - BWG) and the Insurance Supervision
Law (Versicherungenaufsichtsgesetz - VAG).

Specific legal provisions regarding banks and insurance companies related to financial
reporting are not described here.

18
     “Guide to Corporate Sector Accounting and Auditing in the Acquis Communautaire “, (CFRR, 2011).




                                                    ~ 12 ~
III.B.ii Business accounting – tax accounting
Austrian tax accounting is based on the country’s commercial accounting rules (Austrian
GAAP), adjusted in accordance with tax legislation set out mainly in the Federal Fiscal
Procedures Act (Bundesabgabenordnung - BAO) and the Income Tax Act
(Einkommenssteuergesetz - EStG).

Thus, whoever bears an obligation under the commercial code to keep and retain books and
records must also keep this information for tax purposes under the Federal Fiscal
Procedures Act.

According to §5 of the Austrian Income Tax Act, the accrual method is mandatory if an
enterprise exceeds the turnover thresholds mentioned in the commercial code.

However - for tax purposes - enterprises’ calculation of income can also be based on several
other accounting methods if they fall below these thresholds.


                            Bookkeeping requirements in Austria
                    Limit                                     Bookkeeping
 Turnover less than EUR 220,000              Flat-rate, accounting on a cash basis, or
                                             double-entry bookkeeping
 Turnover less than EUR 700.000              Accounting on a cash basis or double-entry
                                             bookkeeping
 Turnover above EUR 700,000                  Double-entry bookkeeping
 Capital companies (LLC, in particular GmbHs Double-entry bookkeeping
 and AGs)


Focus SMEs – Bookkeeping requirements


The Austrian Commercial Code was amended in 2010, raising the turnover threshold that
defines mandatory application of financial reporting requirements set out in the Austrian
Commercial Code from EUR 500.000 to EUR 700.000. As a result many SMEs no longer need
to use double-entry bookkeeping for income and profit tax collection but can prepare their
annual accounts based on simplified systems like cash-basis accounting and global
(“blanket”) accounting.




                                           ~ 13 ~
Focus SMEs – Uniform chart of accounts


The Austrian uniform chart of accounts was issued by the KWT in 1991 on the basis of the
Law on Accounting and amended according to changes in tax and commercial law. It is for
financial accounting purposes only and serves as a guideline and recommendation for an
enterprise setting up a concrete chart of accounts. Built up using the decadic system (classes
0-9) and structured in account groups (two digits) and accounts (three digits), it can be
extended to four or more digits if necessary. This aims to ease the unified booking of similar
business transactions, especially for SMEs.

A further aim is to foster SMEs to adopt double-entry bookkeeping which in turn also allows
SMEs to change software packages more easily and facilitates the government’s efforts to
implement standardized procedures for SMEs though e-portals.



III.B.iii General principles
The UGB incorporates the Austrian GAAP which can be classified into three major groups of
accounting and valuation principles. They lay down the rules necessary for proper
accounting:

Fundamental or True and fair            complete set of financial statements, comprising
superior       presentation             balance sheet, income statement, and – for
principles                              corporations – notes and additional other
                                        statements (management report and Corporate
                                        Governance report)
                                        all assets and liabilities should be measured and all
                                        transactions should be reported in compliance with
                                        all statutory measurement rules
                                        in consolidated financial statements a consolidated
                                        cash flow statement is also mandatory
                   Unambiguous          clear and well-structured presentation of assets
                   presentation         and liabilities as well as of revenues and expenses
                                        to facilitate determining the performance and
                                        financial position of an entity
                                        no netting of assets and liabilities or of revenues
                                        and expenses
Realization and    Revenue              revenue is the gross inflow of economic benefits
recognition        recognition          during the period arising in the course of ordinary
principles         principle            activities of an entity when those inflows result in
                                        increases in equity, other than increases relating to
                                        contributions from equity participants


                                           ~ 14 ~
                   Expense             an entity is required to provide for all possible
                   recognition         losses and if there is any doubt about an asset’s
                   principle           realizability, to provide for or write off the asset
                   Matching            amounts reported as expense depends on as
                   principle           revenue in particular period must have their
                                       economical substance in this period
Supplementary      Consistency         in classification, format, and the valuation of assets
principles                             and liabilities
                                       financial statements of successive periods must be
                                       comparable, i.e. transactions in the current period
                                       must be accounted for in the same way as they
                                       were in the previous periods; changes may only be
                                       made if there are compelling economic reasons
                   Conservatism        where several acceptable valuation alternatives are
                                       available, the alternative with the least favorable
                                       immediate influence on the financial position of the
                                       reporting entity must be chosen
                                       assets have to be valued at the lower of cost or
                                       market value, and liabilities at the higher of cost or
                                       market value, at each reporting date
                                       expected but unrealized revenues must be ignored
                                       and expected unrealized losses have to be
                                       recognized
                                                                                  (KPMG, 2012)

III.B.iv Financial statements
In Austria any business entity subject to the regulation set in the UGB is obliged to prepare
an inventory and financial statements at the end of every financial year. This includes all
LLCs and all other enterprises with an annual turnover exceeding € 700.000.

Financial statements in Austria generally comprise a balance sheet and an income
statement. Balance sheets must be prepared in accounts format, as prescribed in the UGB,
and income statements in report form, using either the total-cost format or the cost-of-sales
format.

LLCs must additionally prepare notes that provide a true and fair view of the firm’s assets,
financial and earning situation as well as, under certain circumstances, a management
report that discloses all additional information.




                                           ~ 15 ~
Focus SMEs – Financial statement simplifications for small and medium LLCs


For LLCs, the legislation distinguishes between small, medium and large enterprises. To
allocate a company to a particular size class, the company must meet two out of the
following three criteria on two successive balance sheet dates. However, an entity is always
considered as large when it is a publicly quoted AG:

                             Balance sheet total         Net Turnover      No. of employees
                             (EUR million)               (EUR million)     (average per year)
Small                        up to 4.84                  9.68               50
Medium                       from 19.25                  38.5              250
Large                        above 19.25                 38.5              250

For medium sized entities simplifications are available in respect of their income statement
and notes to the financial statements. For small entities the notes to the financial
statements are greatly simplified and they do not have to prepare a management report at
all.




III.B.v Consolidated financial statements
Whether or not Austrian LLCs19 are required to prepare a consolidated financial statement is
dependent on where their headquarters are situated, their exercise of control over other
companies, as well as on the shares they hold with these other companies.

If an enterprise is under uniform control of a LLC (parent company) which has its
headquarter in Austria and holds all or part of the company’s shares, the legal
representatives of the parent company have to prepare a consolidated financial statement
and present it together with the management report to their board and the general
assembly. The UGB rules that a certain level of control over a daughter company can be
reason enough for an AG or GmbH to prepare consolidated financial statements.

Consolidated financial statements comprise a consolidated balance sheet, a consolidated
income statement, consolidated notes, a consolidated cash-flow statement, and a
presentation of current assets and their development over time. It can be extended by
segment information.




19
     In particular corporations and partnerships where no individual is a personally liable partner




                                                       ~ 16 ~
For banks and insurance companies additional sector-specific consolidation requirements
are in force.


Focus SMEs – financial statement exemptions


With the exception of listed groups, enterprises can be exempted from the requirement to
prepare a consolidated financial statement if:

a) they meet two out of the following three criteria on two successive balance sheet dates
of their financial statements (pre-elimination figures):
    Balance sheet total of both mother and daughter enterprise(s) do not exceed EUR 21
    Million in total;
    Turnover of both mother and daughter enterprise(s) do not exceed EUR 42 Million
    within 12 months before the balance sheet date;
    Mother and daughter enterprise(s) do not employ more than 250 persons (on average)
    within 12 months before the balance sheet date.

b) they meet two out of the following three criteria on two successive balance sheet dates
of their consolidated financial statements (consolidated figures):
    Balance sheet total does not exceed EUR 17,5 Million;
    Turnover does not exceed EUR 35 Million within 12 months before the balance sheet
    date;
    Mother and daughter enterprise(s) do not employ more than 250 persons (on average)
    within 12 months before the balance sheet date.




III.B.vi International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)
As a member state of the EU, Austria is subject to the IAS Regulation adopted by the EU in
2002 (Article 4 of Regulation 1606/2002). Since 2005 the EU IAS Regulation requires
application of IFRS as adopted by the EU for the consolidated financial statements of
European companies whose securities trade in a regulated securities market.

An Austrian parent company that is not subject to EU Regulation No. 1606/2002 is free to
choose to prepare its consolidated financial statements in accordance with the IFRS of the
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) or in accordance with Austrian GAAP.

Although the Austrian GAAP and the principles in the framework of IAS / IFRS are very
similar, they differ in their fundamental objectives as well as their strategic orientation and
emphasis. While within Austrian financial statements the principle of prudence dominates,



                                            ~ 17 ~
IFRS prioritizes the reliability of financial reporting. This includes the principle of a true and
fair view as well as the principle of objectivity. In comparison to Austrian GAAP, IFRS
considers the so called “matching principle” more important than the principle of prudence.

Another fundamental difference between IFRS and UGB is in the criteria for recognition.
Under IFRS it is given when an economic benefit is probable and costs and value of the item
can be measured reliably. The Austrian legal framework differs (tighter for assets, and
further for liabilities) which can lead to completely different approaches in regard to
provisions.


III.B.vii Audit, disclosure and publication
Obligation to audit financial statements: In Austria it is compulsory for all large and
medium-sized LLCs20 to submit audited financial statements together with the management
report to the supervisory board within five months of the end of the financial year.

The international standards on auditing (ISA) are not currently fully implemented in Austria.
However, all national provisions that contravene ISA regulation have been suspended.
Additional requirements that arise from national legislation and that are not in contradiction
to the ISA are still valid. In accordance with article 26, paragraph 2 of directive 2006/43/EC,
the non-application of ISA is possible in exceptional cases relating to the scope of statutory
audits according to specific national legal requirements.


Focus SMEs - Audit


Only small-sized LLCs21 with obligatory supervisory boards are required to audit their
financial statements. Supervisory boards are obligatory for all AGs with share capital
exceeding EUR 70,000 and more than 50 shareholders.



Nomination and appointment of an auditor: If an enterprise has a supervisory board, the
board has the right to nominate an auditor. The appointment of the auditor is made by the
owners/shareholders at a general assembly to which all board members should be invited.
In the case of a consolidated financial statement the appointment is made by the
shareholders of the mother company.




20
     Corporations and partnerships where no individual is a personally liable partner
21
     See above definition




                                                       ~ 18 ~
Auditor’s fee: The fee is agreed with the body responsible for concluding the audit contract
(normally the supervisory board). The auditor is paid from the funds of the
owners/shareholders.

Personnel rotation: To protect the public interest for listed and very large companies,
Austrian legal regulations require a rotation of the persons primarily responsible for an audit
after five years. This regulation is designed to ensure the objectivity and impartiality of the
certified public accountant responsible for the planning, execution and reporting on audits
of financial statements.

Audit process according to Austrian legislation:
1) Providing documentation: The management of a company must submit the financial
   statements and management report to the auditor in charge. The auditor must be
   allowed to examine the books and documents of the company, as well as its assets and
   liabilities. Throughout his engagement the auditor may request all evidence considered
   necessary for a thorough audit.
2) Reporting obligation: If, in the course of conducting an audit, the auditor establishes
   any facts that raise doubts about the company’s ability to continue as a going concern or
   which indicate a serious breach of law or of the company’s articles of association, the
   auditor must immediately report them to the boards. He may not disclose this to the
   public due to his duty of secrecy. The auditor must also disclose any material
   weaknesses in the internal control of the accounting process (reporting obligation).
3) Issuing an opinion: Upon conclusion of the audit, the certified public accountant issues
   an opinion on whether:
    the individual or consolidated financial statements comply with the statutory
       provision and the supplementary provision of the memorandum or articles of
       association;
    generally accepted accounting principles have been complied with;
    the published financial statements present a true and fair view of the company’s
       financial situation and financial performance;
    the management report is consistent with the financial statements and that the
       disclosures made in it on accounting-related internal control and risk management
       are appropriate.
4) Auditor’s report: The auditor must report on the results of the audit, in writing with
   signature, to the legal representatives of the enterprise and to the members of the
   supervisory board. If the auditor agrees with the financial statements submitted by
   management and the presentation of the company’s position they contain the judgment
   is positive and the auditor issues an unqualified audit opinion, the so called “auditor’s
   report”. If the auditor cannot agree a publicly available qualified or adverse opinion is
   issued.




                                            ~ 19 ~
5) Filing and Publishing: Following approval at the shareholders’ meeting the financial
   statements, the management report, together with the audit opinion, and, if applicable,
   the Corporate Governance Report, has to be submitted to the Register of Firms22 within
   nine months of the end of the fiscal year. Within the same period, the respective
   enterprise must file the report of their supervisory board including suggestions and
   decisions on further procedure following up on the auditor’s report.

     The supervisory board of large stock companies must also have their financial
     statements (including the audit opinion) published in the Viennese Gazette and provide
     evidence of this to the Register of Firms.


Focus SMEs – Financial disclosure


In Austria, regulations regarding the disclosure of financial statements and related
documents vary according to the size of the entity. The legal representatives of LLCs (AGs
and GmbHs) must state the size class of their enterprise to the Register of Firms, at the
latest when the required documents are submitted. For small and medium AGs and GmbHs
the content of filing is relaxed:

     Large entities must file their balance sheets, income statement, notes, and management
     report with the court of the Companies Register. Additionally they have to publish these
     documents in the official gazette.
     Medium sized entities and large GmbHs are also required to file the above mentioned
     documents with the Court of the Companies Register but need only publish the date of
     filing in the official gazette.
     Small entities must only file their balance sheets, in an abbreviated format, and the
     notes with the Court.



6) Forwarding documents: After filing the financial statement in the database of the
   register of firms, the documents are electronically provided to the WKÖ, the Austrian
   Chamber of Labor, and the Agricultural Chambers of Austria.

     The OeNB can demand the electronic forwarding of submitted financial statements to
     the “Bundesrechenzentrum GmbH”. The National bank may forward the data to
     Statistics Austria under certain conditions.
22
  The register of firms is administered by the Bundesrechenzentrum GmbH, a private service provider to
Austrian governmental institutions, fully owned by the Republic of Austria represented through the Ministry of
Finance.




                                                   ~ 20 ~
III.C    Accounting and Auditing Standard-Setting in Austria

Authority to set accounting standards in Austria rests with the government. Austrian GAAP
are established in law, specifically the UGB. The Austrian Financial Reporting and Auditing
Association, a private association, acts as the advisory standard-setting body for accounting
and auditing standards in Austria, particularly its Financial Reporting and Auditing
Committee (AFRAC).


III.C.i Austrian Financial Reporting and Auditing Association
The association’s founding members include the Ministry of Justice ; the Ministry of
Economy, Family and Youth; the Ministry of Finance (BMWFJ); the KWT; the Institute of
Austrian Certified Public Accountants (IWP); the WKÖ; the Federation of Austrian Industries
(IV); the “Vereinigung Oesterreichischer Revisionsverbände”; the “Sparkassen-
Prüfungsverband”; the Financial Market Authority (FMA); the “Aktuarvereinigung
Österreichs”; and the Austrian Insurance Federation.

All regular members have one vote in the general assembly of the association. A board,
elected at the general assembly, steers the association including the management of assets,
electing or excluding members, and providing the necessary budget for AFRAC. The board
consists of one representative of each general member of the association and comprises a
chairman and two substitutes, a secretary, a cashier and their substitutes.

The association is financed by membership fees, donations, subventions and sponsorships,
as well as income from developing expert opinions and publications.


III.C.ii Financial Reporting and Auditing Committee (AFRAC)
Established by the Austrian Financial Reporting and Auditing Association , AFRAC’s principal
responsibility is the continuous development of national and international financial
reporting standards. The committee meets at least four times a year and has an
administrative office at the KWT.

The committee consists of 20 members and 20 alternate members elected by the general
assembly of the association. Committee members elect their chairman and two substitutes.
Members must have detailed knowledge of accounting and auditing but are recruited from
many different backgrounds to represent a range of interests. They include individuals from
enterprises that are audited, academics, certified public accountants, financial analysts,
investors, public oversight and quality assurance authorities, banks, insurance companies,
and SMEs.




                                           ~ 21 ~
AFRAC aims to:
   provide information to its members on current developments in the area of accounting
   and auditing on a national, European and international level;
   issue professional statements;
   support Austrian representatives in international and European working groups;
   provide expert advice to ministries in the preparation of legislative proposals (especially
   in regard to the implementation of European law);
   advise and assist representatives of Austrian interests in international standard setting;
   organize information events;
   issue publications;
   offer expert opinions.

AFRAC papers are developed in working groups which are open to all members of the
committee.


Focus SMEs - Strong standard setting entity


The Austrian Financial Reporting and Auditing Association is made up of the key Austrian
stakeholders in the field of financial reporting. Its Financial Reporting and Auditing
Committee acts as the standard-setting body for accounting and auditing standards in
Austria. The Committee also includes representatives of the SME sector, ensuring that their
interests are considered in the decision making process of introducing new laws and
regulations. All members can contribute to the process of producing the AFRAC statements
and recommendations on which policy makers base their decisions.




                                            ~ 22 ~
IV.      The Accounting and Auditing Profession and Education

There is a distinction in Austria between the public accounting profession and self-employed
accountants. According to the Austrian legal system, self-employed accountants include
Certified Management Accountants, Payroll Accountants, and Certified Accountants. The
public accounting profession includes tax consultants and certified public accountants
(=auditors).


IV.A     Payroll-Accountants / Certified Accountants / Certified
         Management- Accountants
IV.A.i Statutory framework
Accountants in Austria must be officially approved. The Austrian legal system differentiates
between three types of accountants whose fields of operation are strictly regulated:
   Payroll Accountants
   Certified Accountants
   Certified Management Accountants

Of these only Certified Management Accountants may prepare the annual financial
statements of a small enterprise - a corporation or partnership where no individual is a
personally liable partner up to a threshold (balance sheet EUR 4.84 million, turnover EUR
9.68 million, 50 employees in average) as defined within the Austrian Commercial Code.

Two major documents set the regulatory framework:
   Accountants Act (Bundesgesetz über die Bilanzbuchhaltungsberufe – BibuG)
   The BibuG was a joint initiative of the WKO and the KWT which came into force in 2007
   and has been amended a number of times since, most recently in 2012. The BibuG
   regulates the self-employed accounting professions in the area of bookkeeping,
   balancing, cost accounting, payroll-accounting, and accounting advice. It also puts into
   practice EU Directive 2005/36/EC on the recognition of professional qualifications,
   enabling foreign certified accountants to work in Austria. Furthermore the BibuG
   installed an examination board and a joint committee, to put the statutory provisions
   into practice. The BibuG also entitled the joint committee to develop a directive on
   professional practice.
   Directive on professional practice
   This provides a code of ethics for the profession, continuous professional development
   requirements, as well as measures to prevent money laundering and terrorist financing.




                                           ~ 23 ~
IV.A.ii Education and qualification
To be officially appointed as any kind of self-employed accountant applicants must meet
both general and special requirements:

   General requirements include (i) full acting capacity, (ii) special trustworthiness, (iii)
   stable and ordered financial conditions, (iv) a financial loss liability policy, and (v) a
   registered office.
   Special requirements include the successful completion of the appropriate professional
   examination - this includes a written exam and an oral board exam.

Applicants must have evidence of relevant work experience (three years for Certified
Management Accountants, and one and a half years for both Certified Accountants and
Payroll Accountants) and are required to take an examination. There are no educational
requirements for taking the exams.

Qualifications acquired elsewhere which did not include an examination board exam (see
below) must be comparable in their content to be taken into account by the joint
committee, the decision-making authority in this regard.

Temporary and occasional services do not need further authorization. The necessary
qualification requirements are to be verified for the client/customer only. When establishing
an accounting practice in Austria however, it is necessary to apply for official appointment
as a certified management or payroll accountant or certified accountant and the
qualification has to match national standards.

Accountancy companies need official permission to practice. At least one managing director
must meet the requirements of a self-employed accountant.

All practicing registered accounting professionals are obliged to undertake continuous
professional development training of a minimum of 30 x 45 minutes per year, to be verified
in writing by the training provider. Training, according to the Accountants Act, is the proven
participation in events that extend professional and entrepreneurial skills, and/or expand
and update knowledge regarding technical and legal developments. Areas of learning are
not limited but can be selected individually provided that it is subject-specific or job
promoting. Providers of courses, seminars, etc. can apply in advance to the Joint
Commission to have their training recognized as valid for continuous professional
development. If the Joint Commission does not object within 15 working days, the provider
is entitled to mark the event in his publications as ‘training within the meaning of the
BibuG’. Other seminars, training etc. conducted within or outside Austria can also be
submitted for approval, if they meet the above mentioned requirements.




                                           ~ 24 ~
IV.A.iii Quality assurance & Public Oversight
A Joint Commission regulates and controls the obligation for accountants to take the legally
required examinations, meet the quality assurance measures, and undergo an external
quality control. It is governed by six members; each with a backup member. Members are
appointed in equal numbers from the WKO23 and the KWT for a period of six years. The
commission chairmanship rotates on an annual basis between the two organizations, which
also cover all the costs. The commission meets once a month. Decisions are taken by
majority vote. The Joint Commission is supported by 5 full-time employees provided by both
the WKO and the KWT. The BMWFJ is responsible for the oversight of the Joint Commission
and approves its directives.

An examination board established at the office of the joint commission conducts the
professional examinations. A chairperson and substitutes are appointed by the BMWFJ. The
Federal Economic Chambers and the Chamber of Public Accountants have the right of
nomination. The examination board currently comprises 48 members from all over Austria.
Within the regulatory framework, the examination board defines the content and focus of
the examinations and staffs the board of examiners. It additionally advises the Federal
Minister, the Joint Commission, and training institutes on matters related to the
examinations. Quality assurance guidelines for examiners, produced by the Joint
Commission, cover the appointment of an examiner, their responsibilities, the internal
sharing of experience and feedback, the verification of continuous professional
development, the accreditation of exams, and the non-performance of duties.


IV.A.iv Enforcement
The Joint Commission selectively verifies compliance with continuous professional
development requirements at the beginning of each year. At the first meeting of the year a
selection is agreed and those individuals are notified by 31 January. Evidence for the
previous year must be produced by 31 March after which they are notified by the Joint
Committee whether the obligations are met or not. If they are not met, the Joint
Commission can impose sanctions.

     In the following circumstances, and providing no criminal offence falling within the remit
     of courts has been committed, individuals can be found to have committed an
     administrative offence punishable by a fine of up to EUR 20.000:
          practicing accounting without the necessary authorization
          the unauthorized use of a professional title
          the violation of the obligation of discretion and confidentiality

23
  Self-employed accountants are required to become members of the Austrian Federal Economic Chambers,
and their respective professional associations (Professional Association of Management Consultancy and
Information Technology)




                                                ~ 25 ~
            the violation of duties regarding measures concerning money laundering and
             terrorist financing
          the violation of the duty to use the correct professional title
          the non-fulfillment of reporting duties partly or entirely (up to EUR 30.000)
     In case of non-compliance with continuous professional development requirements, the
     Joint Commission is entitled to stipulate improvements regarding the quantity and/or
     content of training activities.
     In case of non-compliance with financial loss liability insurance requirements, the Joint
     Commission can temporarily prohibit working in the accounting profession. This decision
     can be appealed.
     The Joint commission also has the authority to refuse official permission to practice.

Individuals can also ask to be checked if they need confirmation of their entitlement to
practice.


Focus SMEs – Self-employed Accountants


A strict regulatory framework, together with strong quality control and public oversight,
fosters high quality accounting for enterprises that outsource their bookkeeping and
balancing work to external service providers and creates confidence in the accuracy of the
financial data provided among third parties (financial institutions, etc.).




IV.B        Certified Public Accountants
IV.B.i Statutory Framework – The EU Acquis Communautaire24
The EU Directive on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts
(2006/43/EC) sets out the minimum education and training requirements for certified public
accountants:
   The education and training cycle includes university entrance or the equivalent level at
   the start, the completion of theoretical instruction, three years of practical training
   (some of which must be with a statutory auditor or audit firm) and a final examination of
   professional competence equivalent to university degree level. The directive lists
   curriculum subjects for theoretical instruction, including accounting, auditing, tax, civil,
   commercial, and company law.



24
  This section draws on information from the CFRR “Guide to Corporate Sector Accounting and Auditing in the
Acquis Communautaire“ (CFRR, 2011).




                                                  ~ 26 ~
     Statutory auditors must undergo continuing professional development to maintain their
     approval and registration.

According to EU law certified public accountants must be registered in an electronically
accessible public register before they can conduct statutory audits. The directive also
requires the approval and registration of audit firms. It sets out restrictions on the
ownership and management of audit firms:
   Natural persons having the relevant knowledge (or, should member states decide so,
   statutory auditors) or other audit firms must have a majority of the voting rights and
   represent a majority of members in the administrative or management body. The
   majority threshold should not exceed 75% in the latter case.
   Member States must allow statutory auditors or audit firms approved in other member
   States to own and manage audit firms. Statutory auditors carrying out an audit on behalf
   of an audit firm should always be approved and registered in the host member state.


IV.B.ii The Statutory Framework in Austria
There are two main documents that influence the education and qualification standards of
Certified Public Accountants in Austria: The Public Accountants’ Statute of Professional
Practice (Wirtschaftstreuhandberufsgesetz - WTBG), and the directive on the practice of the
public accounting professions (Wirtschaftstreuhandberufs-Ausübungsrichtlinie - WT-ARL).

     The WTBG came into force in 1999 and has been amended several times since then,
     most recently in 2012. It regulates the profession of chartered accountants including
     admission to and the nature and scope of the professional examinations, and the
     framework for professionalism of the public accounting professions. It also contains
     provisions on the KWT, its bodies and organization. The WTBG authorized the KWT to
     develop and issue a directive on professional practice.
     The WT-ARL came into force in 2003 and has been amended several times since then,
     most recently in 2011. It mainly deals with issues regarding professional ethics, bias,
     protection from the influence of organized crime, and prevention of money laundering
     and terrorist financing. It also includes a paragraph on continuous professional
     development obligations.

In Austria certified public accountants must have a relevant25 degree from a university or a
university of applied sciences as well as a minimum of three years26 of work experience as


25
  The degree has to comprise at least six semesters to complete (=180 ECTS credits) and consisting of at least
800 teaching units of 45 minutes in the following areas: business accounting, including Austrian and
international accounting standards; Austrian and international tax law; additional areas of law; and additional
areas of economic sciences.




                                                    ~ 27 ~
auditors-in-training registered with the KWT. If an applicant fulfills these criteria, it is
possible to register for the professional examination.

The KWTs’ official training institute, the Academy of Public Accountants, offers preparation
courses at different locations in Austria.

The professional examination for certified public accountants consists of a written and an
oral part. The written part comprises five 27 tests: accounting, auditing, jurisprudence,
business administration and fiscal law. The subjects of the oral exam additionally include the
law of professional practice of public accounts; the principles of economics, finance,
banking, insurance, securities and foreign exchange law; and quality assurance and risk
management.

After passing the examination and taking the professional oath before the BMWFJ, a
certificate of appointment is issued to the candidate.

The certification procedure is organized by the KWT. An examination board within the KWT
administers the professional examination. The board consists of a chairperson (appointed
by the BMWFJ) and substitutes (jointly appointed by the KWT and the Ministry of Finance)
and examiners from various specific backgrounds. The board has a quorum with the
chairperson, or substitutes, and at least 5 examiners present.

Throughout their career certified public accountants in Austria must continuously complete
further training. Since 2005, certified public accountants who perform audits of financial
statements are legally obliged to ensure high audit quality in their professional practice and
to have it reviewed regularly. Certified public accountants and all their professional
employees are required by law to undergo training and continuing education which is
reviewed annually. Certified public accountants must complete a total of 120 hours and 45
minutes, distributed over three years (with a minimum of 30 hours per year) in relevant
advanced training courses, which can include private study (no more than 10 hours per
year). Up to 20 hours per year can be credited for specialized and relevant work
undertaken.




26
   Passing the professional examination for tax consultants reduces the obligatory time of full-time professional
experience to 2 years.
27
   Tax advisors and other candidates who have already passed the examination for tax are not required to do
the tests in business administration or tax law, and can also skip parts of the oral professional examination.




                                                    ~ 28 ~
V.        The Quality Assurance & Public Oversight System

V.A       Statutory Framework - The EU Acquis Communautaire28

According to the 8th Directive each Member State shall establish an independent system of
quality assurance covering all statutory auditors and audit firms in compliance with the
functional criteria of the directive. The 8th Directive defines the scope of the quality
review/inspection as an assessment of compliance with auditing standards and
independence requirements, and defines the quantity and quality of the resources to be
used.

Quality assurance must take place at least every six years (every three years for statutory
auditors of public interest entities), with the overall results being published annually and,
where needed, followed up on.

In 2008 the Commission issued Recommendation 2008/362/EC which provides guidance for
implementing independent quality assurance systems for statutory auditors and audit firms
conducting an audit of public interest entities.

Each Member State must establish an effective system of public oversight in compliance
with the functional criteria of the 8th directive. This system is to be governed by non-
practitioners knowledgeable in areas relevant to statutory audit and subjects all statutory
auditors and audit firms to public oversight.

Article 5 of the Statutory Audit Directive stipulates the conditions under which a member
state shall withdraw approval of a statutory auditor. They address circumstances in which
either the good repute of a person or firm has been seriously compromised, or conditions
that relate to the ownership of statutory audit firms. Member States are, however, given
the option to provide for a reasonable period of time to meet the requirements of good
repute or fulfill the necessary conditions in regard to the ownership of audit firms.

Where the approval of a statutory auditor or of an audit firm is withdrawn for any reason,
the competent authority of the member state where the approval is withdrawn shall
communicate that fact and the reasons for the withdrawal to the relevant competent
authorities of member states where the statutory auditor or audit firm is also approved.

Chapter VII of the Statutory Audit Directive stipulates investigations and penalties applicable
to statutory auditors. Article 30 regulates the systems of investigations and penalties.

28
  This section draws on information from the CFRR “Guide to Corporate Sector Accounting and Auditing in the
Acquis Communautaire“ (CFRR, 2011).




                                                  ~ 29 ~
V.B        The Statutory Framework in Austria

The legal basis for the Austrian Quality Assurance and Public Oversight System is set out in
the law on Audit Quality Control (Abschlussprüfungs-Qualitätssicherungsgesetz - A-QSG),
which came into force in 2005, and the Abschlussprüfungs-Qualitätssicherungsrichtlinie (A-
QSRL), which came into force in 2006.
   The A-QSG established two bodies that play a role in the external audit quality control
   system of Austria which regulate the obligation of auditors and audit firms to undergo
   legally required examinations, to meet quality assurance measures, and to regularly
   undergo an external quality audit.
   The A-QSRL regulates the structure of the quality assurance system as well as the
   establishment of a public registry listing all statutory auditors and audit firms that have
   had an external quality assessment and possess a valid certificate.

Sanctions and disciplinary procedures are set out in Austria in the UGB, the A-QSG and in
the Wirtschaftstreuhandberufegesetz (WTGB). In addition, provisions are in the cooperative
law revision (GenRevG) and the Savings Bank Act (DDA). The rules are contained in the
Austrian legal system in the form of statutory provisions.


V.C        Quality Assurance

The AeQ: The Austrian Committee for External Quality Inspections (Arbeitsausschuss für
externe Qualitätsprüfung - AeQ) is responsible for the implementation of the external
quality assurance system.

The AeQ comprises seven members who each have a back-up member. Four members are
appointed by the KWT, and three by both the Vereinigung Oesterreichischer
Revisionsverbände and the Sparkassen-Prüfungsverband29. Members are appointed for a
period of four years and must be practitioners. Members of the AeQ act on an honorary
basis, i.e., only their out-of-pocket expenses are reimbursed.

Quality reviews: All statutory auditors and audit firms that perform statutory audits in
Austria are subject to quality reviews at least every six years. Auditors of public interest
entities (PIEs) are subject to quality reviews at least once every three years.

The external quality assurance system builds on external quality control inspections of
certified public accountants which must evaluate:

29
  This Prüfungsverband was established by all the country’s savings banks (Sparkassen) to audit those savings
banks.




                                                   ~ 30 ~
   the quality of the internal quality control system;
   the quality of activities conducted to maintain generally accepted accounting principles,
   professional ethics, and professional conduct;
   compliance with law and professional standards;
   audit evidence and related judgments;
   risk assessment;
   analytical procedures;
   test of controls;
   related parties;
   subsequent events;
   documentation;
   consultation;
   ethical standards – independence issues;
   audit risk and fraud standards;
   audit report;
   and closing of the audit file (archiving).

Process: When auditors or audit firms need to undergo an inspection, they will ask for
proposals from three approved inspectors. The AeQ maintains a list of statutory auditors
who are authorized to conduct inspections. They need to have at least five years of
professional experience, specific training, or relevant experience in quality inspections. The
AeQ appoints the inspector based on the three proposals and can demand amendments to
the proposals if it finds it necessary. If the AeQ and the auditor or audit firm to be inspected
cannot agree on the proposals from the three approved inspectors, it is brought to the Audit
Quality Control Oversight Authority (QKB) for a decision. The appointed inspector prepares
an inspection report based on an established mandatory minimum table of contents and
issues a report assessing whether the internal quality assurance measures adopted by the
inspected auditor/audit firm are:
    adequate;
    adequate subject to weaknesses (in which case weaknesses must be described and
    remedial recommendations made); or
    inadequate (in which case evidence supporting the conclusion must be provided).

The AeQ evaluates this inspection report. When the inspection results in an “adequate” or
“adequate subject to…” report, the AeQ normally issues a certificate to the inspected
auditor or audit firm that permits further audits until the next inspection (i.e., it is valid for
three or six years) subject to implementing the recommended actions in a timely manner.

Financing inspections: Under the current regime, auditors or audit firms pay for their
inspections. The inspection fees are set out in the three proposals.




                                             ~ 31 ~
V.D        Enforcement
V.D.i    Austrian Committee for External Quality Inspections
With the amendment to the Law on Audit Quality Control in 2010, the AeQ also became a
penal authority. In Austria each auditor or audit firm must have a certificate issued by the
AeQ that confirms their authorization to perform audits.

A fundamental sanction is therefore the denial of such a certificate by AeQ. If the auditor or
audit firm is found to have deficiencies in their quality assurance system or in the
performance of an audit, modest remedial measures will be imposed and additional
inspections of the auditor and audit firm will be performed. Under certain conditions it can
lead to a revocation of the certificate. Where there are severe grounds for exclusion and
other breaches of duty a withdrawal of the certificate can be made.

The A-QSG can impose the following sanctions and disciplinary measures:
   to the extent that the infringement does not fall within the explicitly defined categories
   of infringements provided for within the appropriate legislation, fines of between Euro
   400 – 5,000 are imposed on auditors and audit firms who, for example:
    provide no written information to the quality control authority;
    conclude a contract to perform an audit without a certificate required;
    do not provide written evidence of remedial actions addressing issues raised by the
       external quality review within the specified time limit; or
    contravene a reporting requirement imposed.
   to the extent that the infringement does not fall within the explicitly defined categories
   of infringements provided for within the appropriate legislation, fines of between Euro
   5,000 – 50,000 are imposed on auditors and audit firms who, for example:
    perform audits without a valid certificate;
    do not provide the responsible authorities with requested information or requested
       documentation;
    provide the responsible authorities with false or incomplete information; or
    do not permit the entry onto their premises of the responsible authorities, the
       investigative body or experts.

Should auditors or audit firms breach their professional responsibilities, members of the
KWT and the IWP30 are also subject to sanctions by these professional organizations,
including fines, temporary suspension, or permanent exclusion from the profession.




30
  The Institute of Austrian Certified Public Accountants is a voluntary association of certified public
accountants in Austria, with currently around 800 members (natural and legal persons).




                                                      ~ 32 ~
Under the WTBG, the KWT is responsible for disciplinary matters, for example issuing
warnings to members for a failure to meet their professional obligations or revoking their
permission to practice following a related breach of the law. The WTBG regulates the
jurisdiction of disciplinary proceedings, investigations, orders etc. The first step in
disciplinary proceedings is to issue a warning. If this is not effective, the second step is to
impose a fine. The amount of the fines depends on the damages caused and will normally
be in the range EUR 7,268 - EUR 14,536. The penalty for professional malpractice is
determined in the first instance by the disciplinary procedures and in the second instance by
the Chamber’s Disciplinary Board. Procedures are regulated in detail and include: a
commission of inquiry, defense, assessment of damages, appeals, and the enforcement of
findings.


V.D.ii Austrian Review Panel for Financial Reporting
In 2013 Austria was the last country in the European Union to establish a formal IFRS
enforcement process regarding the financial reporting of companies with securities traded
on a regulated market. Based on the German model, Austria implemented a two-tier
enforcement system involving the newly established Austrian Review Panel for Financial
Reporting (OePr) and the FMA, which has sovereign authority. To verify the compliance of
accounts with the IFRS, the FMA draws on assistance from the Austrian Review Panel for
Financial Reporting.

The OePr is approved by the Federal Ministry of Finance. Responsibilities within the
enforcement process are shared between the review panel and the FMA:
   the review panel assists the FMA to verify the compliance of accounts with the IFRS and
   ensures that financial statements have been drawn up in accordance with the applicable
   accounting standards,
   the FMA decides on enforcement priorities and audit plans.

To keep companies informed and allow them to prepare for upcoming examinations the
FMA, amongst other things, published six priority areas to be reviewed in accounting
control. In addition to impairment (valuation of bank liabilities, goodwill, intangible assets)
they include fair value measurement and other areas arising mainly from new standards.

For 2014, about 30 individual reviews have been scheduled. Above that, where there are
specific grounds, a special review held due to public interests can examine any area.


V.E      Public Oversight

The QKB, which is based at the BMWFJ, is the country’s highest-ranking authority
responsible for the oversight of the Austrian audit quality oversight system.


                                            ~ 33 ~
The responsibilities of the QKB include:
   Overseeing the appointment of approved inspectors;
   ruling on appeals;
   monitoring the ongoing appropriateness and effectiveness of the external audit quality
   control system;
   making recommendations on how the external audit quality control system could be
   enhanced;
   preparing an annual report that is publicly available; and
   maintaining the public register of auditors.

The QKB is governed by six members; each has a back-up member. Members are exclusively
non-practitioners appointed for a period of six years by the BMWFJ. They act on an
honorary basis, i.e., only their out-of-pocket expenses are reimbursed. The QKB is supported
by civil servants employed by the Ministry and includes four civil servants who also have
other responsibilities within the Ministry and are, therefore, not full-time QKB staff
members.

The QKB publishes an annual report including:
   a description of the QKB;
   the statutory framework underpinning the QKB; and
   an activity report, including
    summary of the QKB’s duties,
    QKB meetings,
    QKB decisions,
    implementation of the public register,
    staffing and budget,
    European representation,
    transposition of the Directive,
    international cooperation, and
    recommendations for further developments.

There is no specific relationship between the QKB and the audit profession. Approved
inspectors are, however, licensed auditors who have passed specific exams and must keep
their knowledge up to date.

The Austrian Public Oversight and Quality Assurance system is financed by contributions
from the KWT and the Revisonsverbände31 except for the inspections themselves.

31
  This association is a legally recognized platform for the so-called Revisionsverbände, which audit
cooperatives within Austria. These Revisionsverbände comprise approximately 280 statutory auditors.




                                                   ~ 34 ~
References

  BSBV. (2010). Factsheets: Bedeutung der Banken fuer die Oesterreichische
  Volkswirtschaft. Accessed November 30, 2012, from
  https://www.voebb.at/showInfoDatei.jsp?file_id=101.

  World Bank Centre for Financial Reporting Reform. (2011). Guide to Corporate Sector
  Accounting and Auditing in the Acquis Communautaire. Accessed March 21, 2014, from
  http://go.worldbank.org/RX5NNOV2S1.


  World Bank Centre for Financial Reporting Reform. (2013). A Survey of SME Accounting
  and Reporting Practices in Austria. Accessed March 21, 2014, from
  http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTCENFINREPREF/Resources/4152117-
  1270824012230/6954188-1369301061218/CFRR_SME_Austria_CFR_Study.pdf.


  World Bank Centre for Financial Reporting Reform. (2013). Survey on Lending Practices
  to SMEs in Austria.
  Accessed March 21, 2014, from
  http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTCENFINREPREF/Resources/4152117-
  1270824012230/6954188-1369301061218/CFRR_Bank_Study_SME_lending.pdf.


  KPMG International. (2012). Investment in Austria. Accessed March 21, 2014, from
  https://www.kpmg.at/uploads/media/Investment_in_Austria_2012.pdf.


  Oesterreichische Nationalbank. (2012). Facts on Austria and its banks. Accessed
  December 14, 2012, from
  http://www.austria.org/images/stories/content/finance/facts_on_austria_11_2012.pdf.

  Statistics Austria. (2012). Austria: Data – Figures – Facts.. Accessed August 1, 2012, from
  http://www.statistik.at/web_en/static/austria._data._figures._facts_029252.pdf.




                                           ~ 35 ~
Annex - Methodology

                             Types of action performed
In the course of assessing the Austrian financial reporting environment, four different types
of action were performed:
    Desk research following ROSC methodology, consisting of an inventory aimed at
    collecting information on the current Austrian framework for corporate financial
    reporting in general and in particular on those areas that are of particular importance
    for SMEs. This information comprises both a description of the accounting and auditing
    environment in force and an identification of the good accounting practices.
    A survey, based on questionnaires, aimed at collecting data on the experience of the
    Austrian SME sector with corporate financial reporting practices: In cooperation with the
    Austrian Institute for SME Research an online survey was created with Lime Survey – an
    open source tool for the development of online surveys. On October 16th, 2012 the
    invitation to participate in the survey was sent to about 17,300 e-mail addresses from
    the address database provided by Herold Business Data GmbH. Around 1,000 e-mail
    invitations were not delivered due to wrong or invalid addresses. On November 5th,
    2012 a reminder was sent to all enterprises that had not returned the completed
    questionnaire. The online survey was available until November 12th, 2012. Finally, 786
    surveys were completed properly and were used for the analysis. It was not a
    requirement that all questions had to be answered and questionnaires where at least
    two-thirds of all questions were answered were included in the analysis. All results have
    been weighted by industry and by the number of employees according to the basic
    company population in Austria. Data analysis has been carried out using IBM SPSS
    Statistics 19.
    A survey, based on questionnaires, to gain insight into banks’ requirements and
    expectations regarding scope and quality of financial information provided by SMEs
    when applying for credit: A questionnaire was developed with Microsoft Office Word
    2007. On September 17th, 2012 the Industry Sector Bank and Insurance of the Austrian
    Federal Economic Chamber (BSBV) invited all Austrian credit institutions to participate in
    the survey. An invitation including the Word-file to complete was sent to e-mail
    addresses from the member database of five of the seven Trade Associations of the
    BSBV: the “Fachverband der Banken und Bankiers”, the “Fachverband der Volksbanken”,
    the “Fachverband der Landes-Hypothekenbanken”, the “Fachverband der Sparkassen”,
    and the “Fachverband der Raiffeisenbanken”. The deadline for answering the
    questionnaire was October 19th, 2012. Finally, 10 surveys that had been properly
    completed were used for the analysis. Respondents to the survey represent
    approximately one third of the sector based on total assets. Data analysis has been
    carried out with Microsoft Office Excel.




                                           ~ 36 ~
   Semi-structured interviews with representatives of relevant public authorities,
   professional associations, national committees, experienced banking professionals, and
   professional service providers, clarified details gained from the surveys and the desk
   research.



                               Definition of an SME
This report focuses on SMEs. According to an EU recommendation, the number of persons
employed and either the level of turnover or the size of the balance sheet determine
whether a company is a micro, small or medium-sized enterprise (together these make up
the SME sector) or a large enterprise. These limits apply to autonomous companies only.
This means that the company is not a partner or linked to other companies.

Table 1 - Thresholds of the SME definition by EU recommendation


                         Persons          Turnover (in €    or     Balance sheet (in €
                        employed             Million)                   Million)

 Micro enterprise          < 10                   ≤2                     ≤2

    Small-sized
                           < 50                   ≤ 10                   ≤ 10
    enterprise

   Medium-sized
                          < 250                   ≤ 50                   ≤ 43
    enterprise
                                                           (European Commission, 2013)




                                         ~ 37 ~
