This document was prepared by:




                                 Centre for Financial Reporting Reform (CFRR)
                                 Governance Global Practice, The World Bank
                                 Praterstrasse 31
                                 1020 Vienna, Austria
                                 Web: www.worldbank.org/cfrr
                                 Email: cfrr@worldbank.org
                                 Phone: +43-1-217-0700
         EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




List of Abbreviations and Acronyms
ACCA     Association of Chartered Certified          IFRS      International Financial Reporting
         Accountants (UK)                                      Standards
ADA      Austrian Development Agency                 IPA       Instrument for Pre-Accession
A&A      Accounting and Auditing                     IPD       Initial Professional Development
AO       Audit and Oversight                         ISA       International Standards on Auditing
BCBS     Basel Committee on Banking                  ISQC      International Standard on Quality
         Supervision                                           Assurance (for Audit firms, issued by
                                                               IAASB)
BiH      Bosnia and Herzegovina                      KM        Knowledge Management
CAP      Country Action Plan                         MDTF      Multi-Donor Trust Fund
CCA      Croatian Chamber of Auditors                M&E       Monitoring and Evaluation
CDRF     Capacity Development Results                MoF       Ministry of Finance
         Framework
CFR      Corporate Financial Reporting               MoFE      Ministry of Finance and Economy (used
                                                               where applicable)
CFRCoP   CFR Community of Practice                   MPG       Market Participants Groups
CFRR     Centre for Financial Reporting Reform       PAO       Professional Accountancy Organization
                                                               (PB)
CoP      Community of Practice                       PB        Professional Body (PAO)
CPD      Continuing Professional                     PIE       Public Interest Entity
         Development/CPE
DAC      Donor Advisory Council                      PIOB      Public Interest Oversight Board
EC       European Commission                         QA        Quality Assurance
EduCoP   Accounting Education Community of           RLG       Regulatory Liaison Group
         Practice
EU       European Union                              REPARIS   Road to Europe: Program of Accounting
                                                               Reform and Institutional Strengthening
FBiH     Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina        ROSC      Report on the Observance of Standards
                                                               and Codes
FBHA     Association of Accountants, Auditors and    RS        Republica Sprska
         Financial Workers of the Federation of
         BiH in Bosnia & Herzegovina
FR       Financial Reporting                         RSAAA     BiH Republika Srpska Association of
                                                               Accountants and Auditors
FSB      Financial Stability Board                   SAD       Statutory Audit Directive
GDLN     Global Development Learning Network         SCAAK     Society of Certified Accountants and
                                                               Auditors of Kosovo
IAASB    International Auditing and Assurance        SCOA      Serbian Chamber of Auditors
         Standards Board
IAESB    International Accounting Education          SECO      Swiss State Secretariat for Economic
         Standards Board                                       Affairs
ICAM     Institute of Certified Accountants of       SME       Small or Medium-sized Enterprise
         Montenegro
ICARM    Institute of Authorized Auditors-FYR        SRRS      Serbian Association of Accountants and
         Macedonia                                             Auditors
ICE      In-Country Engagement                       SAA       Stabilization and Association Agreement
                                                               (ref EU Enlargement)
IDF      Institutional Development Fund (World       TA        Technical Assistance
         Bank)
IEKA     Albanian Institute of Authorized Auditors   UNCTAD    United Nations Conference on Trade and
                                                               Development
IES      International Education Standards for       USAID     United States Agency for International
         Professional Accountants                              Development
IESBA    International Ethics Standards Board for    WB        World Bank
         Accountancy (IFAC Board)
IFAC     International Federation of Accountants




I|Page
                   EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




Table of Contents



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................................III

1.      BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT ........................................................................................................... 1

2.      PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ..................................................................................................................... 3

     FROM REPARIS TO EU-REPARIS ....................................................................................................................... 3
     PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE ................................................................................................................. 3
     DESCRIPTION OF EU-REPARIS ............................................................................................................................ 3
     PROGRAM PARTNERS........................................................................................................................................... 4

3.      APPROACH AND PROGRAM STRUCTURE .......................................................................................... 5

     ENGAGEMENT ON THREE LEVELS .......................................................................................................................... 5
     PROGRAM FEATURES............................................................................................................................................ 6
     PROGRAM COMPONENTS ................................................................................................................................... 6
     PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS..................................................................................................................................... 9

4.      EXPECTED OUTCOMES AND PLANNED ACTIVITIES 2015 ............................................................... 10

     COMPONENT 1 – CORPORATE FINANCIAL REPORTING REFORM ....................................................................... 10
     COMPONENT 2 – EDUCATION AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT .......................................................................... 12
     COMPONENT 3 – ACCESS TO FINANCE AND FINANCIAL SECTOR ...................................................................... 13
     COMPONENT 4: REGIONAL COOPERATION AND KNOWLEDGE SHARING .......................................................... 14

5.      PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION............................................................................................................ 16

     PROGRAM GOVERNANCE ................................................................................................................................. 16
     TEAM MEMBERS ................................................................................................................................................. 16
     SUMMARY TABLE OF ACTIVITIES .......................................................................................................................... 18
     BUDGET ............................................................................................................................................................. 19

ANNEX: RESULTS FRAMEWORK ................................................................................................................. 20




II|Page
            EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




Executive Summary
Strong financial reporting systems which reflect the needs of different types of businesses
support sustainable economic growth. Financial reporting promotes enhanced availability,
transparency and reliability of financial information, it helps ensure regulatory compliance,
and it supports a business and investment climate conducive to private sector development.

The countries of Southeast Europe, including Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo1,
FYR Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia, are candidates or potential candidates for EU
enlargement and are in the process of closer integrating with the EU and the EU’s internal
market, and aligning their legislative frameworks with the EU acquis communautaire.

EU-REPARIS is funded by the European Union and is an integral part of the Technical
Assistance (TA) Facility of the Western Balkans Enterprise Development and Innovation
Facility (WB EDIF) which supports SME development and growth through finance and
technical assistance services. EU-REPARIS is implemented by the World Bank Centre for
Financial Reporting Reform and builds on the work undertaken as part of Road to European
– Program of Accounting Reform and Institutional Strengthening (REPARIS) from 2008 to
2014.

Working with governments and in-country stakeholders, EU-REPARIS seeks to:

•    Help develop strong institutional frameworks for corporate financial reporting;
•    Assist the accounting profession to provide effective business support services;
•    Improve financial literacy and raise awareness of the role of financial reporting;
•    Encourage greater regional harmonization of corporate financial reporting frameworks.

Organized on a regional basis, EU-REPARIS engages at three levels:

•    Providing knowledge and training, using diagnostics to help identify areas of weakness;
•    Encouraging peer to peer learning and experience sharing amongst participating
     countries to promote regional cooperation and coordinated actions within a common
     framework;
•    Offering country-level reform implementation support in the development of sustainable
     and effective institutions and capacity building.

The program is structured along four components, three thematic and one cross-cutting:

1.   Supporting the implementation of a framework for accounting and auditing that
     meets international standards, addressing the specific reporting needs of SMEs, the
     application of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), the enforcement of
     financial reporting requirements, and the introduction of public oversight and quality
     assurance arrangements for statutory audit. Planned activities include the fostering of a
     Community of Practice (CoP) with regular joint learning events, seminars and facilitated
     knowledge exchange with relevant EU and global bodies and each other. This
     component also supports accounting and auditing reform at the country level, assisting
     with specific projects and financing targeted and critical technical assistance. It enables
1
 This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR1244 and the ICJ Opinion
on the Kosovo Declaration of Independence.



III|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




     regular dialogue with country authorities and facilitates ongoing monitoring and
     evaluation.

2.   Promoting the development of accounting education aligned with International
     Accounting Education Standards and the educational requirements of the EU's Statutory
     Audit Directive (i) at university level, (ii) for professional qualification, and (iii) for
     continuing professional development of those already qualified. A CoP will collaborate
     on common solutions to shared challenges. A regional university curricula
     benchmarking study will be conducted in all EU-REPARIS countries, comparing an
     international recognized curricula benchmark in accounting and auditing education
     against local university curricula. A “Training of Trainers” stream of activities will train
     Professional Accountancy Organizations (PAOs), offering them tools to train
     accountants, and organize trainings and continuous professional development for their
     member practices.

3.   Facilitating easier access to finance through practical guidance and solutions, and
     building capacity among financial sector regulators in the use of financial reporting
     standards to effectively monitor the financial sector, particularly the bank and insurance
     sectors. Key activities are facilitating a dialogue between regulators and auditors and
     organizing an annual training event, in collaboration with the International Accounting
     Standards Board, and several virtual seminars updating supervisors of the implications
     of IFRS changes. There will also be a project to develop a common understanding of
     financial information required for a loan application and the relevance of audited
     financial statements in support of SME improved access to credit.

4.   Ensuring sustained reform momentum, regional collaboration and active
     knowledge transfer among participating stakeholders by regular engagement with
     Ministers of Finance, senior government officials, and other key stakeholders. Activities
     include high-level conferences and workshops and dissemination of information through
     publications, website and newsletters.
Senior Officials representing the Governments of participating countries, typically Deputy
Ministers of Finance, will review progress at least annually and a stakeholders’ group,
involving market participants from the region, foreign investors and other stakeholders, will
provide insights to improve the design and implementation of EU-REPARIS. A results
framework is used to assess the progress and outcomes of EU-REPARIS against its
objectives. Indicators used include progress in aligning existing frameworks with the acquis;
the enhanced capacity of the profession to apply international and EU standards of
corporate financial reporting; and the presence of a functional audit quality assurance
system.




IV|Page
            EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




1. Background and Context

EU Integration and WB EDIF
The countries of Southeast Europe including Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo 2,
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia are candidates or
potential candidates for EU enlargement. As such, they are in the process of aligning their
legislative frameworks with the EU acquis communautaire which EU-REPARIS supports as
regards the financial reporting aspects.

The countries of Southeast Europe are also beneficiaries of the EU led Western Balkans
Enterprise Development and Innovation Facility (WB EDIF) which seeks to promote SME
development and financing as well as enhance the associated regulatory frameworks in the
region. With a view to alignment with EU law, an improved business and investment climate,
economic growth, and particularly private sector development, EU-REPARIS aims support
with its efforts the World Bank's twin goals of eliminating extreme poverty, and particularly
promoting shared prosperity.


Role of Financial Reporting for a Functioning Investment Climate
As well as being a requirement of EU accession, strong financial reporting systems with
reporting requirements that reflect the needs of different types of businesses help in several
ways to create a business climate which supports sustainable economic growth and reduces
the barriers facing high-potential SMEs and the corporate sector at large:

•    For high-potential SMEs seeking venture capital finance, appropriate financial reporting
     standards (such as the IFRS for SMEs) can reduce the barriers to an eventual flotation,
     making venture capital (early stage equity) investment more attractive.
•    Adopting shared and internationally recognized reporting standards across Southeast
     Europe makes it easier for domestic businesses to expand to operating on the regional
     and the wider European markets – a key factor for growth.
•    The credibility provided by sound financial reporting gives banks and other providers of
     external finance the confidence to move beyond basing lending decisions solely on the
     collateral available toward lending on the basis of the business cash flows.
•    Modern and effective financial reporting systems, if aligned with national tax systems,
     can also help to reduce the burden of tax compliance.
•    Relevant financial reporting can help businesses monitor which activities generate the
     greatest returns and thus manage their operations more effectively.


Key Issues
EU-REPARIS supports a functioning business and investment climate and builds on existing
efforts as well as strong client demand. It aims to promote transparency and strengthen
corporate financial reporting practices as a key feature of a well-functioning market
economy. It particularly focuses on strengthening countries' capacity to make available
2
 This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR1244 and the ICJ Opinion
on the Kosovo Declaration of Independence.



1|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




sound, high-quality and accurate financial information that are needed by regulators,
investors and financial intermediaries. It aims to help enhance tertiary education as well as
continuous professional development. Working with governments and in-country
stakeholders, the following issues are to be addressed:

•   In each participating country, strong improvements towards an institutional framework
    for corporate financial reporting aligned with the acquis are needed.
•   The accounting profession in each participating country needs to be better equipped to
    be in a position to provide effective business support services required by enterprises
    and particularly SMEs such as access to finance, business planning and business
    management, and compliance with regulatory requirements.
•   There is a need to inform stakeholders of the relationship between improved financial
    reporting and better access to finance;
•   A higher degree of harmonization of the corporate financial reporting frameworks across
    Southeast Europe, as well as increased and continued awareness of the benefits and
    successful approaches to corporate financial reporting reform in participating countries,
    are needed.




2|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




2. Program Description

From REPARIS to EU-REPARIS
Since 2008, countries of Southeast Europe have been supported by the Road to Europe –
Program of Accounting Reform and Institutional Strengthening (REPARIS). This program
has established effective regional communities of practice that regularly bring together
stakeholders including ministers of finance, senior officials, professional bodies, standard
setters, regulators and educators. It has assisted professional accounting bodies to achieve
membership of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC), so formally joining the
global community of professional accountancy bodies and committing to implementing
international standards. Several countries have (i) advanced in transposing the accounting
and audit acquis into national law, (ii) started to implement quality assurance systems, and
(iii) introduced IFRS for SMEs. The program has fostered strong regional cooperation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia (and soon extended to Croatia and FYR
Macedonia) share a “single passport” for accountants with full mutual recognition.

REPARIS came to an end in 2014 and the countries of Southeast Europe expressed strong
interest in a new program to support the next phase of financial reporting reform, placing
particular emphasis on completing the process of aligning their national frameworks for
financial reporting with the relevant provisions of the acquis. Financed by IPA funds as part
of the Technical Assistance (TA) component of the Western Balkans Enterprise
Development Innovation Facility (WB EDIF) EU-REPARIS focuses on SME development,
and supports other business entities such as listed companies, banks, and state-owned
enterprises (SOEs) will share the benefits of the program.


Program Development Objective
The objective of EU-REPARIS is to support the implementation of corporate financial
reporting frameworks in line with the EU acquis communautaire in the countries of Southeast
Europe, with a view to promoting enhanced availability, transparency and reliability of
financial information.


Description of EU-REPARIS
EU-REPARIS supports countries of Southeast Europe complete the alignment of their
financial reporting laws with the acquis communautaire in a way that reduces the barriers to
growth. It also helps the accounting profession develop and maintain their relevance and
expertise. An important aspect of the program is to help create conditions in which
companies, particularly SMEs, can move to the next stage of their development including
accessing sources of venture capital and the project aims to develop practical tools and
approaches that enhance the financial reporting of SMEs and reduce related barriers to
lending.

EU-REPARIS activities are developed based on the findings and recommendations of A&A
ROSC diagnostics, which have been completed in all countries of Southeast Europe. The
program delivers policy advice and technical support in partnership with other institutions


3|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




and works closely with EU institutions responsible for policy in the area as well as national
institutions supporting private sector and SME development in the region (such as the
Centre for Entrepreneurial Learning in Croatia and the Serbian Innovation Fund). It is built on
a capacity building and client-driven approach that includes peer- learning sessions and
communities of practice exchanges. It facilitates regional cooperation and offers convening
services through high-level conferences, policy discussions and seminars featuring globally
and EU relevant institutions as well as renowned speakers and experts. Managed by the
Vienna based World Bank Centre for Financial Reporting Reform, the program provides just-
in-time country-specific technical assistance and help-desk type services for implementation
efforts on the ground. The program is supported by a rich online portal and repository of
information in the area of financial reporting.

EU-REPARIS is based on a model of “peer learning,” so that the participating countries learn
from the reform experiences of their fellow participants, helping them avoid problems that
others have already faced. Although CFRR staff will play a valuable coordinating role, the
structure of EU-REPARIS, in particular its use of Communities of Practice which bring
together specialist practitioners in professional education, corporate financial reporting, and
financial regulation from all the participating countries to exchange experiences, is designed
to allow as many opportunities as possible for participants to learn from their peers’
experiences with designing and implementing financial reporting reforms.


Program Partners
Funding for EU-REPARIS is provided by the European Union (European Commission - DG
European Neighborhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations) as part of the Technical
Assistance (TA) Facility of the Western Balkans Enterprise Development Innovation Facility
(WB EDIF) platform. To support socio-economic development and EU accession across the
Southeast Europe region, the EU has established WB EDIF which aims to increase the
financial resources made available to SMEs in Southeast Europe, and to provide technical
assistance for strategic investments, particularly in infrastructure, energy efficiency and
private sector development. WB EDIF was launched in December 2012 as a joint initiative of
the EU, International Financial Institutions (IFIs), bilateral donors and the governments of
Southeast Europe.
Other external partners providing expertise for this program include the International
Federation of Accountants (IFAC) the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)
including the IFRS Foundation, EFRAG, FEE and others.
Close collaboration and exchange with WB EDIF partners is a core element of this program.




4|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




3. Approach and Program Structure
EU-REPARIS is organized on a regional basis, complemented by national initiatives to
support financial reporting reform. The participant countries have a shared goal of accession
to the EU and also face many common challenges in setting up effective systems of financial
reporting and fostering the growth of SMEs. The regional approach of the program helps
participating countries to tackle these shared issues together, while learning from each
other’s experiences. This “peer-learning” aspect of the program reduces the costs of
financial reporting reform by helping participants to avoid problems that others have already
faced. A regional approach also magnifies the convening power of the program, leaders of
global accounting and standard-setting bodies, as well as the leading EU institutions in
financial reporting, have all taken part in past REPARIS events.


Engagement on Three Levels
As a capacity building and technical assistance program EU-REPARIS assists in
establishing effective frameworks for corporate financial reporting aligned with good
international practices and, through gradual alignment and convergence, with the EU acquis
communautaire.
The program builds on the REPARIS program and findings from A&A ROSC diagnostics
which have been completed in all beneficiary countries. The program is structured around
the notion of knowledge and experience sharing, peer learning and targeted assistance, and
support to effective, sustainable implementation. Through expert presentations and
professional facilitation, the program provides integrated advisory services, effective
knowledge management, training, implementation support, and monitoring and evaluation
assistance to the beneficiary countries.
The program puts a heavy focus on regional activities mainly directed towards knowledge
transfer and experience sharing, thus achieving significant economies of scale allowing the
countries to tackle issues shared regionally, fostering cooperation and coordinated actions
among Western Balkan countries within a common framework.
In addition, the program provides country-level reform implementation support, aimed at
supporting CFR institutions and capacity building to ensure their sustainability and
effectiveness.




5|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




Program Features
As part of the overall capacity building effort, the principal audience is engaged through a set
of knowledge and experience sharing activities including regular community of practice
exchanges, workshops and seminars, high-level, cross-regional thematic conferences,
distance learning events such as GDLN sessions, webinars through Adobe Connect and
other available technology and tools.

Furthermore, electronic newsletters will be issued on a regular basis to provide updates and
background information on relevant topics. A comprehensive online information portal
supports the program by making available a knowledge repository allowing program
participants to retrieve relevant information, background materials, presentations etc. on
discussed topics. Facilitating social networking through collaborative spaces such as Wikis
and community tools may be considered, if appropriate. The main program features,
adapted to each of the three main dimensions of knowledge sharing, peer learning and
implementation support, include:

•   Participants of Communities of Practice (CoPs) meet regularly through face-to-face
    workshops and virtual (video-conference) seminars intended to foster peer exchange
    and learning and to help address different issues and challenges (e.g., accounting and
    auditing issues in the context of the financial sector);
•   High-level technical conferences on relevant topics, to build and sustain reform
    momentum and showcase progress and success stories;
•   Study trips to EU member countries that have addressed similar challenges a track
    record of successful financial reporting reform implementation;
•   Technical dialogue with participating countries to facilitate policy decisions, capacity
    building, and implementation of reforms;
•   Other targeted, country-level technical advice and reform implementation support, in the
    form of training courses, support to drafting of legislation and regulation, development of
    methodologies and analytical work.


Program Components
The program is structured along three thematic components, and one cross cutting
component:
•   Corporate Financial Reporting Reform: To support the implementation of a
    framework for accounting and auditing that meets international standards. Key themes
    include the specific reporting needs of SMEs, the application of International Financial
    Reporting Standards (IFRS), the enforcement of financial reporting requirements, and
    the introduction of public oversight and quality assurance arrangements for statutory
    audit. The component includes two sub-activity streams with the following objectives:

    o    Financial Reporting Community of Practice: The activity provides direct technical
         assistance for the alignment of company law with the acquis, and for candidate
         countries’ to transpose the acquis, drawing on the experience of countries that have
         completed this process, especially Croatia. Ensuring increased transparency and
         confidence, this activity promotes and supports the enforcement of high standards



6|Page
         EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




        of financial reporting that meet the needs of business management as well as
        potential investors, thus contributing to an improved business environment and
        investment climate fostering private sector and particularly SME development. The
        focus of this activity is on peer learning, seminars, facilitated knowledge exchange
        with relevant EU and global bodies, and the identification of common solutions to
        shared challenges. Technical assistance is provided to the community of practice to
        address challenges in the financial reporting needs of SMEs, the application of
        International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), the enforcement of financial
        reporting requirements, and the introduction of public oversight and quality
        assurance systems.
    o   In-Country and Implementation Support: This helps create effective links
        between the regional program and country-level implementation of national
        activities. Tailored to the needs of individual countries, help-desk type of assistance
        and on-demand technical assistance is being provided and addresses country or
        institutional specific needs/requests. Assistance allows for trouble-shooting specific
        technical issues during the program delivery phase, as well as providing individual
        and specific institutions with tailored technical advice, as appropriate. The activity is
        also intended to facilitate monitoring and evaluation of progress made in financial
        reporting reforms and related capacity development in beneficiary countries.
•   Education and Capacity Development: To promote the development of accounting
    education aligned with International Accounting Education Standards and the
    educational requirements of the EU's Statutory Audit Directive (i) at university level, (ii)
    for professional qualification, and (iii) for continuing professional development of those
    already qualified. The component includes two main activity streams with the following
    objectives:
    o   Education Community of Practice: Supporting the educating and training of
        individuals to become and remain highly qualified accountants, this activity
        contributes to the development of internationally compatible accounting education
        for professional qualification, continuing professional development, and at university
        level. There is substantial commonality of curriculum content, qualification systems,
        and lifelong learning requirements being addressed on a regional basis by the
        community of practice. Topics include the implementation of International
        Accounting Education Standards, application of the education requirements of the
        EU Statutory Audit Directive, and identification and replication of the experiences of
        EU universities in accounting education.
    o   Training of Trainers: This activity provides training sessions and tools for
        professional accounting organizations to train accountants in providing effective
        financial reporting support to SMEs and private sector enterprises. This helps
        accounting organizations provide assistance to the private sector, particularly high-
        potential SMEs, to create fundable business plans, raise finance, take advantage of
        fiscal and other incentives, and generate credible financial information that meets
        the needs of investors, lenders and guarantors. This also includes support for the
        implementation of international auditing standards and the quality assurance of
        auditors that are necessary for a credible information infrastructure underpinning
        SME private sector financing.


7|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




•   Access to Finance and Financial Sector: To (i) provide practical guidance and
    solutions to facilitate easier access to finance, and (ii) build capacity among financial
    sector regulators in the use of financial reporting standards to effectively monitor the
    financial sector, particularly the bank and insurance sectors. The component includes
    two activity streams with the following objectives:
    o   Pilot Project on SME Reporting: This activity will support an ongoing dialogue
        with banks, chambers of commerce, and business associations to develop a
        common understanding of the financial information required for a loan application
        and the relevance of financial statement audits. Workshops will discuss and
        benchmark financial information required from SMEs in existing loan applications,
        and this will be used to develop a set of financial information to be tested during
        focus groups. The activity will also build on the experience of EU countries and best
        practices in other regions.
    o   Financial Reporting for Supervisors: This activity helps financial regulators
        acquire the skills necessary to analyze financial statements of banks prepared
        under IFRS and explore regulation that would require banks to obtain audited
        financial statements or other type of assurance for loans over certain thresholds. It
        also gives financial regulators a better understanding of the work of auditors, the
        various types of assurance and types of opinion that an auditor can issue on
        financial statements.
•   The cross-cutting component, Regional Cooperation and Knowledge Sharing, (i)
    helps maintain the momentum for accounting and audit reform among policy makers,
    including ministers of finance, their deputies and other senior officials, and (ii) facilitates
    knowledge capturing and sharing through online information portal and other knowledge
    management activities. It aims to nurture continued reform momentum and facilitate
    greater regional cooperation and regulatory coordination. Activities seek to ensure
    decision makers are fully aware of the issues at hand, have a solid financial reporting
    knowledge base, are up-to-date in regard to requirements and developments at EU and
    international level, and are in a position to master the much needed financial reporting
    reform agenda. Additionally, a range of knowledge sharing activities, such as a
    comprehensive online information portal, are supported.




8|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




Program Participants
The program aims to engage a broad set of stakeholders in both the public and private sectors. The
main stakeholders expected to participate include:

•   Government officials responsible for drawing up and implementing the framework for
    corporate financial reporting. These will generally be in ministries of finance but other
    ministries may also be involved, such as ministries of the economy and, as regards the
    EU acquis, ministries of European or foreign affairs;
•   Setters of national accounting and auditing standards, in government and PAOs;
•   Staff working in central banks and regulators of financial firms who need to be able to
    analyze financial statements produced by banks and other financial institutions in order
    to carry out their regulatory tasks effectively;
•   Staff responsible for supervising the professional education of accountants and auditors,
    from universities and PAOs, and those responsible for overseeing audit work and the
    professional standards of auditors;
•   Compilers of financial statements in the private sector;
•   Users of financial statements, especially sources of external finance, such as banks and
    investors on capital markets.




9|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




4. Expected Outcomes and Planned Activities 2015
The following describes the activities that will be carried out in each component during the
program period January – Dec 2015.


Component 1 – Corporate Financial Reporting Reform

Expected outcomes
This component supports the implementation of accounting and auditing frameworks that
meet the requirements of the EU acquis, and that serve the needs of companies, particularly
small and medium size enterprises, helping companies to commerce and finance their
needs. Activities are directed towards the development of country strategies that improve
financial reporting frameworks and practices that are compliant with the EU Accounting and
Auditing Directives. These will inform the development of laws and regulations, and the
availability of international accounting standards such as IFRS for SMEs, full IFRS, and
auditing standards, ISA, including translation in local language. Progress is measured
through transposition tables comparing local requirements with EU directives and
regulations, ROSC accounting and auditing assessments, EC progress and other reports,
and qualitative review by CFRR staff.

There are two main activity streams, i) the Corporate Financial Reporting Community of
Practice, and ii) In-country and Implementation Support.


Planned activities - Corporate Financial Reporting Community of Practice
The Financial Reporting Community of Practice will build the capacity of countries
participating in EU REPARIS by increasing the financial reporting knowledge of country-level
stakeholders and facilitate their collaboration on the identification of common solutions to
shared challenges. Peer learning will be achieved through a Community of Practice (CoP)
approach, facilitated by the CFRR, comprising regular joint learning, seminars, and
knowledge exchange events with relevant EU and global bodies.
Topics of discussion will include:


Accounting: •       Implementing accounting systems which take account the capacity and
                    needs of reporting companies, including possible implementation of a
                    standard derived from IFRS for SMEs and compatible with EU Law, and
                    the option for a micro-regime offered by the new accounting directive
                    (2013).
                •   Opportunities to better align financial reporting and tax reporting.
                •   Definition of PIEs that need to prepare IFRS financial statements, and
                    have them audited;
                •   Impact of the scope of PIEs on quality assurance and public oversight
                    systems




10|Page
           EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




Audit and        •    Strategies to implement quality assurance and public oversight systems,
Oversight:            introduction to systems that have successfully built capacity in Europe;
                 •    Discussion of possible public oversight and quality assurance regional
                      cooperation on the monitoring of audit quality and the review of audits of
                      PIEs in South Eastern Europe. Cooperation could be based on a joint
                      pool of inspectors with: (i) common education and professional
                      background, (ii) adequate training, and (iii) common tools



Activities will include:

Workshops
•   Financial Reporting Community of Practice: Launch; Key challenges in Implementing
    the EU Accounting Directive; May 2015, Vienna
•   Financial Reporting Community of Practice: Definition of PIEs and Public Oversight,
    September 2015, Tirana

Virtual Seminars

•    IFRS for SMEs
•    Auditing and SMPs

Publication

•    Preparation of a publication on: “Standardizing formats for better comparability”
     (expected to be published in 2016)


Planned activities - In-country engagement and Implementation support
Activities support accounting and auditing reform at the country level, helping with the
preparation of projects and financing small and targeted technical assistance. The technical
assistance will focus on both critical and urgent issues, which require limited resources and
cannot wait for a holistic country-level project. There will be regular dialogue with the country
authorities, typically focused on one or two priorities identified for a specific year. There will
also be ongoing monitoring and evaluation.

Albania, Montenegro and Serbia have companion country projects, so no particular activities
are planned under EU-REPARIS with the exception of a joint EBRD/CFRR workshop on
IFRS for SMEs in Belgrade (March 2015).

Envisaged country-level activities include:

•    BiH: Align legal framework with EU requirement; support the implementation of IFRS for
     SMEs; support Federation and RS with the initial development of a QAS.
•    Kosovo: Align legal framework with EU requirements; establishment of a QA system.
•    FYR Macedonia:        Align legal framework with EU requirement; simplification of
     accounting and reporting for micro entities; assist the development of the oversight
     body.




11|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




Additionally, it is expected that key CFRR staff will travel to each country at least once
annually for stakeholder discussions and to provide technical assistance with implementation
and guidance on the ground. Travel can be more significant based on priorities identified
each year.


Component 2 – Education and Capacity Development

Expected outcomes
This component supports the development of accounting education systems, and the
capacity of the accounting profession, fully aligned with the International Accountings
Education Standards and the educational requirements of the EU’s Audit Directives at the
university level, for professional qualification, and for continuous professional development.
A key area is to help professional accountancy organizations comply fully with IFAC
statements of membership obligations. Progress is measured by whether PAOs are able to
become IFAC members as well as through ROSC assessments and other qualitative
assessments by CFRR specialist, including a planned benchmarking study.

The component includes two main activity streams, the Education Community of Practice
(EduCoP), and the Training of Trainers (ToT) stream.


Planned activities - Education Community of Practice (EduCoP)
The focus will be on capacity building through peer learning, adopting a Community of
Practice (CoP) approach which includes regular joint learning, seminars, facilitated
knowledge exchange with relevant EU and global bodies, and the collaboration on the
identification of common solutions to shared challenges. The CFRR is facilitating a regional
university curricula benchmarking study, to be conducted in all REPARIS countries. The
study compares an international recognized curricula benchmark in accounting and auditing
education with university curricula in the selected country sample. This will assess how each
country compares to the benchmark and identify areas for improving accounting and auditing
education systems. The results of the benchmarking study will be made available in a
publication during February 2016. Two regional workshops will present the two parts of the
study and provide opportunities for in-depth discussions about the benchmarking tool and
strategies going forward. Universities in two of the participating countries will host the
workshops.

Workshops

•   EduCoP: Launch; regional benchmarking study on A&A curricula (I), June 2015, Ohrid
•   EduCoP: Regional benchmarking study on A&A curricula (II), November 2015, Pristina

Publication

•   Benchmarking Study (expected to be published in 2016)




12|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




Planned activities – Training of Trainers (ToT)
The Training of Trainers stream of activities provides training and tools to PAOs allowing
them to to train accountants, and organize trainings and continuous professional
development for their member practices.

Workshops

•   IFRS for SMEs and the complexity of the reporting environment, October 2015,
    Thessaloniki

Virtual Seminars

•   Practical tools and examples: TBD


Component 3 – Access to Finance and Financial Sector

Expected outcomes
This component (i) provides practical guidance and solutions to facilitate easier access to
finance, and (ii) builds capacity among financial sector regulators in the use of IFRS to
effectively monitor the financial sector, particularly the bank and insurance sectors. A country
pilot project will address the first part of the component’s objective, working with business
community partners to identify opportunities for enhancing the quality and the adequacy of
financial reporting information to banks, including assurance provided by the auditing
profession. Training activities and studies to help prudential supervisors use a broader array
of information in discharging their supervisory duties will contribute to better supervision and
address the second part of the component. The component will show how better targeted
financial reporting practices can facilitate better access to finance, and contribute to an
enhanced supervisory environment for a safer banking sector responding to the needs of the
business community. Progress is measured through (i) broad recognition of the pilot study
including follow-up activities by financial intermediaries, SMEs or Governments, and (ii)
qualitative assessments of prudential regulators’ capacity.
The component is structured along two activity streams, the Financial Reporting Exchange
Forum, and the Pilot Project on SME Reporting.


Planned activities - Financial Reporting Exchange Forum
The CFRR delivers annual training events and virtual seminars, in collaboration with the
International Accounting Standards Board, informing participants of the implications of
changes in IFRS relating to financial instruments, leases and more generally to fair-value
measurement. In addition, the CFRR continues to facilitate dialogue between regulators and
auditors, including conducting a survey on the relationship between auditors and banking
regulators and their cooperation in preparing supervisory reports in Europe, and using this
information to produce a report for the regulators outlining the findings.

Workshops

•   Relationship between supervisors and auditors, May 2015, Vienna



13|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




•   IFRS Executive Seminar: September 2015, Vienna

Publication

•   Relationship between supervisors and auditors, June 2015, Vienna

Virtual Seminars
•   Regulatory Update, May-December, 2015


Planned activities – Pilot Project on SME Financing
The activity is expected to support an ongoing dialogue with banks, chambers of commerce,
and business associations to develop a common understanding of the financial information
required for a loan application and the relevance of providing assurance on financial
statements. Workshops will discuss and benchmark financial information required from
SMEs in existing loan applications and the findings will be used to develop a sample set of
financial information which will then be tested by focus groups. As part of this project, the
CFRR will work with the business community and a bank of an individual country (not yet
identified) to investigate whether, and how, improved financial reporting is able to contribute
to better access to credit at better rates. The CFRR seeks to associate key players in
Western Europe with this work and seek their contributions to this agenda.

Publication

•   Stocktaking, Nov 2015
•   Extending credit to SMEs (expected to be published in March 2016)


Component 4: Regional Cooperation and Knowledge Sharing

Expected outcomes
This component’s main objective is to ensure sustained reform momentum, regional
collaboration and active knowledge transfer among participating stakeholders by regularly
engaging with Ministers of Finance, senior government officials, and other key stakeholders.
It is expected that beneficiary countries will continue to show a high degree of commitment
to reform and participation in program activities. Progress is measured by the degree of
participation in related events, the overall outlook of financial reporting reform evaluated
through CFRR qualitative assessments, progress reports and other, as well as the level of
collaboration i.e. the sharing translations of international standards and education materials.


Planned activities
Planned activities include Ministerial and senior level conferences to which Ministers of
Finance of beneficiary countries are invited, regular workshops with senior officials, and
facilitated knowledge exchange with major stakeholder groups such as market participants
and international regulators. Activities also include publications and knowledge management
work, particularly website work and newsletters. The program of activities for 2015 includes:




14|Page
         EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




Workshops and Meetings

•   Launch of EU-REPARIS - Senior Officials Workshop, May 2015, Vienna
•   Stakeholder group meeting, TBD

Publications

•   Update of the publication “Corporate Sector Accounting and Auditing in the Acquis
    Communautaire” (January 2015)
•   Croatia’s EU Accession: Case Studies on Reform and the Transposition of the
    Community Acquis (June 2015)
•   Audit Practices (expected to be published in 2016)
•   Update of the publication “Corporate Sector Accounting and Auditing in the Acquis
    Communautaire” (expected to be published in 2016)

Knowledge Management

•   Website: event, country and topic related content pages
•   Quarterly newsletter




15|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




5. Program Administration

Program Governance
EU-REPARIS is managed by the Vienna-based World Bank Centre for Financial Reporting
Reform (CFRR), with a core team of experts and a panel of short-term consultants under the
leadership of Henri Fortin. Each of the program’s components is led by a senior specialist.
This structure is designed to ensure that the program’s resources are used efficiently.

Senior Officials representing the Governments of the program participating countries,
typically Deputy Ministers of Finance, will meet at least annually to review progress of the
program and to endorse the work-plan.

A stakeholders’ group, bringing together market participants from the region, foreign
investors and other stakeholders provides insights to improve the design and implementation
of EU-REPARIS.

EU-REPARIS is funded by the European Commission, Directorate General for European
Neighborhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations with which the CFRR closely partners
throughout the implementation of this program. The CFRR drafts program plans and
progress reports for discussion with the EC.

EU-REPARIS is also an integral part of the Western Balkans Enterprise Development and
Innovation (WB EDIF) Facility, an EC led initiative to support the development and growth of
SMEs in the Western Balkans region. The CFRR will participate in WB EDIF meetings,
particularly the Platform Advisory Group to present planned activities and report on progress
made.


Team Members
EU-REPARIS is implemented by CFRR staff that includes among others the following
individuals:




Management


                  Soukeyna Kane          Practice Manager


                  Henri Fortin           Head, CFRR




16|Page
         EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




Country-relationship responsibilities


                                CFRR                  Country based


                Albania         Andrei Busuioc        Keler Gjika


                BiH             Pascal Frerejacque


                Kosovo          Kalina Sukarova


                Macedonia       Kalina Sukarova       Atanasko Atanasovski


                Montenegro      Kalina Sukarova       Danijela Vukajlovic-Grba


                Serbia          Jarrett Decker        Aleksandar Crnomarkovic




Activity responsibilities


    Overall program manager                                           Henri Fortin


    Component 1       Corporate Financial Reporting Reform            Pascal Frerejacque


    Component 2       Education and Capacity Development              Kalina Sukarova


    Component 3       Access to Finance and Financial Sector          Pascal Frerejacque


    Component 4       Regional Cooperation and Knowledge Sharing      Henri Fortin


    Program Management                                                Reinhard Haslinger


                                                                      Johanna Lincoln

                                                                      Lejla Begtasevic

    Technical and Knowledge Support                                   Elena Salcher

                                                                      Susan Schroeder

                                                                      Ecaterina Gusarova




17|Page
         EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015




Summary Table of Activities

 Component        No.      Type of Activity                                       Topic                                            Time            Location
                  (A) Financial Reporting Community of Practice
    1:             1    2-day-Workshop         FRCoP: Launch; Key challenges in Implementating the EU Directive             May 2015             Vienna
 Corporate         2    2-day-Workshop         FRCoP: Definition of PIEs and Public Oversight                               September 2015       Tirana
 Financial         3    Virtual seminar series IFRS for SMEs                                                                July - Dec 2015
 Reporting         4    Virtual seminar series Auditing and SMPs                                                            January - Dec 2015
  Reform           5    Publication            Standardizing formats for better comparability                               (expected for May
                                                                                                                            2016)
                  (B) In-country and Implementation Support
  All countries    1    Mission visits           On-the-ground technical assistance (2-3 visits per year/ per country)      TBD
       Albania     2                             No further activities due to Albania companion country project                                  Tirana
           BiH     3    1-day-Workshop (3)       Legal framework: IFRS for SMEs; improvement of legal framework             TBD                  Sarajevo
                                                 QA&POS: Support Federation with QA and POS operational start;
                                                 support RS ensuring independence btw. Profession and academia
     Kosovo        4    1-day-Workshop (3)       Legal framework: reform of law; QA&POS: establishment of QA                TBD                  Pristina
   Macedonia       5    1-day-Workshop (3)       A) Legal framework: (i) close gaps in acquis alignment; (ii)               TBD                  Skopje
                                                 simplification of acc. standards for micro ent; (iii) implement. support
                                                 for law; B) QA&POS: capacity development for oversight body
  Montenegro       6                             No further activities due to companion IDF project                                              Podgorica
      Serbia       7    1.5-day-Workshop (1)     IFRS for SMEs (No further activities due to companion country              February 2015        Belgrade
                                                 project)
                  (A) Education Community of Practice
                   1    2-day-Workshop           EduCoP: Launch; regional benchmarking study on A&A curricula (I)           June 2015            Ohrid
                   2    2-day-Workshop           EduCoP: Regional benchmarking study on A&A curricula (II)                  Nov 2015             Pristina
     2:
                   3    Publication              Benchmarking study                                                         (expected for Feb
 Education
                                                                                                                            2016)
and Capacity
Development       (B) Training of Trainers
                   1    2-day-Workshop           IFRS for SMEs and the complexity of the reporting environment              Oct 2015             Thessaloniki
                   2    Virtual seminar series   Practical tools and examples: TBD                                          TBD




18|Page
          EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015



 Component       No.      Type of Activity                                       Topic                          Time            Location
                 (A) Financial Reporting Exchange Forum
                  1    2-day-Workshop           Relationship between supervisors and auditors            May 2015              Vienna
                  2    2-day Workshop           IFRS Executive Seminar for Supervisors                   September 2015        Vienna
      3:          3    Publication              Relationship between supervisors and auditors            June 2015
  Access to       4    Virtual seminar series   Regulatory Update                                        May - December
 Finance and                                                                                             2015
  Financial
    Sector       (B) Pilot Project on SME Reporting
                  1    Study                    Stocktaking                                              Nov 2015
                  2    Publication              Extending credit to SMEs                                 (expected for
                                                                                                         March 2016)
                  1    1-day WS                 Launch of EU-REPARIS - Senior Officials Workshop         May 2015              Vienna
                  2    Meeting                  Stakeholder group meeting                                TBD                   Vienna
      4:          3    Publication              Update of the Acquis Guide                               January 2015
  Regional        4    Publication              Croatia’s EU Accession: Case Studies on Reform and the   June 2015
 Cooperation                                    Transposition of the Community Acquis
     and          5    Publication              Update of the Acquis Guide                               (expected for April
 Knowledge                                                                                               2016)
   Sharing        6    Publication              Audit Practices                                          (expected for May
                                                                                                         2016)
                  7    KM/ Website              Event, country and topic pages
                  8    KM/ Newsletter           Quarterly




Budget
This information is available, on request, from a member of the CFRR team.




19|Page
         EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015



Annex: Results Framework

    Program Development                                                                                                  Institutional Constraints and
                                            Outcome Indicators                        Means of Verification
          Objective                                                                                                               Assumptions
The objective of EU-REPARIS is •      Progress in aligning existing            • Transposition tables               • Continuing support of the
to support the implementation of      frameworks with the acquis               • EC Country Progress Reports          beneficiary countries to corporate
corporate financial reporting    •    Enhanced capacity of the profession      • Surveys                              financial reporting reforms
frameworks in line with the EU        for applying international and EU        • Reports and statistic published by • Commitment to collaboration and
acquis communautaire in the           standards of corporate financial           the International Federation of      regional harmonization by the
countries of Southeast Europe         reporting                                  Accountants (IFAC) Official          beneficiaries
with a view to promoting         •    Presence of a functional audit quality     Gazettes                           • Support for reforms and capacity
enhanced availability,                assurance system                         • A&A ROSC reports                     development efforts by the
transparency and reliability of                                                • Regulatory and oversight agencies’   beneficiary countries’ business
financial information.                                                           annual reports                       communities

                                                                                                                         Institutional Constraints and
   Intermediate Outcomes                    Outcome Indicators                        Means of Verification
                                                                                                                                  Assumptions
Statutory frameworks for          •   Progress in implementing standards       •   Official Gazettes, government     •   Efforts to sustain reform
corporate financial reporting         compliant with the EU Accounting             websites and other official           momentum can help
more effective and aligned with       Directive, including financial               communications                        overcome resistance by
the acquis.                           reporting standards and process for      •   EC Country Progress Reports           vested interest to
                                      audit quality assurance                  •   Transposition tables                  modernizing the statutory
                                  •   Published strategies to improve          •   A&A ROSC reports
                                      corporate financial reporting
                                                                                                                         framework and mobilize
                                                                               •   Government and PAO websites
                                      frameworks and practices                                                           support of national
                                                                               •   Published financial statements
                                  •   International Financial Reporting and                                              parliaments.
                                                                               •   Independent auditor reports
                                      Auditing Standards (IFRS and ISA)        •   Regulators’ enforcement reports
                                      available in local languages             •   Financial Sector Stability
                                                                                   Assessment (FSSA) reports
                                                                               •   Perception surveys




20|Page
            EU-REPARIS Program Plan 2015



                                                                                                                               Institutional Constraints and
      Intermediate Outcomes                      Outcome Indicators                       Means of Verification
                                                                                                                                        Assumptions
Improved accounting education         •    Professional bodies comply with        •   IFAC website and publications       • Tertiary and professional
systems and capacity of the                IFAC statements of membership          •   Analytical reports and published      education institutions in EU
accounting profession.                     obligations                                research on accounting education      countries willing to cooperate
                                      •    Accounting education systems               systems                               with peers in beneficiary
                                           comply with International IES          •   A&A ROSC reports                      countries
                                      •    Academic qualification of local                                                • Accounting organizations and
                                           universities are recognized by EU-                                               regulatory agencies cooperate
                                           based universities and professional                                              to develop audit quality
                                           accountancy bodies                                                               assurance systems


Enhanced reporting practices in the   •    Capacity of financial supervisors to   •   Participation in technical workshops •    Continued commitment of
financial sector and improved              monitor quality of financial               an training courses                       financial supervisory
understanding of how IFRS and              statements                             •   Central bank and banking                  authorities to building their
financial reporting can facilitate    •    Application of reconciliation              supervisory body reports                  capacity for monitoring and
                                           approach using prudential filters      •   Surveys of SMEs and banks                 enforcing IFRS
access to finance.
                                      •    Financial institutions using
                                           accounting information for credit
                                           decisions and risk monitoring
Sustained reform momentum,            •    Continued commitment to peer           • Government, professional              Beneficiary countries commit to
regional collaboration and active          exchange                                 accounting organizations, CFRR and    achieving single economic space
knowledge transfer.                   •    Translations of international            IFAC websites                         through collaboration and
                                           standards and education materials      • REPARIS Progress Reports              harmonization of their corporate
                                           shared by relevant countries           • Website and newsletter traffic        financial reporting systems
                                      •    Participation of Ministers and other     monitoring tools
                                           senior officials in program events     • Surveys
                                                                                  • Self-assessment
                                                                                  • Degree of participation in meetings
                                                                                    and seminars




 21|Page
