                      Document of
                     The World Bank


               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY




INDIA: GRID-CONNECTED ROOFTOP SOLAR PROGRAM

        FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT


                          FINAL




                        May, 2016




           Energy and Extractives Global Practice
          South Asia Sustainable Development Unit
                      The World Bank
                                 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ACB      Audit Committee of the Board                   INT     Integrity Vice Presidency
ACG      Anti-Corruption Guidelines                     IT      Information Technology
ALCO     Asset Liability Management Committee           IUFR    Interim Un-Audited Financial Report
AMC      Annual Maintenance Contract                    IVA     Independent Verification Agent
AML      Anti-Money Laundering                          JNNSM   Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission
CAS      Country Audit System                           kWh     Kilowatt-hours
CA       Chartered Accountant                           kWp     Kilowatt peak
CAG      Corporate Accounts Group                       KYC     Know Your Customer
CAGR     Compound Annual Growth Rate                    LIE     Lender’s Independent Engineer
CAPEX    Capital expenditure                            LIFO    Last-in-first-out
CEA      Central Electricity Authority                  MCG     Mid Corporate Group
CGM      Chief General Manager                          MIS     Monthly Information Summary
CMS      Compliant Management System                    MRMC    Market Risk Management Committee
CPS      Country Partnership Strategy                   MNRE    Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
CPPD     Credit Policy and Procedure Dept.              MW      Megawatts
CRMC     Credit Risk Management Committee               NBFC    Non-Bank Financial Company
CTF      Clean Technology Fund                          NBG     National Banking Group
CVC      Central Vigilance Commission                   NPA     Non-performing Asset
DC       Direct Current                                 OM      Operations Manual
DG       Diesel Generator                               O&M     Operations and Maintenance
DGM      Deputy General Manager                         OP      Operations Policy
DLI      Disbursement-Linked Indicator                  OPEX    Operating Expenditure
DLR      Disbursement-Linked Results                    OPRC    Operations Procurement Review Committee
Discom   Electricity distribution company               ORMC    Operational Risk Management Committee
ECCB     Executive Committee of Central Board           PAD     Program Appraisal Document
EGRMC    Enterprise and Group Risk Management           PCB     Pollution Control Board
         Committee
ERC      European Research Council                      PDO     Program Development Objective
ESR      Early Sanction Review                          PforR   Program-for-Results
ESSA     Environmental and Social Systems Assessment    PFSBU   Project Finance Strategic Business Unit
EWCS     Early Warning Control System                   PIU     Program Implementation Unit
FM       Financial Management                           POM     Program Operations Manual
FMR      Financial Management Report                    PPA     Power Purchase Agreement
FY       Financial Year                                 RBI     Reserve Bank of India
GAAP     Generally Accepted Accounting Principles       RESCO   Renewable Energy Service Company
GEF      Global Environment Facility                    RFIA    Risk Focused Internal Audit
GoI      Government of India                            RM      Risk Management
GRM      Gross Rent Multiplier                          RMCB    Risk Management Committee of the Board
GRSSPP   Grid-connected Rooftop and Small Solar Power   SBI     State Bank of India
         Plant
GRPV     Grid-connected Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic      SEBI    Securities and Exchange Board of India
GW       Gigawatts                                      S&I     Supply & Installation
IBG      International Banking Group                    SMS     Short Messaging Service
IBRD     International Bank for Reconstruction and      SNA     State Nodal Agency
         Development
ICHA     International Corruption Hunter’s Alliance     TOR     Terms of Reference
ICAI     Institute of Chartered Accountants of India    USD     United States Dollar
I&MAD    Inspection & Management Audit Department       WB      World Bank
INR      Indian Rupee
                                        India: Grid-Connected Rooftop Solar Program


                                                                           Contents




I.     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................................................................................. 1

II.    B ACKGROUND AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS ................................................................................. 2

III. P ROGRAM LOAN C OMPONENTS .................................................................................................................... 3

IV. P ROGRAM FM AND P ROCUREMENT ARRANGEMENT ASSESSMENTS .......................................................... 6

V.     FIDUCIARY RISK ASSESSMENT ......................................................................................................... 13

VI. IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT ........................................................................................................................ 17

VII. GOVERNANCE .............................................................................................................................................. 17

VIII. SBI B OARD OVERSIGHT .............................................................................................................................. 19

IX. ETHICS AND CODE OF Conduct .................................................................................................................. 20

X.     R ISK M ANAGEMENT MECHANISMS ............................................................................................................ 22

XI. W HISTLEBLOWER MECHANISM AND THE CVC .......................................................................................... 23

XII. CUSTOMER SERVICE AS A P REVENTION AND COMPLAINTS MANAGEMENT MECHANISM ........................ 23

XIII. ACTIONS AGREED TO OPERATIONALIZE THE ANTI-C ORRUPTION GUIDELINES (ACG S) ........................ 24
                            India: Grid-Connected Rooftop Solar Program



I.          EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
     1.      As part of the fiduciary systems assessment under PforR operations, the World Bank’s
     fiduciary staff (Financial Management, Procurement and Integrity) reviewed the Program’s
     fiduciary implementation arrangements to assess the capacity of State Bank of India (SBI). SBI
     is the Borrower and Implementing Agency for the World Bank-assisted Grid-connected Rooftop
     Solar Program (The Program), which in turn is an important segment of the government’s Grid-
     connected Rooftop and Small Solar Power Plant (GRSSPP) Program. The assessment was
     undertaken to (i) assess the capacity of SBI to record, control, and manage all Program resources,
     and to produce timely, understandable, relevant, and reliable financial information for
     stakeholders; and (ii) determine the degree to which the planning, bidding, evaluation, contract
     award, and contract administration arrangements and practices provide a reasonable assurance
     that the Program will achieve its intended results.

     2.      In particular, the financial management assessment focused on critical elements of the
     Program such as planning and budgeting, accounting and financial reporting, treasury
     management and funds flow, internal controls including internal audit, Program external audit,
     and transparency. The assessment provides a reasonable assurance that the fiduciary
     arrangements at SBI for the Program are adequate for (i) ensuring the appropriate use of Program
     funds, (ii) safeguarding assets, and (iii) mitigating and handling risks of fraud and corruption.
     . The coverage of the fiduciary systems assessment is as per the nature and scope of the Bank
     funded Program.

     3.      The development objective of the Program is to increase installed capacity of Grid-
     connected Rooftop Solar PV (GRPV) and strengthen the capacity of relevant institutions for
     GRPV. The Program will focus on results related to strengthening institutional capacity for
     GRPV, market development and expanding generation of GRPV. The total amount of Program
     financing would be $915 million, comprising of International Bank for Reconstruction and
     Development (IBRD) and Clean Technology Fund (CTF) loan, a CTF grant, a Global
     Environment Facility (GEF) Grant which is expected to be separately approved by the World
     Bank Board as a part of this financing package for the Rooftop Program, and private and public
     sector financing.

     4.      The fiduciary assessment carried out by the Bank provides a reasonable assurance that
     the Implementing Agency’s relevant planning, budgeting, accounting, internal controls, funds
     flow, financial reporting, and auditing arrangements are adequate and that SBI would ensure the
     appropriate use of Program funds and safeguarding of its assets. The assessment also provides
     assurance that systems are in place and are adequate to handle the risks of fraud and corruption,
     including a complaint mechanism, and provides additional assurance on how such risks are
     managed and/or mitigated.




                                                     1
      5.       Since the GRPV Program is SBI’s first World Bank-funded Program, SBI is not familiar
      with the World Bank’s requirements for a PforR loan. SBI is also not familiar with the GRPV
      sector. Furthermore, the Program will be implemented in multiple locations across the country,
      through many SBI branches and departments. These factors present challenges and risks to the
      Program. The following measures have been incorporated in the Program design to mitigate
      these risks: (i) a central location for monitoring and control (the Credit Policy and Procedure
      Department - CPPD); (ii) a Program Operations Manual (POM) to ensure a common
      understanding of the Program boundaries, processes, and requirements; and (iii) development of
      a Program-specific code(s) in SBI’s IT system to keep track of all Program-related transactions
      and to facilitate financial reporting on the Program. These design features, along with SBI’s
      institutional strengths—availability of skilled staff and good governance and risk management—
      considerably mitigate Program risks. Hence the fiduciary risk is perceived as “Moderate?. The
      fiduciary risk rating will be reviewed during Program implementation and adjusted as necessary


II.          BACKGROUND AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

      6.      SBI, the Implementing Agency for the GRPV Program, is India’s oldest and largest
      financial services company. It has more than 16,000 branches in the country, 194 foreign offices
      in 36 countries, and an active customer base of 270 million. While the bank is majority-owned
      by the GoI, SBI shares are traded on the Bombay Stock Exchange and National Stock Exchange
      of India. Its Global Depository Receipts are listed on the London Stock Exchange.

      7.      In 2015, SBI was ranked 260 on Fortune’s 500, up from 303 in previous year. SBI has
      won the 2015 “Brand of the Year? Award given by World Branding Forum. SBI’s audit reports
      are clean; its corporate governance practices which are mandated under law are in compliance.
      SBI’s financial management (FM) systems, procedures and controls are well established. It has
      strong risk management and internal control including internal audit systems.

      The responsibility for implementing the Program across the country would rest with several
      administrative and operational units of SBI. CPPD would be responsible for the overall
      coordination and monitoring of the activities carried out by the various units as well as
      interactions with the World Bank. The Program-specific fiduciary arrangements are being
      documented in the POM, which must be acceptable to the Bank before disbursements will be
      made. The broad activities of CPPD shall include: (i) Policy formulation; (ii) Drafting and
      finalization of POM and its subsequent amendments, if any; (iii) Coordinating within the
      organization for building system capability and required training for the staff, for successful
      implementation of Program; (iv) Coordination within the organization for setting up separate
      product code(s) and sub-accounts; (v) Monitoring and Evaluation of the Program based on the
      agreed verification protocol; (vi) Coordination for creation of standardized document e.g.
      standardized appraisal format, standardized term sheets, loan agreement, standardized Power
      Purchase Agreement (PPA) etc.; (vii) Data collection and reporting to the World Bank in the
      agreed format; (viii) Coordination and review of Program with the WB.

      8.    The International Banking Group (IBG) at SBI would be specifically tasked with
      submission of periodic drawdown requests to the World Bank, servicing the World Bank Loan


                                                     2
       etc. The Program would be implemented through SBI’s vast branch network including Corporate
       Accounts Group (CAG), Mid Corporate Group (MCG) and National Banking Group (NBG)
       branches for rapid up-scaling of the Program in an inclusive mode.

       9.     Project Finance Strategic Business Unit (PFSBU), CAG, MCG and NBG – These entities
       within SBI have the responsibility for following activities -
               Appraisals and sanction (i.e. approval) of lending facilities for GRPV projects.
               Disbursement of funds to borrower.
               Monitoring of the projects.
               Submission of data required by CPPD for monitoring of Program.

       10.     The Program funding by World Bank would be based on the assessment and performance
       of the institutional structure, systems, procedures and controls as specified in the POM which
       also contains specific additional reporting requirements to comply with the World Bank’s
       lending terms.


III.          PROGRAM LOAN COMPONENTS

       11.      The proposed Program will support the implementation of Ministry of New & Renewable
       Energy’s (MNRE) GRSSPP program, with a focus on mobilizing private sector equity
       investments and commercial lending, increasing deployment and uptake of GRPV through a
       variety of business models, and thereby contributing to the achievement of GoI’s GRPV
       installation targets. The duration of the Program will be five and a half years, with a start date of
       May, 2016 and end date of November 2021. The PforR Program will finance activities in three
       results areas on a countrywide eligibility basis, as outlined in SBI’s POM - (i) strengthening
       institutional capacity for GRPV; (ii) market development of GRPV; (iii) expanding GRPV
       generation.

       Activities under Results Area 1: Strengthening Institutional Capacity for GRPV. This
       includes:

          Strengthening the Institutional Capacity of SBI, through: (i) establishing a PIU for the
           Program and mobilizing staff in other SBI departments and/or branches in support of its
           GRPVs business line; (ii) setting up SBI internal policies and procedures for loan origination,
           risk assessment and loan approval, (iii) providing training to SBI staff on GRPVs financing,
           (iv) providing incentives to SBI staff to undertake the promotion of GRPVs financing, (v)
           strengthening SBI’s IT systems to track GRPVs transactions, (vi) carrying out public
           awareness and advertising campaigns promoting GRPVs financing products, (vii)
           internalizing lessons learned during Program implementation and launching a second round
           of GRPVs financing, and (viii) setting up a loss-offsetting fund.
          Strengthening the Institutional Capacity of DISCOMs, SNAs and ERCs to contribute to an
           improved investment climate for GRPV (and improved Ease of Doing Rooftop Business), by
           coordinating the administration of a technical assistance program with the help of a program
           management consultant under the guidance of Ministry of New & Renewable Energy’s


                                                        3
   (MNRE) and the Steering Committee, which will be: (i) providing capacity building and
   technical assistance support to selected DISCOMs, regulators and other institutions in respect
   to solar rooftop power generation, trading and metering; (ii) facilitating the SNAs’
   communication and stakeholder awareness campaigns on GRPVs systems and the available
   financing therefor; and (iii) establishing training and accreditation programs for qualified
   rooftop PV technical inspectors, technicians, trainers, designers and other professionals.

Activities under Results Area 2: Market Development of GRPV. The Program will focus on:
(i) developing and implementing market aggregation models for the financing of GRPV
installers and rooftop owners, (ii) undertaking marketing and business development for deal
origination, (iii) providing financing to SBI clients, eligible as per the POM, for the purchase,
including inventory creation, and installation of, GRPVs, and (iv) piloting targeted lending to
non-banking financial companies and small and medium enterprises.

Activities under Results Area 3: Expanding GRPV generation. Under this Results Area, the
focus will be on installing GRPV systems for aggregate generation capacity of at least 400MW
including optional batteries for power storage in accordance with the technical standards issued
by MNRE and/or Central Electricity Authority (CEA), as applicable. For Capital Expenditure
(CAPEX) and Renewable Energy Services Company (RESCO) models funded through the sub-
project mode, GRPV power generation plants with a minimum capacity of 5 kWp per project or
system will be eligible under the Program. For the RESCO model funded through the program
mode, the aggregate capacity presented in a sub-loan application will have to be at least 1MW.
SBI will appoint a Lender’s Independent Engineer for sub-projects receiving loans equal to or
greater than US$7.4 million and for sub-projects with overall investment costs equal to or greater
than US$14.8 million. For sub-projects below these thresholds, SBI will depute its staff to ensure
that all installations comply with Program requirements and standards. In addition, the sub-
borrowers of SBI will need to insure all installations to cover appropriate risks, including force
majeure events both during and after the construction period, for as long as the loan is
outstanding.

12.     The expenditure for the PforR Program will be at least US$915 million, to be financed by
IBRD financing of US$500 million, CTF financing of US$125 million (US$120 million of loan
on concessional terms, and US$5 million as grant), an expected GEF grant of US$23 million,
private and public sector financing of US$265 million (which represents a 30 percent equity
contribution against US$625 million of debt), and SBI financing of US$2 million. Table 1
summarizes the first phase of Program financing, which will be supported by the World Bank.
SBI will continue with a second phase of the Program with an expected contribution of
approximately US$400 million of its own resources and / or through syndication with other
banks, subject to success of phase one of the Program and availability of creditworthy pipeline.




                                                4
                             Table 1: Phase 1 Program Financing

                        Source                     Amount                % of total
                                                 (US$ million)
             IBRD                                     500                       54.6
             CTF (loan & grant)                       125                       13.7
             GEF (grant—pending GEF                    23                        2.5
             Council approval)
             Private & public sector                   265                      29.0
             financing
             SBI                                         2                       0.2
             Total Program financing                   915                     100.0

13.     Six Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs), consistent with the PforR framework and
based on the Program’s Results Framework and results chain, have been developed in
consultation with SBI. The World Bank will disburse against the achievement of these DLIs.
They have been identified over five disbursement periods, corresponding to the launch and the
five and a half years of the Program implementation period. In turn, equivalent amount of funds
would be utilized by SBI for onward lending in local currency for financing the Program and
meeting Program related operating and administrative expenses.

14.     The Program-specific fiduciary arrangements are documented in the POM and must be
acceptable to the Bank before disbursements will be made. The POM, which is the intellectual
property of SBI, shall include:
 definition of the contours of the Program, including Program activities, results framework,
    overall budget and list of Program Expenditures;
 Program implementation arrangements, including the setup of a dedicated PIU, identification
    of key relevant staff, and the allocation of functions and responsibilities within SBI’s cadres;
 technical specification of GRPV equipment eligible for financing, the various financing
    modalities therefor, and loan pricing;
 pro-forma Sub-loan Agreement, setting forth the terms and conditions for GRPV financing,
    including the technical standards, and applicable procurement thresholds, the Bank’s Anti-
    Corruption Guidelines, and environmental, social and safety requirements consistent with the
    Program Fiduciary and Environmental and Social Systems and the ESSA;
 screening protocols and procedures for the assessment of clients and the evaluation of their
    GRPV financing application, including social compliance social, safety and environmental
    standards set forth in the ESSA;
 terms of reference for the Lender’s Engineer;
 DLIs/DLRs verification protocols and arrangements, and the terms of reference for the
    independent verification agents;
 procedure for the preparation of annual work plans and budgets;
 format of the Program’s Interim Unaudited Financial Reports (IUFRs);
 terms of reference for the external auditor preparing the Program’s Financial Statements;
 protocols and procedures for the grievance redress mechanism; and


                                                 5
         Program monitoring and evaluation, and reporting requirements.

      15.    The WB (IBRD, CTF and GEF) funds will be disbursed directly into the accounts of SBI
      upon achievement of the disbursement linked indicators (or as advance against DLIs) and will be
      pooled to become the Program funds. The Program funds will be on-lent to borrowers based on
      SBI’s commercial practices and the Program-specific criteria stated in the POM. From the
      World Bank funding perspective, the program expenditure is defined in the POM and Project
      Appraisal Document (PAD) and largely comprises of funds on-lent by SBI as per POM.


IV.          PROGRAM FM AND PROCUREMENT ARRANGEMENT ASSESSMENTS
            A.       Program FM arrangements assessment

      16.     The financial management systems assessment carried out by the Bank provides a
      reasonable assurance that the Implementing Agency’s relevant planning, budgeting, accounting,
      internal controls, funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing arrangements are adequate and
      would ensure the appropriate use of Program funds and safeguarding of its assets. The details of
      financial management assessment on the critical elements is given below:

             i)   Planning and Budgeting

      17.     Preparation of a proper plan and budget plays an important role in timely implementation
      of a program. CPPD would prepare an overall Program Plan for the duration of the Program with
      annual forecasts and estimates. The Plan would help in ensuring that adequate resources –
      manpower, infrastructure and financial etc. are available on a timely basis for the success of the
      Program. The Plan would cover both sub-loan targets and the corresponding administrative
      expenses for Program implementation backed up by appropriate explanation and justification.
      The Plan would form the basis for annual Program Budgets. To summarize for effective
      program implementation, CPPD will prepare the following:

             a) An overall plan for the duration of the program;
             b) An annual plan and budget with quarterly break-ups; and
             c) Quarterly statements providing variance between planned and actual disbursement
                and expenditure.

      18.    In addition to preparing the above statements, CPPD will be responsible for monitoring
      compliance with these, and sharing these with the Bank.

             ii) Accounting, Reporting, Treasury and Cash Flow

      19.    Advances/DLI Based loan funds will be disbursed by the World Bank in an offshore
      branch of SBI. Grant Funds (both CTF and GEF) will be disbursed in an onshore branch of SBI.
      Any refunds will also come from these accounts. As soon as the loan funds are disbursed by the
      WB, SBI will create specific Contra Proforma Accounts in the Books of Account (Ledger
      Account/s) viz. “WB Fund amount to be disbursed account? and “WB Fund amount to be



                                                      6
disbursed contra account? and an equivalent amount of local currency will be reflected as credit
in that account. Equivalent local currency will be calculated based on the USD/ INR exchange
rate published on RBI website on the date of disbursement. Grant funds will be converted to the
local currency by SBI’s treasury team and will be credited in separate accounts. SBI will on-
lend the money to the borrowers and will also release payments against program expenditure.


                               Program Funds: WB, SBI, Other




                           GRPV Program Funds
                                                                                     Program
                                                                                  Internal Audit
   Program                                                                          and other
 External Audit               Loans as per           Administrative                 oversight
                              POM Criteria           Expenditure and              arrangements
                              (1 MW, etc)             NPA Write off



                          CAPEX,             RESCO            Other
                           NBFC              THIRD            agreed
                          MODELs             PARTY            models
                                             MODEL




20.     Various modules of SBI’s IT systems would provide the required operational and
financial data pertaining to the Program through separate product code(s).

21.    The SBI’s financial statements are prepared under the historical cost convention, on the
accrual basis of accounting on going concern basis, unless otherwise stated, and conform in all
material aspects to Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) in India, which comprise
applicable statutory provisions, regulatory norms/guidelines prescribed by the Reserve Bank of
India (RBI), Banking Regulation Act 1949, Accounting Standards issued by the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), and the practices prevalent in the banking industry in
India.

22.     Income and expenditure are accounted on an accrual basis, except where otherwise
stated. Interest income is recognized in the Profit and Loss Account as it accrues except: (i)
income from Non-Performing Assets (NPAs), comprising of advances, leases and investments,
which is recognized upon realization, as per the prudential norms prescribed by the
RBI/respective country regulators in the case of foreign offices (hereafter collectively referred to
as Regulatory Authorities). Loans and Advances are classified as performing and non-



                                                 7
performing, based on the guidelines issued by the RBI. Non-Performing Assets are classified
into Sub-Standard, Doubtful and Loss Assets.

23.     The accounting systems will provide information for comparison against Program
budgets; half yearly sources and application of funds; and annual Program Financial Statements.
Program costs would include funds on-lent for the purposes of Program and expenditures
chargeable to the Program. SBI’s accounting procedures and controls would ensure that
expenditures under the Program are incurred for the purposes of the Program, duly checked and
verified as per standard operating procedures and authorized in accordance with the official
delegation of powers. Program related documents and records would be kept in safe custody for
the duration of the Program and thereafter as per SBI’s policy and would be accessible to the
World Bank during supervision visits.

24.    Interim Unaudited Financial Reports (IUFR): During the tenure of the program,
CPPD would prepare and submit half yearly / semester interim unaudited financial report (IUFR)
within 60 days from the end of semester to the World Bank. The format of the report as agreed
with the World Bank is provided in the draft POM. The information would be provided for the
semester, year to date, program to date and would be compared with budgets and variances
analyzed. The above report shall be provided by SBI to the WB, twice in a year on November
30th and May 31st for April to September and October to March respectively (6 month period).
This report will be unaudited.

25.    Program Annual Financial Statements: The Program annual financial statements will
include (a) IUFR for the second semester; and (b) any other statement agreed with the WB.

       iii) Internal Control and Internal Audit

26.     SBI has internal control systems with well-defined responsibilities at each level. SBI’s
existing policies and procedures along with Program specific arrangements as provided in the
POM shall be the basis for internal controls under the Program. Provided below are the key steps
for approval and disbursements for the sub-loans to be provided and the expenditure to be
incurred under the Program.

       (a)    Approval and Disbursement for the sub- loans:

       i. Receipt of loan application by the official of Branch/Processing Cell.
       ii. Pre-sanction credit process will be done by the official of Branch/Processing Cell.
       iii. Preliminary assessment followed by detailed assessment will be carried out by the
            designated official of the Branch/ Processing Cell.
       iv. Proposal will be submitted by the Branch/ Processing Cell to the Credit Committee
            for sanction of credit facilities as per the Bank’s Scheme for Delegation of Financial
            Powers.
       v. Disbursement will be made by the Branch/ Processing Cell after receiving the
            sanction/ approval and subject to compliance of pre-disbursement stipulations/
            observations and execution of appropriate documents.



                                                8
       vi. A Report of sanction accorded by the appropriate authority is submitted to the next
            higher Committee for control by the Branch/ Processing Cell.
       vii. Post-disbursement follow up and supervision is carried out by the designated official
            of Branch/Processing Cell as per the SBI’s laid down instructions.
       viii. Compliance of the stipulations/ observations made by the sanctioning authority/next
            higher authority who have controlled the sanction is to be done by the branch/
            Processing Cell.

       (b)     Expenditure under the program:

       i. Expenditure to be debited for the program will be authorized by DGM, CPPD under
           the control of CGM, CPPD.
       ii. DGM, CPPD will ensure that only expenditures allowed under the program are
           debited.

27.     SBI conducts internal audit through its Inspection & Management Audit Department
(I&MAD). Audit Committee of the Board (ACB) exercises supervision and control over the
functioning of I&MAD. I&MAD has zonal inspection offices located throughout the country.
Inspection officials periodically monitor adherence to controls and procedures and report
deviations to facilitate corrective action. Besides I&MA officials, each Circle is assigned an
internal audit team and concurrent auditors are assigned to all large branches.

28.    SBI carries out mainly two streams of audits: Risk Focused Internal Audit (RFIA) and
Management Audit, covering different facets of Internal Audit requirement. SBI’s accounting
units are subjected to RFIA. SBI’s Management Audit covers administrative offices and
examines policies and procedures, besides quality of execution..


29.     In addition, the I&MAD department conducts credit audits, concurrent audits,
information systems audits, home office audits (audits of foreign offices) and expenditure audit.
Expenditure audits involve scrutiny of accounts and correctness of expenditures incurred and are
conducted at such operating units as corporate center, local head offices, zonal offices, regional
business offices, lead bank offices. To ensure that irregularities identified in audits of branches
are rectified, audits of compliance at select branches are also undertaken.

30.     Credit Audit: The goal of the Credit Audit System (“CAS?) is to continually improve the
quality of the SBI’s commercial credit portfolio through critically examining large commercial
loans on an individual basis. Aligned with RFIA, CAS assesses compliance with the SBI’s
policies for credit appraisal, sanction of loans and credit administration. CAS also provides
feedback to the business units by way of warning signals about the quality of their advance
portfolios and suggests remedial measures. Credit audits are carried out through an offsite review
called a loan review mechanism, of all individual advances above a threshold limit within six
months of a sanction, enhancement or renewal. Onsite post sanction audits occur once in 12
months.

31.     Information System Audit: Information systems audits of SBI’s centralized IT
establishments are conducted in a manner similar to RFIA, but by a separate team of qualified


                                                9
officials. Branches are subject to the information systems audits, which assess IT-related risks, as
part of the RFIA of the branches.

32.     Concurrent Audit System: A concurrent audit system is a continuous control process,
integral to the establishment of sound internal accounting functions, effective controls and
overseeing of operations on a continuous basis. Concurrent Audit System is reviewed on an on-
going basis in accordance with RBI directives. The Inspection and Audit Department prescribes
the processes, guidelines and formats for the conduct of concurrent audits.

33.    The Program would be covered by SBI’s existing internal audit systems as described
above. Scope of internal audit of the Program will be as per internal Policy Document on internal
audit. Sections of the internal audit reports, (from above referenced audits) relevant to the
Program would be made available to the Program external auditor, and to the World Bank
representatives, as requested.

       iv) External Audit

34.    External Audits of the Program need to be carried out by auditors with independence,
experience, and capacity and Terms of Reference (TOR) acceptable to the World Bank. The
annual external audit of the project will be carried out by a firm of chartered accountants
appointed as per criteria and TOR agreed with the World Bank and as provided in the POM. This
auditor may cover the program procurement post review in line with the POM during the
program life cycle. Findings of the auditor shall be followed up by SBI to improve its work. The
Annual Audit Report of the Program would be shared with the Bank within 9 months from the
end of the year. The annual audit report of the Program would be accompanied by (i) audited
program financial statements with management assertion; (ii) an audit report expressing an
opinion on (a) the program financial statements; and (b) the accuracy of the IUFRs submitted
under the program; and (iii) management letter highlighting significant issues to be reported to
the management. The annual audited Program financial statements and the audit report would be
uploaded on website of the World Bank.

       v)   Transparency

35.     SBI’s official corporate website provides information regarding its management,
operations, governance etc. including audited financial statements as well as quarterly unaudited
financial statements.

       vi) Program expenditure

36.     The Program expenditures will include (i) disbursement of loans according to the criteria
set out in the POM; (ii) Program establishment and operating costs including PIU costs; (iii)
Program advertisement costs, including outreach to aggregators inside and outside India; (iv)
SBI capital market fees for advisory services provided to the Program, including out of pocket
expenses up to a level consistent with market norms; (v) training and capacity building of all key
stakeholders; (vi) engagement of key staff required to operate the Program, various
consultancies, dissemination materials, and operating costs; (vii) capitalization of a loss-


                                                10
offsetting fund (also referred to interchangeably as “guarantee facility for non-performing
loans?); (viii) audit fee, legal fee and independent verification agent (IVA) charges; and (ix)
incentive to staff.
37.     Program sub-loans will be considered Program expenditures when SBI makes a
disbursement on a sub-loan to its borrowers. There will be no direct transfer of Program funds to
the recipients of the TA and capacity-building (such as Discoms, SNAs, and SERCs). Program
funds will only be transferred to sub-borrowers and consultants or service providers.

38.     The eligibility of Program Expenditures of the funds contributed by SBI to the
capitalization of the guarantee facility for non-performing loans would be subject to fiduciary
arrangements agreed with the Bank, which shall include: (a) the fund should be included in SBI’s
financial reporting and audits; (b) the fund should be subject to SBI’s regular controls; (c) SBI
management should exercise satisfactory controls over the use of the fund; (d) the fund should
not exceed the equivalent of US$10 million. These will be further detailed in the POM.

39.    The amount of World Bank financing under the Program will be equal to or less than the
total Program expenditures. If by the end of the Program, the cumulative World Bank
disbursements (against DLIs) exceed the total amount of Program expenditures, SBI will be
required to refund the difference to the World Bank. Reconciliation and reporting of
expenditures in financial statements and reports will be in Indian Rupees (INR). The refund if
any, will be made in the currency of the loan and at the exchange rate at which the disbursement
was notionally converted into INR on a last-in-first-out (LIFO) method.

      B.      Procurement Arrangements Assessment

40.     The procurement assessment carried out by the Bank provides a reasonable assurance that
the Implementing Agency’s procurement review of the sub-loan beneficiary, complaint handling
system, audit arrangements, internal controls, are adequate and found acceptable against the
principles of economy and efficiency of procurement process and ensure appropriate use of
Program funds. The extent of procurement assessment is based on the typical nature of a GRPV
Program being implemented by a commercial lender, SBI. The procurement assessment focused
on the following critical elements:-




                                               11
       i)   Procurement profile of the program

41.     SBI is the implementing agency of the operation and will on-lend the Program funds
through mobilization of large-scale private investment under both "Aggregator Model’ (from an
aggregator i.e. a third party owner of the panel relative to the owner of the rooftop) and ‘Capex
Model’ (from Public or Private - Institutional/Industrial /Commercial establishments where the
rooftop owner and the panel owner are the same). This will involve lending for financing grid
connected rooftop solar PV investments in accordance with SBI’s existing institutional
arrangements, procedures and requirements for sub-loan application, eligible sub-projects,
eligible sub-borrowers, appraisal and sanction of sub-project proposals, due diligence,
supervision, and oversight arrangements under each sub-loan. The institutional arrangements,
financing models and risk controls are included in the draft POM that was discussed with the
World Bank, and found acceptable. The procurement under the Program would mostly include
rooftop solar PV power plants which consists of solar PV panels, inverters, module mounting
structures, trackers, batteries and charge controllers. Based on a “Moderate? risk rating for
Procurement capacity, the thresholds provided in the guidance on P4R and applicable for this
Program are US$75 million for Goods, US$115 million for works/Supply and Installation,
US$60 million for non-consulting services and IT systems, and $30 million for consultants’
services,. These will be applicable for contracts under the Program. Any individual contract
financed by the Program should be equal to or less than the indicated thresholds and hence
contracts of higher values shall be excluded from the Program. For all practical purposes,
aggregator/sub-loan beneficiaries will be in-charge of procurement which will be taken up in line
with the broad procurement details shown in the sub-loan proposal agreed by SBI. The general
rule for sub-loan beneficiaries is to carry out formal/informal market analysis of available
products/technologies/providers, and then through a series of negotiations, try to establish long
term mutually beneficial relationships with the providers. Procurement under the Technical
Assistance and Capacity Building, would mostly include procurement of Consultancy services
and will be done by SBI according to its procedures. Procurement Management

42.     iProcurement under the Program will be undertaken by the respective private sector
beneficiaries/aggregators who are approved for sub-loans; rooftop owners and Public Sector
Undertakings, in accordance with the commercial practices in private sector and procurement
practices of Public Sector Undertakings; that meet the principles of economy and efficiency.


       ii) Procurement Management

43.     SBI has prepared a draft POM, to be finalized and accepted by the Bank before
disbursement can take place. The POM includes the program implementation and governance
regulations for this PforR Program to ensure that the loan is being used for program objectives
and to reduce the risk of corruption and fraud (refer to the Anti-corruption paragraph below).
During the program implementation, the POM will be updated in line with the implementation
needs. In order to better manage the project implementation SBI shall ensure that the following is
received from the sub-loan beneficiaries:




                                               12
         Procurement components of the sub-loans - As part of the sub-loan proposal/application,
          the sub-loan beneficiary shall provide broad break-up of the loan including cost estimates
          and time schedule.
         Methods and procedures - the sub-loan beneficiary will follow procurement methods which
          are accepted procedures are in accordance with well-established private sector/commercial
          practices in India, ensuring economy and efficiency of the procurement process.
         Compliance to the World Bank’s Anti-corruption Guidelines : shall be established within
          sub-loan beneficiaries as a lending condition,
         Procurement records keeping – SBI shall request sub-projects to keep all procurement
          records for monitoring and supervision purposes. In addition, SBI shall allow the Bank to
          conduct supervision for some exceptional cases if needed

     44.     For purpose of procurement management a chapter titled: “procurement management
     framework? is included in the POM. SBI has introduced two sections: Commercial Practices and
     Payment, in this chapter of the POM. The definition and process of Commercial Practices are
     given in the POM: (i) opening bidding; comparison of quotations; reversed auction and direct
     contracting, etc.; (ii) the effective competition among several suppliers or contractors is
     encouraged in accordance with the nature and scope of the contract to be procured; and (iii) any
     other procedures accepted.

     45.     Record Retention Policy of SBI: As per RBI directives, the SBI has formulated a
     comprehensive Record Retention Policy, which inter-alia, lays down the following as its main
     objectives:

            “Preservation of records in an efficient, secured and cost effective manner so that
            identification and retrieval of records by Branches/offices of the Bank are facilitated to
            meet their operational, business, legal, statutory and decision/policy making requirements
            in the course of pursuit of the Bank’s mission?.

     46.     The records at Branches/offices will be retained for the minimum prescribed period.
     However, relevant records may be kept for longer periods where circumstances so warrant, such
     as suit filed cases, fraud cases etc. The vital records at the Corporate Centre in the nature of
     policy prescription, operating instructions etc. and Central Board/ECCB Memoranda will be
     preserved permanently. The Policy will be reviewed periodically to accommodate changes in the
     record retention area in the light of statutory/legislative changes, or introduction of new
     technologies. Records must be kept tidily and methodically, each book and file being
     conspicuously numbered and dated for easy reference. The record registered will be maintained
     in which the name of every book or file placed in the record room will be entered with its
     number and first and last date as soon as it is received.


V.          FIDUCIARY RISK ASSESSMENT




                                                    13
      A.         Procurement Risks and Mitigation Measures

47.    Based on the information provided by SBI, the following gaps which are identified by the
Bank team are addressed through appropriate actions in the Program Action Plan agreed with
SBI prior to program negotiations:

Sl. No.                 Risk Description                            Mitigation Measure
1.         Compromise on economy and efficiency         As this is a well-established industry
           in Award of contracts by aggregators/sub-    practice to award the contract to most cost
           loan beneficiaries to their parent or        effective supplier, it may not be possible to
           affiliate companies                          stop award of contract to group/affiliate
                                                        companies. However, SBI will ensure that
                                                        economy       and     efficiency    are   not
                                                        compromised in such transactions.
2.         No requirement of procurement plan in        SBI shall ask for broad break-up of loan
           the sub-project application                  (Civil     Works/Goods/Equipment/services
                                                        etc.) in the loan application. Private sector
                                                        normally has good track record of adhering
                                                        to procurement time-frame, even if no
                                                        formal procurement plan is prepared.
3.         No mechanism for SBI’s procurement           SBI or its independent engineers shall
           review, supervision                          require aggregators/sub-loan beneficiaries
                                                        to maintain the all procurement records, and
                                                        during World Bank’s supervision mission,
                                                        SBI shall provide following information
                                                        obtained from Utilization Certificates :
                                                        (i)      Name of large Supplier/Contractor
                                                        (ii)     Break-up of items procured
4.         lack of complaint handling mechanism         Complaints in private to private transactions
           within some of the aggregators/sub-loan      are not common due to balance of power
           beneficiaries                                between purchaser and supplier in contracts
                                                        and long term relationship between them.
                                                        Suppliers       to       aggregators/sub-loan
                                                        beneficiaries will have option to approach
                                                        SBI, if needed.
5.         non-application      of     the     Bank     SBI shall seek compliance to Bank’s Anti-
           debarment/suspension lists to the            Corruption      guidelines,      from     the
           suppliers of the aggregators; which may      aggregators/sub-loan beneficiaries, in their
           result in unacceptable contract awards to    loan application. These guidelines shall
           the Bank debarred/suspended firms or         apply to the suppliers/contractors of the
           individuals under the Program                aggregators.

48.       Based on above addressed, the procurement risk rating is Moderate.


      B.         Financial Management Risk Assessment

49.   The fiduciary assessment identified the following potential FM risks that could impact
Program as well as FM risks:



                                                   14
   The Program would be the first World Bank assisted project to be implemented by
    SBI. Non-familiarity with World Bank’s as well as other partner Donor Agencies’
    operational, fiduciary and legal requirements may cause confusions resulting in
    delays/ non-compliances. A team from SBI has been working closely with the WB
    during preparation and during implementation, close interactions with the WB team
    would continue.
   The Program implementation would be spread over large geographical areas and
    managed by several Departments and Branches of SBI. Coordination could be an
    issue. SBI has identified CPPD as the focal point for Program management. Specific
    team (PIU) would monitor the day-to-day management and control of the Program
    and interact with World Bank for reports submission and legal compliances.
   SBI has good experience in financing renewable energy project and has sanctioned
    1651 MW till date but rooftop financing is nascent; the Program (providing financing
    to rooftop solar) itself would be a new line of business and form a comparatively
    small part of SBI’s total operations. Thus, the challenges for the Program’s successful
    implementation would include capacity, resources and timely and relevant
    information. While SBI’s capacity is assessed as more than adequate to handle the
    Program, the proposed separate product code(s) would facilitate compilation of all
    Program related information for management and reporting purposes.
   With respect to FM the risks associated with the various elements are summarized
    below:

 FM Elements & Risks              Impact                      Proposed mitigation measures
Planning Budgeting –  Lack of proper work plan and        SBI has adequate resources in terms
Plans and budgets are   targets       may      delay       of manpower and infrastructure.
not properly drawn up   implementation           and       Focused attention will be given to
                        achievement of DLIs;               drive the program. A committee of the
                       Resources may not be               senior officials of the departments
                        available to the Program on        concerned will also be constituted for
                        timely basis.                      periodic review of progress under the
                                                           program. Necessary corrective steps,
                                                           if required, will be initiated as per
                                                           recommendation of the committee.

                                                           Resources       required     for     the
                                                           implementation of the program will be
                                                           small compared to resource available
                                                           (both in term of manpower and
                                                           infrastructure available), hence risk is
                                                           low.




                                        15
         FM Elements & Risks                Impact                      Proposed mitigation measures
        Accounting & Reporting  Delays and errors in financial     (i) SBI’s existing accounting systems
        – Delays in accounting;   management         information    are standards compliant; quarterly
        Program        specific   would     in    turn      delay   accounting reports are published in
        information         not   appropriate corrective actions    time under regulations. No accounting
        collected; Delays in      being taken,                      issues are highlighted by the
        reporting/    incorrect  Non-compliance of WB legal        independent statutory auditors of SBI.
        information               covenants      relating      to   (ii) SBI’s accounting systems are
                                  timelines     for       reports   computerized.
                                  submission would attract          (iii) POM lays down Program
                                  remedies.                         accounting and reporting requirements
                                 Slowdown         in        WB     including expenditure authorization,
                                  disbursements.                    checking and verification etc.
                                 Delays in implementation of       (iv) Separate product code(s) would
                                  Program.                          compile      all   Program     specific
                                                                    information and make them available
                                                                    in the required form in a timely
                                                                    manner for effective management of
                                                                    the Program and reporting through
                                                                    IUFRs      and     annual     Financial
                                                                    Management Report (FMR).
        Audit – Lack of timely  Serious     deficiencies     in    SBI carries out regular internal audits
        and propose independent   governance, systems and           and reports are reviewed by Audit
        oversight                 controls may lead to losses       Committee of the Board.
                                  and damaged reputation            Annual statutory audit of SBI is
                                 Non-compliance of WB legal        carried out by several independent
                                  covenants     relating      to    Chartered Accountant (CA) firms
                                  independent audit and report      appointed by the RBI. The audit
                                                                    reports are clean.
                                                                    The Program would be covered by
                                                                    SBI’s existing internal audit systems
                                                                    as described above. Scope of internal
                                                                    audit of the Program will be as per
                                                                    internal Policy Document on internal
                                                                    audit. Sections of the reports from
                                                                    internal audits as described above
                                                                    relevant to the Program would be
                                                                    made available to the Program
                                                                    external auditor, and to the World
                                                                    Bank representatives as requested.
                                                                    However, to conduct independent
                                                                    audit for the program external auditor
                                                                    will be empaneled and TOR will be
                                                                    decided in consultation with World
                                                                    Bank

50.   Based on the above FM risk assessment, the post-mitigation risk is Low.

51.    The Program implementation arrangements together with SBI institutional strengths in
availability of skilled manpower, good governance and risk management would considerably


                                               16
       mitigate the challenges/ risks of the Program. Hence, the Fiduciary risk is perceived as
       Moderate. The Fiduciary risk rating would be reviewed during project implementation and
       adjusted suitably where necessary.


VI.           IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT
       52.      Regular Program FM information would be available to the Bank for Program monitoring
       purposes. These include quarterly budget performance reports, half-yearly IUFRs, half-yearly
       internal audit reports and annual Program financial statement audit report. World Bank’s
       Fiduciary team would review these reports and recommend necessary actions where appropriate
       to SBI. The World Bank FM team would undertake half-yearly implementation support missions
       and visit Program implementation locations to hold discussions with counterpart officials of SBI
       and review Program related systems, Program records and documents as appropriate. The FM
       risk rating would be reviewed and revised, if require, and where necessary suitable actions would
       be recommended and followed up.

       53.    SBI shall arrange to monitor and supervise the sub-loans during the program
       implementation. During each supervision mission of the World Bank, SBI shall arrange to
       submit the following procurement related reports, available from the utilization certificates of the
       sub-loans:
              (i) Name of the major supplier/contractor from whom the goods/works were procured
                    using Bank’s funds.
              (ii) Confirmation that there are no large value procurements exceeding OPRC
                    thresholds but it is possible that multiple contracts may be awarded to a single
                    supplier and cumulative value of such contracts may be significant in comparison to
                    Bank’s loan size.


VII.          GOVERNANCE
       Integrity Review

       54.     To complete the review of fiduciary areas, the assessment included a review of systems
       SBI has in place to monitor and address possible fraud and corruption issues that may affect the
       proposed Program. The review found SBI relies on robust systems that control for fraud and
       corruption risks, as defined by the Anti-Corruption Guidelines (ACG) approved specifically for
       PforR operations and revised in July 2015. Indeed, SBI’s systems monitor for issues beyond
       those defined in the ACGs, given its critical position in the Indian financial system, and has put
       in place redundant systems that closely monitor its various operations, in India and abroad. SBI
       expends significant resources to ensure relevant legislation and banking system regulations, it is
       subject to, are complied with in all of its operations. As well as to assure its shareholders and
       clients that its corporate goals related to safeguarding its brand and reputation are met. To assist
       the team carry out its assessment, SBI made available key corporate officers for this review as
       well as the direct officials in charge of monitoring SBI issues onsite from the Central Vigilance




                                                       17
Commission (CVC)1. Officials showed various internal documents and the team did a run-
through of one of the complaints-handling systems in place. In the course of other preparation
activities, observations from the market regarding challenges in this area were also noted.
Lastly, given that SBI has made available a significant volume of documents to the public, and
has an active online presence to publicize and actively seek comments and complaints on issues
that may affect its clients and customers, the team incorporated relevant information contained in
those documents or through those sources.

55.     The main objective of the integrity review, as part of the fiduciary assessment, was to
confirm whether the legal framework and institutional mechanisms in place would enable SBI to
abide by the “Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Program-for-
Results Financing.? A secondary objective was to find out how SBI systems attempt to prevent
or identify the type of misconduct defined in the ACGs, and/or, if a customer or client (or
potential client) seeks to complain about fraudulent and corrupt acts, SBI systems are able to
capture such a complaint in a secure manner, assign such complaint to a relevant unit or official
for review, and track the complaint until it is addressed. A third objective was to find out if SBI
systems are then able to address a potential issue that the complaint raises in a systematic
manner, in order that the relevant internal control mechanism may prevent recurrence of such
potential issue.

56.     To meet these objectives, the assessment briefly reviewed the various corporate
mechanisms with oversight over “corporate governance? areas, including those at the Board, and
technical systems that actively control for these risks, including grievance and complaint
handling mechanisms; the standard lending process; various systems that handle information in
this area, and the level of transparency, accountability, and integrity that the various systems aim
to reach; and, critically, the internal controls and audit systems in place.

57.     An assessment of integrity systems, including those over fraud and corruption found that
SBI has put redundant policies, procedures, and systems in place in an effort to ensure SBI has
control over fraud and corruption risks in its various areas of operations, and these are not only
reviewed on a periodic basis by key committees of SBI’s Board, but are also continuously
monitored by RBI, as well as by the Central Vigilance Commission and the Securities and
Exchange Board of India (SEBI). These policies, procedures, and systems are also reviewed
and upgraded to ensure compliance with international standards. In addition, SBI has robust
staffing in place to ensure the various complaints handling and risk control systems that it runs,
which can in fact operate continuously, 24x7x365.

58.    The assessment concludes SBI can capably absorb the various measures outlined in the
ACGs and observe its parameters to accompany implementation of the Program without need for
additional actions to address gaps, or assistance from the Bank on this topic, apart from taking a

1
 The CVC is the main anti-corruption agency in India with a mandate to monitor and investigate
“vigilance issues? such as fraud and corruption misconduct, as defined by the ACGs, as well as
misconduct beyond those defined by the ACG. The CVC is a member of the International Corruption
Hunter’s Alliance (ICHA) that the Bank’s Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) runs, and INT is well familiar
with CVC, and has had numerous interactions with the CVC in the past.



                                                  18
        collaborative approach on a case-by-case basis in the event that there is a need for the Bank to
        undertake specific audits.

VIII.           SBI BOARD OVERSIGHT

        59.     SBI was established in 1955 through a specific Act, “The State Bank of India? Act and
        has put in place governance and oversight mechanisms that were set out under that Act.
        Although operating since its establishment as a public institution, SBI’s Board composition has
        steadily began to include significant private sector participation (4 of the 14 in the Board of
        Directors, excepting the Chairman are Independent and not appointed by GoI). The government
        still owns the majority share of the Bank, but as a financing institution that also sells its shares in
        the Stock Exchanges, SBI complies with provisions of clause 49 of the Listing Agreement with
        the Stock Exchanges (overseen by SEBI) except where the provisions are not compatible with
        the SBI Act. Lastly, SBI is closely monitored by RBI, which ensures that SBI complies with
        directives that RBI issues from time to time.

        60.     As a result, SBI has unique governance and integrity objectives that seek to both ensure
        its competitiveness among lenders in India and abroad (where it maintains branches) as well as
        to protect the public interest. In particular, the objectives it adheres to in this area include:
                 To protect and enhance shareholder value;
                 To protect the interest of all stakeholders such as customers, employees, and society
                    at large;
                 To ensure transparency and integrity in communication; and
                 To ensure accountability for performance and customer service.

        61.     The Board is expected to oversee the risk profile of the Bank; monitor the integrity of its
        business and control mechanisms; ensure expert management; and, maximize shareholder
        interests. The Central Board of SBI met twelve times during the SBI financial year 2014-2015
        whilst the Executive Committee of the Central Board met once every week, with the Chairman
        being recorded in attendance at every meeting.

        62.    With respect to the governance and integrity area, following provisions of the SBI Act
        and RBI/SEBI guidelines, the Central Board constituted nine Board level Committees, including:
        the Audit Committee, Risk Management Committee, Special Committee of the Board for
        Monitoring Large Value Frauds (fraud valued at INR 1 crore and above), the Customer Service
        Committee (which oversees the complaint handling systems that are most visible to the public
        and borrowers), Board Committee to Monitor Recovery, and Corporate Social Responsibility
        Committee. These Committees are charged with oversight of key areas such as Audits and
        Accounts, Risk Management, Resolution of Shareholder/Investor grievances, Fraud Review,
        Control Review, Review of Customer Service, and Redressal of Customer Grievances, and
        Payment and Incentives to Executive Directors.

        63.    An example of close and responsive Board oversight in this area was the adoption by the
        Board of recommendations following a recent review by the RBI that the position of Chief Risk
        Officer be separated from Credit Risk Officer, and for the Group Compliance Officer to report
        independently to the Audit Committee or the Central Board.


                                                          19
IX.          ETHICS AND CODE OF Conduct

      64.      Apart from various operational due diligence procedures and internal controls processes
      and systems (mentioned below), SBI has a Code of Conduct for the Central Board Directors and
      its Management.            Such code is publicly disclosed via the SBI website:
      https://www.sbi.co.in/portal/web/corporate-governance/code-of-conduct-for-the-banks
      .
      65.      Of particular relevance to the Program in this area is SBI’s Business Responsibility
      Policy, which lays out specific codes related to ethics, and vigilance against bribery and
      corruption
      (https://www.sbi.co.in/portal/documents/41076/60023/1403856255584_SBI_BR_13.06.14.pdf/0
      2c5c712-375b-4c97-9c5f-3ea7de70a800)

      66.    The risks that such codes are violated in any lending activities are essentially controlled
      for from top to bottom and through various systems. As mentioned above, there are critical
      Board Committees with well-defined mandates to oversee areas of risk, including fraud and
      corruption risks, as follows:


        Risk Management Structure              Board of Directors           Risk Management Committee

                                                                                Credit Risk Management
                                                                                  Committee (CRMC)
                                               Risk Management
                                             Committee of the Board
              Asset Liability                      (RMCB)                       Market Risk Management
              Management                                                         Committee (MRMC)
            Committee (ALCO)

                                                 DMD & CRO                        Operational Risk
                                                                                Management Committee
                                                                                      (ORMC)

                                                   CGM (RM)
                                                                                Enterprise and Group Risk
                                                                                 Management Committee
                                                                                        (EGRMC)




                                                     20
67.     The Audit Committee of the Board (ACB) is a key unit at the Board level that oversees
actions taken by SBI in critical areas of activity of concern to integrity issues, including:
application of KYC (“Know Your Customer?) and AML (“Anti-Money Laundering?)
Guidelines, compliance with Clause 49 and other guidelines issued by SEBI, and
“housekeeping? or follow-up on issues identified in various audit systems that SBI runs (more on
this below). The Group Compliance officer reports on compliance issues to the ACB and
compiles a periodic report for the ACB. The ACB met 11 times during the financial year to
review these reports and other issues.

68.     Within this framework, there are external systems also that ensure compliance with
relevant legal and regulatory provisions, with the RBI being amongst the most active. Apart
from nominating Directors to the SBI Central Board, the RBI conducts periodic inspections and
records issues in its Annual Financial Inspection Reports (this mandate is spelled out in Section
35 of the Banking Regulation Act).

69.      At the time of this assessment, a special team from RBI was onsite, conducting an
inspection. This was the third such inspection following RBI’s adoption in March, 2013 of risk-
based supervision. The RBI team conducting the inspection was a dedicated unit which was
assigned solely to SBI. It comprised of six specialists working under a senior manager who were
collecting data from SBI systems and running such data through unique models that would
identify risk markers. The findings would allow the RBI team to dig deeper in areas and conduct
spot-checking. The RBI team was also following-up on actions taken on issues identified
following the last inspection. As with previous inspections, the RBI team asked about SBI
Board and Senior Management functioning, probed for organizational weaknesses, examined the
credit risk process, looked into liquidity, operational, IT, and non-IT risks.

70.    The Group Compliance officer is a key counterpart of SBI to the RBI team, and includes
issues identified through this process, as well as through its review of the functioning of
compliance systems. These are assigned to relevant operational units to address, and reported
the ACB.

71.    SBI has an internal control system that is subject to close scrutiny not only by internal
and external auditors but also by regulators and the CVC. There are multiple and redundant
systems that seek to control for all manner of risk, including fraud and corruption risk. The TOR
of each critical component of the internal control system is well-vetted by the Board and closely
watched. Internal audit is conducted by the Inspection and Management Audit Department, and
the ACB supervises the activities of this Department.

72.     Of specific relevance to the Program and systems in SBI that can identify fraud and
corruption risks are the specialized audits that are activated when loans above a certain size enter
into the SBI system. In September 2014, SBI introduced an “Early Sanction Review (ESR) to
review new loans approved that were valued between INR 1 crore up to INR 5 crore. Following


                                                21
      its introduction, up until March 2015, 4339 accounts were reviewed under this process. The ESR
      aims to:
                Capture the critical risks in loan proposals approved at an early enough stage and, if
                  risks are identified, bring these to the attention of the Controllers of the risks to ensure
                  mitigation at the earliest;
                Improve the quality of the loan application process; and
                Improve the quality of proponents.

      73.    When financing larger than INR 5 crore are approved, a “Legal Audit? is undertaken.
      This was initiated in June 2014, and has covered both loans and mortgages. Since its
      introduction up to March 2015, 8976 accounts were reviewed under this type of Audit.

      74.    Apart from the specialized audits above, SBI revamped a comprehensive system called a
      “Concurrent Audit? system, which it considers essential to sound accounting functions, and
      assures effective controls and oversight of operations on a continuous basis. The system is
      reviewed on an on-going basis in accordance with directives from RBI, principally to ensure that
      SBI’s Advances and other risk exposures are within limits of the regulatory authority. SBI
      appointed external auditors as Concurrent Auditors in several of its Centers of operations.


XI.          RISK MANAGEMENT MECHANISMS

      75.     As mentioned above, SBI requires due diligence checks on proponents and loan
      applicants. A composite listing of steps taken by loan officers when reviewing such applications
      is attached. There are system constraints that affect the latitude afforded loan officers to exercise
      discretion, not the least being the specialized audits described above, as well as the risk a loan
      officer runs that not only will the loan review process spot a weakness, or an internal auditor or
      an external auditor will spot an anomaly, but also the RBI team. There is also a risk the loan
      officer faces that, viz-a-viz fraud and corruption complaints that are followed up on by the CVC,
      the process will result in actions against him/ her.

      76.     In the background is an elaborate risk management system that also screens for various
      risks, including fraud and corruption risk, on a continuous basis. SBI is in the midst of
      improving and upgrading its risk management systems, but there are several ones in place, some
      new, that are relevant to the assessment, including:
           An Early Warning Control System (EWCS) being put in place that monitors credit risk
              exposures, based on quantified indicators, and would trigger a warning when there is a
              breach of the parameters set (this controls for the risk that only a few borrowers would be
              favored under the Program);
           A lifecycle management system to cover the whole cycle of a loan, from proposal to
              approval to payments;
           Monitoring for “variance risks? based on several models, which are back-tested daily
           Training of key staff, and development of a “risk culture? amongst staff at all levels,
              including through the use of e-learning modules;
           Publishing “Risk Appetite Statements? – which are being reviewed and formalized; and


                                                        22
              Active measuring of Group Risk through Reputation Risk, Contagion Risk,
               Concentration Risk, and Strategic Risk indicators.

        77.    A bedrock of credit risk management in SBI’s system are the appraisal and risk
        assessment practices in place to identify, measure, manage, and control credit risks that SBI
        faces. To this end, it uses internal risk assessment modules and score cards to assess credit risk
        under different exposure segments. The internal ratings are reviewed and subjected to a
        comprehensive validation process and framework.

        78.   SBI is in the process of preparing to participate in RBI’s program of Advanced
        Approaches for Credit Risk, which is another indicator that it continues to upgrade its risk
        management systems.


XII.           WHISTLEBLOWER MECHANISM AND THE CVC


        79.     The head of the CVC unit who is onsite in SBI headquarters actively monitors the
        whistleblower mechanism of SBI. The unit reports the system has been in place for about four
        years, and estimates around 40 complaints have been investigated as of late.

        80.     It is also noteworthy that CVC makes available online and mobile methods for the public
        to report complaints. These modalities have been examined previously by the World Bank in the
        context of other projects and operations, as well as through participation of the CVC in ICHA
        events. For example, a former CVC Commissioner presented “Vigeye? during an ICHA event in
        Washington, DC in 2012 -.It is a complaints system through which the public may report online
        and through mobile devices any complaints it seeks to raise to the CVC.

        81.     If there is a “vigilance overtone? in any of the issues detected through the audit, controls,
        or risk management system, the CVC reported to the team that these are turned over to the CVC.
        In addition, RBI may refer a complaint, as well as other authorities that interact with SBI.

        82.    CVC also monitors “SMS Unhappy? to augment the various methods by which the public
        can report a grievance related to vigilance. A complainant will be called back upon receipt of
        such SMS.


XIII.          CUSTOMER SERVICE AS A PREVENTION AND COMPLAINTS MANAGEMENT
        MECHANISM


        83.    SBI has a robust complaint management system which is web-based and accessible to all
        customers as well as non-customers at SBI’s web-site www.sbi.co.in>customer care>complaint
        and compliments. As soon as the complaint is entered in the system, it generates a ticket number.
        Complainant can track his status through this ticket number. SBI also has Board approved
        Grievance Redressal Mechanism available in the above mentioned web-site.



                                                         23
       84.     In case of any kind of corruption, there is vigilance department at the Corporate
       Centre/Local Head Offices (Circles) to deal with such cases. The structure of vigilance
       department is as per GoI guidelines under the strict monitoring of CVC. All corruption cases are
       dealt with strongly with appropriate action against the officials involved. The complaint
       management analysis is put up to the Central Board at quarterly interval where the Directors give
       their guidance to make it more transparent and efficient.

       85.     The visiting team observed how the CMS is working, and, at the time of the assessment,
       a live complaint was reported and demonstrated online. The team was allowed to observe how
       the complaint was recorded and addressed.


XIV.        ACTIONS AGREED TO O PERATIONALIZE THE ANTI-CORRUPTION GUIDELINES
       (ACGS)


       86.     In order to operationalize implementation of the various areas covered in the ACGs, SBI
       agreed to:
       a) Maintain and compile a quarterly report of complaints that may be reported that are related to
       the Program and share this with the Bank (based on the agreed format provided below);
       b) Incorporate the Bank’s debarment list in the filter used by lending officers when they conduct
       due     diligence.     This     list   may     be     found     in   the     following    website:
       www.worldbank.org/debarr or http://web.worldbank.org/external/default/main?theSitePK=84266
       &contentMDK=64069844&menuPK=116730&pagePK=64148989&piPK=64148984
       c) Incorporate into the filter mentioned above the Bank’s suspension list that will be compiled on
       a periodic basis by the WB team and shared with the SBI team; and,
       d) Incorporate the ACGs in the lending document to be used by SBI for this Program, to ensure
       potential borrowers are aware of the applicability of the ACGs. The ACGs were attached to the
       financing documents that were negotiated and agreed with SBI and Department of Economic
       Affairs, Ministry of Finance, GoI.




                                                      24
                                      Quarterly Report of Complaint Format

                                                       Manner of    Substance of
                                                        complaint       the                Results       Recommendation
         Who                                           submission    complaint
                                              Who
       submitted
                                            received
      (Full name -   Complaint   Complain
No.    Address/ if   Summary      t Date
                                               the        (e.g.          (brief
                                            complai    telephone,   description of               Final
           not                                                                       Interim
                                                nt       e-mail,    the allegation              Action
      anonymous)                                                                     Action
                                                         writing,    or reason for              Taken
                                                         verbal)    complaining)


1

2

3

4

5

...




                                                          25
