Corpor t S ctor
Accountin nd Auditin
in th EU Acquis Commun ut ir
 3rd edition
Corporate Sector
Accounting and Auditing
in the EU Acquis Communautaire
 3rd edition
Copyright Statement:
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting
portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of
applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will
normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send
a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA,
telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights,
should be addressed to the
Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA,
fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




This publication was prepared by:

Centre for Financial Reporting Reform (CFRR)
Governance Global Practice
The World Bank Group
Praterstrasse 31
1020 Vienna, Austria

Web: www.worldbank.org/cfrr
Email: cfrr@worldbank.org
Phone: +43-1-217-0700
Table of Contents

   Preface                                                             ii
   Disclaimer                                                          ii
   About the CFRR                                                     iii
   Introduction                                                        v


1. Ov rvi w of th Europ n Union                                        1
   A. THE MAIN TREATIES                                                1
   B. MEMBER STATES, ACCESSION AND THE
      EUROPEAN NEIGHBOURHOOD POLICY                                    3
   C. THE ACQUIS COMMUNAUTAIRE                                         4
   D. EU INSTITUTIONS & THE EU POLICY-MAKING PROCESS                   7


2. Th    Int rn l M rk t                                              11
   A.   BACKGROUND OF THE EU INTERNAL MARKET                          11
   B.   THE INTERNAL MARKET STRATEGIES                                12
   C.   FINANCIAL SERVICES REGULATION AND SUPERVISION                 14
   D.   COMPANY LAW HARMONIZATION                                     17


3. Accountin nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir                     20
   A. ACCOUNTING: THE ACQUIS COMMUNAUTAIRE AS IT APPLIES TO
      CORPORATE SECTOR ACCOUNTING                                     21
   B. FINANCIAL REPORTING FOR ISSUERS ON
      EU REGULATED FINANCIAL MARKETS                                  36
   C. AUDITING: THE ACQUIS COMMUNAUTAIRE AS IT APPLIES TO
      CORPORATE SECTOR AUDITING                                       45


4. A Look Forw rd                                                     54
   A. ENDORSING AND USING IFRS IN THE EU                              54
   B. ENHANCING AUDITORS’ REPORTING                                   55
   C. FINANCIAL REPORTING FOR SMEs                                    56
   D. AUDITING AND OTHER ASSURANCE FOR SMEs                           57
   E. ADOPTING INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS ON AUDITING (ISA)              58
   F. STRENGTHENING AUDIT OVERSIGHT SYSTEMS                           59


   Annex: Timeline                                                    60
   Table of Acronyms                                                  61
   Index                                                              63



                                                   T bl of Cont nts     i
Preface

The first edition of the “Guide to Corporate Sector Accounting and Auditing in the EU
Acquis Communautaire” (issued in 2007) was prepared by the World Bank with con-
tributions from the European Commission and other relevant European institutions.

Henri Olivier, Professor at HEC-Management School of the University of Liège and
former Secretary General of the Fédération Européenne des Experts-Comptables
(FEE), updated the Guide as part of the second edition published in 2011. For this
third edition Henri Olivier and Pascal Frerejacque (CFRR) revised the text with inputs
from Andrei Busuioc and other CFRR colleagues and with the editorial assistance of
Susan Schroeder and Ecaterina Gusarova, under the direction of Henri Fortin, Head
of the CFRR.

The key elements of the acquis communautaire in the areas of corporate sector
accounting and auditing are accessible at http://ec.europa.eu/finance/accounting
and http://ec.europa.eu/finance/auditing.
Despite the extent and quality of the external assistance received in preparing the
Guide, the CFRR is solely responsible for its contents.




Disclaimer

This Guide is intended to provide a general overview of the relevant sections of the
acquis communautaire on financial reporting and auditing and does not attempt
to give anything more than an introduction to the issues. It is not meant to be an
exhaustive rendition of the law, nor is it legal advice to those reading it. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this guide are entirely those of the
authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive
Directors, or the countries they represent.




ii   Pr f c & Discl im r
About the CFRR

The Centre for Financial Reporting Reform (CFRR) located in Vienna, Austria, is part
of the World Bank’s Governance Global Practice and is responsible for the World
Bank‘s corporate sector financial reporting activities in Europe and Central Asia.
The Centre helps client countries build strong accounting, reporting, and auditing
practices which bring sustainable and equitable private sector-led growth, strength-
ened governance and accountability.

The CFRR provides knowledge services including analytical and advisory services;
learning and skill development; know-how and knowledge transfer; and technical
assistance and institutional strengthening. Activities are focused on four areas of
expertise: i) raising awareness of the importance of the corporate financial report-
ing reform agenda and contributing to legislative reform; ii) building institutional
capacity by addressing knowledge gaps and offering tailored advice in areas such
as public oversight and standards; iii) encouraging strong and engaged professional
accountancy organizations; and iv) promoting the development of internationally
compatible accounting education.

Detailed analysis of the extent to which accounting, reporting and audit systems
comply with international good practice, and the capacity of institutions to
implement and enforce such systems, have been completed in 29 countries. These
“Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes on Accounting and Auditing
(ROSC A&A)” provide recommendations to national governments which are used to
help develop and assess legislative reform and guide CFRR’s engagement.

The CFRR also manages a range of regional and country-specific programs that seek
to raise the quality of corporate financial reporting.

Regional programs include:
The Road to Europe: Program of Accounting Reform and Institutional Strengthen-
ing (EU-REPARIS), funded by the European Union as part of the Western Balkans
Enterprise Development and Innovation Facility. EU-REPARIS supports candidates
or potential candidates for EU enlargement in the countries of Southeast Europe to
integrate more closely with the EU by aligning their legislative frameworks with the
EU acquis communautaire.

The Financial Reporting Technical Assistance Program (FRTAP), funded by the
Government of Switzerland through its “enlargement contribution”. FRTAP supports
newer EU member states, such as Poland, Latvia and the Czech Republic, to imple-
ment sustainable regulatory and institutional frameworks and achieve the correct
implementation of the acquis communautaire in the area of financial reporting.




                                                                About th CFRR     iii
Strengthening Auditing and Reporting in the Countries of the Eastern Partnership
(STAREP), funded by Austria, the EU, Luxembourg and Switzerland. STAREP works
with the countries of the EU’s Eastern Partnership to support the development of
modern accounting and auditing frameworks, in line with international standards
and taking account of EU requirements.

Country-level projects address a range of specific issues in client countries, including
accountancy education in Moldova and the development of a reform strategy in
Albania. The CFRR implemented or contributed to other projects to enhance corporate
financial reporting practices including in Croatia, Macedonia, FYR Montenegro, and
Serbia.




vi    About th CFRR
Introduction

We are pleased to present the third edition of “Corporate Sector Accounting and
Auditing in the Acquis Communautaire”, designed to give an overview of EU policy
in this area for policymakers, regulators, and other stakeholders in Member States,
enlargement countries, countries within the “European Neighbourhood”, and other
countries interested in understanding the EU regulatory model.

This edition reflects significant changes in EU corporate financial reporting since
2011. In June 2013, a new Accounting Directive was adopted, replacing the Fourth
and Seventh Directives on company law. A Directive amending the 2006 Audit
Directive and a new Audit Regulation addressing oversight of the most significant
audits were adopted in April 2014.

The new legislation, summarized in this guide, is a result of several years of drafting
and discussions following the financial crisis of 2008 and it represent a landmark in the
EU’s efforts to strengthen its corporate sector accounting and auditing. The Accounting
Directive seeks to enhance the quality of financial reporting and expand it, especially
with regard to public interest entities, while reducing the administrative burden for
smaller companies. The changes to the Audit Directive and the Audit Regulation are
designed to increase or restore public confidence in audits, by strengthening mecha-
nisms already provided in the 2006 Directive – especially quality assurance systems –
and through a number of innovations such as mandatory rotation of audit firms or
caps on non-audits services. The new audit reporting requirements introduced by
the Regulation are expected to increase the usefulness of statutory audits of public-
interest entities, such as listed companies, credit institutions, and insurance under-
takings, and reduce risks of excessive familiarity between statutory auditors and their
clients, encourage professional skepticism, and limit conflicts of interest.

The 2013 Accounting Directive must be transposed into national legislation by mid-
July 2015, and the 2014 Auditing Directive must be transposed by mid-June 2016. A
number of options are available to Member States regarding the Accounting Directive,
including to adopt simpler requirements for smaller entities. The Audit Directive and
the Regulation will bring more consistency in audit oversight and quality assurance
systems across Europe. Implementation will involve significant challenges and re-
quire increased resources to ensure systems function effectively. The legislation puts
a renewed emphasis on cooperation among public oversight authorities through a
new European body. Cooperation between all key actors of public oversight and qual-
ity assurance at national level will also be important.

Now that the reform process initiated in 2010 with the Green paper on audit policy is
complete a period of relative stability can be expected. A few outstanding issues re-
main. These include the effective adoption of the International Standards on Auditing




                                                                    Introduction        v
in the EU; the process by which the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)
are adopted in the EU, which is currently under review; and the possible use by EU
Member States of the IFRS for SMEs. At the international level, while achieving a
common regulatory framework for accounting and auditing remains an elusive goal,
there is continued convergence in both areas, and countries will continue to benefit
from the EU experience.


Henri Fortin
Head, Centre for Financial Reporting Reform – World Bank
March 2015




vi    Introduction
1.                   Overview of the
                     European Union


1. A number of treaties provide the fundamental basis of the European Union (EU).
The EU’s origins can be traced to the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel
Community (ECSC), also referred to as the Treaty of Paris, which came into force
in 1952.1 The ECSC’s original objective was to “lead to the realization of the first
concrete foundation of a European Federation indispensable to the preservation of
peace” following the two World Wars.2 In addition to this underlying motive, the
ECSC rested primarily upon the ideas of economic growth, free market competition,
and the improvement of living standards. The initial success achieved by ECSC
cooperation led to successive treaties, which in turn created the institutional bodies
and the body of EU laws known collectively as the acquis communautaire (see para-
graph 12). Each successive treaty (or treaty revision) and change to the acquis com-
munautaire has aimed at bringing the Member States closer together economically,
socially, and politically in order to promote the region stability and economic growth.

2. This section begins with an overview of the main treaties establishing the EU. It
then looks at the current state of EU membership and its various policies towards its
neighbor countries, particularly as regards accession. This section then examines the
acquis communautaire and the legislative means by which it is developed, as well as
its application in practice. Finally, this section turns to the institutions established by
the treaties and the policy-making process through which these institutions interact.


A. THE MAIN TREATIES 3

3. Following the Treaty of Paris, the Treaty of Rome (commonly referred to as the
“EC Treaty”) entered into force on 1 January 1958, creating the European Economic
Community (EEC). The EC Treaty laid down the framework for bringing about a
common market and developing a number of common policies. It contained from
the outset a legal basis for company law harmonization. At that time, the role of
the European Parliament in the law-making process was only advisory (the so-called
“consultation procedure” see paragraph 26).




1   For more detail on the ECSC, see
    http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/institutional_affairs/treaties/treaties_ecsc_en.htm.
2   French Minister of Foreign Affairs Robert Schuman’s speech on May 9, 1950.
    For full text, see http://europa.eu/abc/symbols/9-may/decl_en.htm.
3   See http://europa.eu/abc/treaties/index_en.htm.



                                                              Ov rvi w of th Europ            n Union   1
4. However, once these initial moves towards greater community integration had
been completed, the process lost momentum by the early 1980s. Amidst mount-
ing political criticism, the EEC’s political leaders decided to move forward by passing
the Single European Act (SEA), which entered into force on 1 July 1987. The SEA
adapted the Treaty of Rome in order to hasten the completion of the Internal Market
by 31 December 1992. It introduced a new legal basis for harmonization of laws in
order to establish the Internal Market, and a new legislative procedure (the so-called
“cooperation procedure,” see paragraph 27).

5. The Treaty on the European Union, also referred to as the Maastricht Treaty, entered
into force on 1 November 1993, and was built on the integration successes of the SEA.
It changed the name of the European Economic Community to “the European Commu-
nity” and introduced detailed provisions on the creation of an economic and monetary
union. It also introduced a new legislative procedure (the so-called “codecision pro-
cedure,” see paragraph 28) as well as the principle of subsidiarity (see paragraph 16).

6. The Treaty of Amsterdam, which entered into force on 1 May 1999, amended
and renumbered the previous Treaties. It strengthened the role of the European
Parliament and extended the scope of the co-decision procedure’s application.

7. In anticipation of the addition of ten new Member States, the Treaty of Nice
entered into force on 1 February 2003. The treaty reformed institutions to enable
the EU to function efficiently after its enlargement to 25 Member States.

8. The Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe was signed in Rome on 29 Oc-
tober 2004. The intention of this document was to replace the existing treaties with
a single text and to bring about a large number of institutional changes aimed at
increasing the efficiency and democratic legitimacy of EU decision-making. Negative
referenda in France and the Netherlands meant that the Treaty failed to be ratified
by all Member States.

9. Subsequently on 13 December 2007, EU leaders signed the Treaty of Lisbon, which
was designed to bring an end to years of negotiations on institutional issues and “to
complete the process started by the Treaty of Amsterdam and by the Treaty of Nice with
a view to enhancing the efficiency and democratic legitimacy of the EU and to improv-
ing the coherence of its action.” It includes an important overhaul of the Maastricht
Treaty and the Treaty of Rome including a proposal that the EU will take on a single
legal personality, strengthening the role of the European Parliament and extending
the co-decision making process.4 After some political turbulence, the Treaty of Lisbon
was ratified by all 27 Member States and entered into force on 1 December 2009. A
coordinated version of the Treaty on the functioning of the European Union (TFEU)
was published in the Official Journal of the European Union on 9 May 2008.5

4   Egenhofer, C. Kurpas, S. van Schaik, L. (2009), “The Ever-Changing Union. An Introduction to the History,
    Institutions and decision making Processes of the European Union” Centre for European Policy Studies,
    Special Report, January 2009
5   OJ-EU C 306, 17 December 2007; See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=OJ:C:2007:306:TOC



2        Ov rvi w of th Europ           n Union
B. MEMBER STATES, ACCESSION AND THE
   EUROPEAN NEIGHBOURHOOD POLICY

10. The EU currently comprises 28 Member States. In 1958, the Treaty of Rome
created a common market and customs union, and provided for the free move-
ment of capital and labor among the six signatories: Belgium, France, Germany, Italy,
Luxembourg and the Netherlands. Additional Member States were added to the
EU through seven enlargements (see Annex: Timeline). The most recent member,
Croatia, joined the EU on 1 July 2013.

11. Turkey started accession negotiations in October 2005. In December 2005, the
European Council granted the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia the status of a
candidate country. In December 2010 Montenegro and Iceland were also granted the
same status. In line with the decision of the European Council in June 2013 to open
accession negotiations with Serbia, the Council adopted the negotiating framework
in December 2013. All the other Western Balkan economies are potential candidates:
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo. The EU has repeatedly reaffirmed at
the highest level its commitment to eventual EU membership of the Western Balkan
countries, provided they fulfill the accession criteria. There are several associative
frameworks that extend EU relationships throughout its geographic region. Norway,
Iceland and Liechtenstein are members of the “European Economic Area” (EEA)
and therefore have access to the EU single market; however, they are not allowed
to participate in the EU decision-making process. Following a referendum in 1992,
Switzerland rejected EEA membership; however it enjoys privileged relations with
the EU Internal Market through a number of bilateral agreements. In addition, the EU
has Association and/or Partnership and Cooperation Agreements6 with many other
countries. Through its European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP),7 the EU works with
its southern and eastern neighbors to achieve the closest possible political associa-
tion and the greatest possible degree of economic integration. The ENP is comple-
mented by regional and multilateral agreements such as the Eastern Partnership, the
Black Sea Synergy or the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership. For instance, the Eastern
Partnership (EaP), launched in 2009, enables partner countries interested in moving
towards the EU and increasing political, economic and cultural links to do so.8 The
EU is not offering ENP countries/entities the possibility of membership, at least for
the time being. As is obvious from the large number of associative relationships, the
sphere of influence of the EU’s institutions and of the acquis communautaire there-
fore extend far beyond the actual EU Member States’ borders.




6   These agreements are signed bilaterally and each agreement sets forth a different set of objectives.
    Some agreements focus on economic dialogue, political dialogue, and/or trade liberalization, among other
    themes, while others are precursors to an accession treaty.
7   The European Neighbourhood Policy applies to the EU’s immediate neighbours by land or sea,
    i. e. Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Egypt, Georgia, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Moldova, Morocco,
    Russian Federation, Syria, Tunisia, Ukraine, and West Bank & Gaza. Although Russia is also a neighbor of the EU,
    the EU’s relations with Russia are instead developed through a “Strategic Partnership.”
8   See http://eeas.europa.eu/world/enp/index_en.htm.



                                                               Ov rvi w of th Europ             n Union           3
C. THE ACQUIS COMMUNAUTAIRE

12. The entire body of EU laws is known collectively as the acquis communautaire
(the “acquis”). The term is most often used in connection with preparation by
candidate countries to join the EU. Within the context of EU accession, a country must
meet certain criteria, among which is the adoption of the acquis. All Member States
must comply with the acquis unless they have negotiated an opt-out. Although new
Member States may be granted transition periods for implementation, they will not
be granted permanent ‘opt-outs’. For recent enlargement negotiations, the acquis
has been divided into 35 chapters. Chapter 6 (Company Law) has greatest relevance
to corporate sector accounting and auditing; Chapters 2 (Freedom of Movement for
Workers) and 3 (Right of Establishment and Freedom to Provide Services), Chapter 4
(Free Movement of Capital), Chapter 8 (Competition Policy), and Chapter 9 (Financial
Services) also have some implications. When applying for membership, an applicant
country will receive a roadmap from the European Commission tracing its progress in
adopting the acquis. Accession negotiations may be concluded even if the acquis has
not been fully adopted, as transitional measures may be introduced after accession.
However, transposition periods and specific transitional measures are rarely applied
in the context of Chapter 6.

13. Each Association Agreement/Partnership and Cooperation Agreement sets out
a different agenda for approximation to parts of the acquis although generally there
are no deadlines. Association Agreements with Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Egypt, Georgia, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Moldova, Morocco, Syria, Tunisia,
Ukraine, and West Bank & Gaza have entered into force. As the EU does not offer the
incentive of membership to these countries in exchange for aligning their legislation
with the acquis, ENP countries/entities may not be as keen on adapting to the acquis
as accession countries. However, the incentives on offer, in return for progress on
relevant reforms, are greater integration into European programs and networks, in-
creased assistance and enhanced market access. Building on the experience acquired
from the implementation of the Neighbourhood Programs in the period 2004 to
2006, the EU adopted a framework for Neighbourhood and Partnership Instruments
to provide Community assistance for the development of an area of prosperity and
good neighbourliness involving the European Union, and its neighbours.9

14. The acquis includes all primary legislation (Treaties), secondary legislation (regu-
lations, directives, decisions, recommendations, etc...) and case law (judgments of
the European Courts). As EU legislation is constantly changing (e.g., new directives
are enacted, regulations are amended), the acquis is not a static document, but one
that is in constant evolution.




9   Regulation 1638/2006/EC of 24 October 2006, laying down general provisions establishing a
    European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument. (OJ EU. L310 9.11.2006)



4        Ov rvi w of th Europ           n Union
i.    Main legislative instruments

15. Article 288 of the TFEU states that “to exercise the Union’s competences, the
institutions shall adopt regulations, directives, decisions, recommendations and
opinions”. The ordinary legislative procedure consists in the joint adoption of a regu-
lation, a directive or a decision by the European Parliament and the Council, on a
proposal of the Commission (Art. 289 TFEU): 10

» Regulations are addressed to and directly applicable and binding in all EU Member
  States without the need for any national implementing legislation.11 Regulations
  are the type of legislation that most closely resemble a domestic statute and are
  used when uniformity is crucial.
» Directives are binding with respect to the results to be achieved and the time
  limit within which the objectives must be reached; however, they leave to national
  authorities the choice of form and means for achieving those results. Directives
  have to be transposed into national legislation in accordance with the procedures
  of the individual Member States and by a fixed date. The deadline for Member
  States to transpose a directive into national law is generally between 18 to
  24 months after its publication. Directives are the most frequently used instru-
  ment in relation with the establishment of the internal market (Art. 50 TFEU).
» Decisions are binding in all their aspects for those to whom they are addressed.
  Decisions do not require national implementing legislation. A Decision may be
  addressed to any or all Member States, to enterprises or to individuals.
» Recommendations, Opinions, Interpretative Communications, and Commission
  Comments are non-binding and are considered “soft law.” Soft law can be defined
  as “rules of conduct, which in principle have no legally binding force but which
  nevertheless may have practical effects.”12 As such they promote good practice
  throughout the EU. Soft law is often the starting point for the “Communitarisation”
  of a particular policy area, acting as the precursor to the development of hard law.13


ii. Main legislative principles

16. A number of main legislative principles govern the way the EU formulates and
implements public policy, and how these policies affect the national legislation of
individual Member States. The first of these is the principle of subsidiarity, intro-
duced by the Maastricht Treaty. According to this principle, in areas which do not fall
within its exclusive competence, the EU may act only if and insofar as the objectives
of the proposed action cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States but can
rather, by reason of the scale or effects of the proposed action, be better achieved


10   Although the legal acts did not change, the Lisbon Treaty substantially modified the procedure to adopt these
     legal acts. Consolidated versions of the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the functioning of the
     European Union (OJ EU C115, 9.5.2008). See http://europa.eu/lisbon_treaty/full_text/index_en.htm.
11   However in practice national legislation often has to be changed or removed in order to comply with Regulations.
12   SNYDER, F. (1993), “The Effectiveness of European Community Law: Institutions, Processes, Tools and Techniques.”
13   CHALMERS D. (1998), “European Union Law, Volume I: Law and EU Government,” Dartmouth Pub., Aldershot, UK



                                                                Ov rvi w of th Europ             n Union           5
at EU level. This is intended to ensure that decisions are taken as closely as possible
to the citizen in order to avoid too much centralization of power. Other principles
include the principle of proportionality, which requires that any Community action
should not go beyond what is necessary to achieve the objectives of the treaty.

17. Before the Lisbon Treaty, EU legislative measures provided for the European
Commission to be assisted by committees in accordance with the “comitology deci-
sion” (Decision of 28 June 1999 modified on 17 July 2006). The committees consist
of representatives from Member States and are chaired by the Commission. The
Commission can only adopt implementing measures if it obtains the approval by
the Member States meeting within the committee and absent objections from the
European Parliament. Examples include the Accounting Regulatory Committee and
the Audit Regulatory Committee.

18. Since the Lisbon Treaty, a new legal framework replaces the comitology. The
Treaty formally distinguishes between two kinds of measures: delegated acts (based
on Art. 290 TFEU) and implementing acts (based on Art. 291 TFEU). Article 290 TFEU
makes the Commission solely responsible for drafting and adopting delegated acts
although the European Parliament and the Council have an ex-post right of control;
they can oppose or revoke the delegation.

19. Where uniform conditions for implementing legally binding Union acts are
needed, those acts shall confer implementing powers on the Commission (Article
291 TFEU). The rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by
Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers have been laid
down by a Regulation of the European Parliament and the Council of 16 February
2011 (EU/182/2011).14 Implementing acts will easily be identified since the Treaty
requires that the word ‘implementing’ be inserted in the title of these acts.

20. The new “examination procedure” confirms that, in order to prepare an imple-
menting act, the Commission shall be assisted by a committee composed of repre-
sentatives of the Member States where opinions will be delivered with a weighted
majority. The committee shall be chaired by a representative of the Commission who
shall not take part in the committee vote. If the committee does not reach a conclu-
sion or when its opinion is negative, the Regulation provides for a possible appeal
mechanism by the European Commission. Where a basic act is adopted under the
ordinary legislative procedure, either the European Parliament or the Council may
at any time indicate to the Commission that, in its view, a draft implementing act
exceeds the implementing powers provided for in the basic act. In such a case, the
Commission shall review the draft or withdraw the draft implementing act.




14   Regulation EU/182/2011 of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning
     mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise of implementing powers.
     OJ EU L 55 of 28 February 2011



6        Ov rvi w of th Europ            n Union
D. EU INSTITUTIONS & THE EU POLICY-MAKING PROCESS

i.    The primary EU Institutions15

21. At the core of the EU there are seven main institutions, each playing a specific
role: the European Commission, the European Parliament, the European Council, the
Council of Ministers of the European Union, the European Court of Justice (ECJ), the
Court of Auditors and the European Central Bank. The European Commission (the
“Commission”) is the driving force and executive body of the EU playing a central role
in the European decision making process.16 As such, it is responsible for the proposal
of any new legislation to the European Parliament and Council. Additionally, it man-
ages and implements the EU’s policies and budget, “enforce[s] European law (jointly
with the ECJ) [and]…represent[s] the EU on the international stage, for example by
negotiating agreements between the EU and other countries.”17 The Commission is
composed of Commissioners who are in charge of Directorates General (DG), or in-
stitutionalized policy area. Each DG and its staff are managed by a Director General.
The Directorates General are broken down into policy sub-units called Directorates,
which are further broken down into more specific Units. The entire European Com-
mission is meant to function above the level of national interests.

22. In contrast to the supranational EU-level focus of the Commission, the European
Council and the Council of Ministers of the European Union (the “Council”) directly
represents the Member States. They consist respectively of Head of States or
Government18 and of Member States’ Ministers in different configurations depending
on the subjects under discussion. Each country has a number of votes in the Council
broadly reflecting the size of its population, but weighted in favor of smaller coun-
tries. The Council shares with Parliament the responsibility for passing EU laws.19
Once the Commission issues a proposal, the Council is responsible for either approv-
ing or rejecting the proposal. The Member States hold the Presidency of the Council
on a six-month rotational basis. The subject at hand in the Council determines which
Member State ministers attend a Council meeting. The Council is administered by
a General Secretariat which briefs the Presidency, helps prepare the agenda, and
reports on progress. The Committee of Permanent Representatives (COREPER) is the
Council’s key committee, in which the permanent representatives of all EU Member

15   See http://europa.eu/abc/panorama/howorganised/index_en.htm for a more comprehensive description of
     how the EU is organized.
16   The Commission has five basic functions: the right and duty of initiating Community action and legislation;
     the guardian of the Treaties; the responsibility for the implementation of Community decisions;
     the decision-making authority in the field of competition policy; and the external representation of the
     European Community. Egenhofer, C, Kurpas, S, van Schaik, L. op cit (2009)
17   See http://europa.eu/institutions/inst/comm/index_en.htm
18   The wording “European Council” refers solely to the meeting of the Heads of State and Government from the
     respective Member States. It has a permanent President and the President of the Commission also attends
     the meetings. The European Council provides the Union with the necessary impetus for its development and
     defines the general political directions and priorities thereof. It does not exercise legislative functions, which is
     the responsibility of the Council of the European Union. Further details on the different configurations of this
     institution can be found at: http://www.consilium.europa.eu/showPage.asp?id=429&lang=en&mode=g
19   It is also in charge of the EU’s foreign, security and defense policies, and is responsible for key decisions on
     justice and freedom issues.



                                                                    Ov rvi w of th Europ               n Union               7
States sit and prepare the formal Council meetings by trying to secure political agree-
ment among the Member States.

23. The Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) are directly elected every
five years and represent the citizens of the EU. There are 766 Members represent-
ing all 28 EU Member States. The main function of Parliament is to pass European
laws on the basis of proposals presented by the European Commission. Parliament
shares this responsibility with the Council of the European Union. Over time, the
European Parliament’s role in approving legislation along with the Council has in-
creased. Twenty two standing committees exist within Parliament. The Committee
on Economic and Monetary Affairs (ECON) and the Legal Affairs Committee (IURI)
share responsibilities on the regulation and supervision of financial services, institu-
tions and markets including financial reporting, auditing, accounting rules, corpo-
rate governance and other company law matters specifically concerning financial
services. With regard to EU law-making procedures, the Parliament is included in
decisions via three processes detailed hereafter (see paragraphs 26 to 28). It is also
worth noting that the Economic and Social Council representing the social partners
(business, workers and civil society) and the Committee of the Regions issue opinions
on legislative proposals, which are addressed to the three legislative institutions.

24. The ECJ ensures that EU laws are enforced by Member States and are coherently
interpreted and applied uniformly across the EU. In addition, the ECJ plays a pivotal
role of “referee” between the EU and its Member States, as well as between the EU’s
own institutions.

25. Over time and with the passing of successive treaty reforms, the distribution of
powers of these institutions has and continues to shift, particularly as regards the
Commission, the Council and Parliament. Successive EU founding treaties set forth
three main procedures (described in paragraphs 26 to 28) under which these institu-
tions make and/or implement EU policy. A distinctive feature of each procedure is
the degree of influence of the Parliament. Consultation grants the least amount of
influence to Parliament; cooperation increases the powers of Parliament, and ordi-
nary legislative procedure grants the most power to Parliament in the policy-making
process.




8     Ov rvi w of th Europ     n Union
Graphic 1: EU law-making process


                                            European Council
                              (Heads of State + appointed chair and EC chair)
                                      Impetus no legislative function


                                         European Commission
                                                   Initiative


       Council of the EU 10 configurations                              European Parliament
       Representing the 28 Member States                                  766 Elected MEPs
            Discussion and decision                                    Discussion and decision

                                                                                         National
                                                                                       Parliaments
                     Committee             European Economic
                                                                                        influence
                    of the Regions        and Social Committee
                       opinions                 opinions




ii. The law-making process

26. The consultation procedure was the legislative procedure originally provided for
under the Treaty of Rome. It obliges the Council to consult the European Parliament
before voting on a Commission proposal. However, Parliament’s opinion is not
binding on the Council. Until 1987 this procedure applied to the harmonization of
company and accounting law. The Fourth and Seventh EU Company Law Directives
on annual and consolidated accounts were adopted on the basis of this procedure.

27. The cooperation procedure was introduced by the SEA. It gives the European
Parliament greater influence in the legislative process, by allowing it two “readings.”
The scope of this procedure was considerably extended by the Maastricht Treaty
(see paragraph 5); however, the Treaty of Amsterdam (see paragraph 6) reversed
this by introducing the co-decision procedure. Since then, the cooperation procedure
applies exclusively to the field of economic and monetary union.

28. The Treaty of Lisbon (see paragraph 9) expands this further. The co-decision re-
named as “ordinary legislative procedure” places the European Parliament and the
Council of Ministers on an equal footing (i.e., no institution may adopt legislation
without the other’s assent and both institutions have the power to reject legisla-
tion). The procedure allows adoption of legislative proposals in one or two readings
or eventually after a conciliation procedure.20 The ordinary legislative procedure to
adopt regulations or directives is the core legislative procedure for the purpose of
EU law-making in the areas of company law, including accounting and auditing.

20   See http://ec.europa.eu/codecision/procedure/index_en.htm.



                                                                Ov rvi w of th Europ     n Union     9
iii. EU Institutions primarily responsible for
     Corporate Sector Accounting and Auditing

29. Until November 2014, the Directorate General for Internal Market and Services
(DG MARKT) was one of the 44 Directorates General and other specialized services
which make up the European Commission (see paragraph 21). Its main role was to
coordinate the Commission’s policy on the European Single Market, which aims to
ensure ever greater European market integration and the free movement of people,
goods, services and capital within the EU.21 In that context, the DG Internal Market
and Services was responsible for policies and regulations concerning financial ser-
vices, company law, financial reporting, professional qualifications, free movement
of services, and freedom of establishment.

30. The allocation of portfolios and support services to the members of the new
European Commission, which entered into office in November 2014, modified the
administrative organization of the EC. A new Directorate General has been created to
deal with “Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Market Union”. This new
DG takes over part of the responsibilities of the previous DG MARKT; in particular
financial reporting by companies in the private sector and statutory audit. Some
other services directly related to internal market policy, for instance free movement
of professionals throughout the EU, are merged with another Directorate General,
DG Enterprise, which plays already an important role in enhancing the Internal
Market by developing policies, laws and regulations for specific industries and SMEs.
This DG is now renamed “Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs”. It
is also relevant to note that harmonization of company law becomes a competence
of the DG Justice.

31. The European Parliament has two committees that address the topics of com-
pany law, accounting and auditing. The first is the Committee on Economic and
Monetary Affairs. The second committee is the Committee on Legal Affairs.




21   See http://ec.europa.eu/finance/accounting/index_en.htm.



10       Ov rvi w of th Europ           n Union
2.                   The Internal Market


A. BACKGROUND OF THE EU INTERNAL MARKET

32. One of the main objectives of the Treaty of Rome was the creation of a single
common market, with free movement of goods, persons, services and capital,
to accelerate improvements in standards of living. Although a customs union was
established from 1 July 1968, the integration process slowed considerably through
the early 1980s. In June 1985, the Commission adopted the White Paper on the
Completion of the Internal Market to revive the European market integration effort.
This paper set out an ambitious program (the “Europe 1992” program) to create a
truly effective internal market by the end of 1992.

33. In 1987, the Single European Act introduced the notion of an “internal market”
into the existing Articles of the Treaty of Rome, now used interchangeably with the
original expression, “common market .” Although both concepts refer to market in-
tegration and the elimination of all obstacles to intra-Community trade throughout
the EU, the “Internal Market” is seen as a more fully integrated evolution of the
“common market”. The Single European Act introduced a new provision (Article 95)
that empowers the Council to adopt, by a qualified majority vote, measures regard-
ing the establishment and functioning of the Internal Market. In addition, a new
policy in the area of harmonization emerged, shifting the Commission’s previous aim
of comprehensive harmonization of laws, including in the area of company law, to a
reduced approach, based on the subsidiarity principle, focusing on the harmoniza-
tion of only those laws and policies deemed to be essential.

34. Although the “Europe 1992” project resulted in the adoption of most of the
282 Internal Market Directives from the 1985 White Paper by 1 January 1993, a num-
ber of significant measures were still missing. In addition, serious problems existed
with the transposition within individual Member States. The Commission therefore
issued in 1996 a Communication on The Impact and Effectiveness of the Single
Market22 to renew attention on the Internal Market project: it highlighted the gaps
in the current framework, the absence of competition in a number of sectors and the
continuing existence of barriers to trade resulting from a variety of national rules. It
underlined the need for concerted action in the areas of company law and financial
services. Since then, significant progress in deepening the integration of the Internal
Market has been achieved. Approaching the 20th anniversary of the symbolic date
of 1992, Professor Mario Monti was asked by the President of the Commission to

22   See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/economic-reports/docs/single_en.pdf.



                                                                             Th Int rn l M rk t   11
prepare a report containing options and recommendations for the future of the
internal market. This report entitled, “A New Strategy for the Single Market” was
tabled on 9 May 2010 proposing a new set of initiatives to deliver a stronger single
market in Europe. Fifty proposals were selected by the Commission as priorities in
the Communication of October 2010 “Towards a Single Market Act”.23 Commissioner
Michel Barnier and the European Commission intend to keep the Single Market Act
high on the political agenda. The following section describes in more detail the strat-
egies of the internal market.


B. THE INTERNAL MARKET STRATEGIES

35. The EU has launched a number of strategies and action plans to increase efforts
toward the completion of the Internal Market. The European Council’s 1997 Action
Plan for the Single Market24 stressed the need to (a) promote greater competitive-
ness of European capital markets as a means for attracting trade and investment,
as well as (b) make European companies more attractive in international capital
markets. These two goals would be achieved through greater intra-EU legislation
harmonization, and by harmonizing EU accounting rules with internationally accep-
ted accounting standards. Within the Commission’s subsequent 1999 Strategy for
Europe’s Internal Market, four strategic objectives were outlined:

»    to improve the quality of life of citizens,
»    to enhance the efficiency of Community product and capital markets,
»    to improve the business environment, and
»    to exploit the achievements of the Internal Market in a changing world.

36. These objectives continue to be valid today.

37. Each of these strategic objectives was accompanied by a number of operational
objectives, which were intended not only to contribute to the achievement of the
Strategy’s goals but also to act as a benchmark for the progress of the Strategy. Those
relevant to company law, including accounting and audit, are:

» the Financial Services Action Plan (1999)25 followed by the
  Lamfalussy Report (2001)26 proposing institutional measures to accelerate
  the implementation of the FSAP’s objectives;
» the Lisbon Strategy (2000);27
» the Winter Report (2002)28 followed by the Company Law Action Plan (2003);29

23   Doc COM(2010) 608 final/2;
     See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2010:0608:REV1:EN:PDF#page=2
24   See http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/other/l70002_en.htm.
25   See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/finances/docs/actionplan/index/action_en.pdf.
26   See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/securities/docs/lamfalussy/wisemen/final-report-wise-men_en.pdf.
27   See http://ec.europa.eu/growthandjobs/pdf/lisbon_en.pdf.
28   See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/company/docs/modern/report_en.pdf.
29   See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:52003DC0284:EN:HTML.



12       Th Int rn l M rk t
» the White Paper on Financial Services Policy (2005 –2010) (2005); 30
» the Monti Report: A New Strategy for the Internal Market (May 2010)31 and
» The Single Market Acts (I and II) (April 2011 and October 2012)32

38. The corporate scandals and financial turbulence in the first decade of the cen-
tury reemphasized the importance of ensuring high-quality financial reporting and
enforcement through an updated Internal Market Strategy in the area of financial
services. Based on the Report on Financial Supervision in the EU presented by the
High-level Group chaired by Jacques de Larosière,33 a legislative package to strengthen
financial supervision in Europe was approved in September 2010, including the
creation of a European System of Financial Supervisors with three new European
Supervisory Authorities. The approval of these proposals changes substantially the
financial services architecture (see paragraphs 46 – 49).

39. One priority of the Internal Market Strategy is the integration of services markets,
which is of particular relevance to corporate sector accounting and auditing. In the field
of services, there are still considerable differences between Member States, which is a
barrier to the free movement of services. This barrier affects all stages of the business
process and can deter companies from operating in other Member States.

40. The European Commission’s first report on the implementation of the Internal
Market Strategy Priorities for 2003–2006 found that too many European industries, in-
cluding accounting services, still operate in fragmented markets due to trade obstacles
and differences in standards and regulations. Fragmented markets hamper innovation
and productivity growth and keep prices in some parts of the EU at higher levels than
they would be in a more integrated Internal Market. Although the Internal Market has
boosted EU economic growth and created jobs over the past ten years, much still needs
to be done to build on that success. The European Commission’s second report on
the implementation of the Internal Market Strategy 2003–2006 34 pointed to the need
for a stronger focus on completing the legal framework of the Internal Market, ensur-
ing greater coherence and synergy with other EU policies and thus ensuring that the
Internal Market legal framework is better attuned to the global economic framework.

41. The market turmoil at the end of the first decade of the XXIst Century re-emphasized
the need to continue to improve framework conditions for business, particularly for
small and medium sized businesses that in contrast to large companies often find the
single market fragmented and difficult to penetrate. DG MARKT focused on two main
objectives: an integrated and well-functioning Single Market and a properly super-
vised, stable, efficient financial system. To reach these goals specific objectives are
formulated as follows in the DG’s Annual Management Plan 2014,35 including:


30   See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/finances/policy/index_en.htm
31   See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/strategy/docs/monti_report_final_10_05_2010_en.pdf
32   See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/smact/index_en.htm
33   See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/finances/docs/de_larosiere_report_en.pdf
34   See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2005:0011:FIN:EN:PDF.
35   See http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/internal_market/docs/management-plan_en.pdf



                                                                           Th Int rn l M rk t     13
» The EU’s regulatory framework for Services fosters growth and jobs, including
  through mobility in the EU, and supports delivery of quality services for all
  consumers at affordable prices, regardless of the technology used in their delivery;
» EU businesses benefit from a regulatory level playing field and consistent market
  access at international level;
» EU companies can operate and move easily within the EU, are well governed
  and transparent, present high quality and comparable financial reports and are
  subject to high quality audits and ratings;
» Free movement of capital is applied in a coherent way in the EU, enabling access
  for European companies and States to capital and ensuring the integrity of
  financial markets;
» Appropriate supervision, robust market infrastructures and a high level of
  transparency contribute to the stability and integrity in financial markets;
» Effective investor protection is ensured through strict conduct-of business and
  disclosure rules;
» Banking, insurance and pension sectors are stable, resilient and at the service
  of the real economy due to prudential and supervisory measures as well as
  to a resolution regime.


C. FINANCIAL SERVICES REGULATION AND SUPERVISION

42. One of the key operational objectives to be achieved by the Strategy for Europe’s
Internal Market was the implementation of the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP).
EU policymakers viewed the integration of financial services as crucial following the
introduction of the single currency, as this sector acted as “the motor for [economic]
growth and job creation.” The FSAP contained some forty measures aimed at achiev-
ing an integrated market for financial services in the EU. It set out indicative priorities
and a timetable for specific measures to achieve three strategic objectives: establish-
ing a single market in wholesale financial services; making retail markets open and
secure; and strengthening the rules on prudential supervision.

43. Upon the completion of the regulatory aspect of FSAP, the Commission concluded
that the EU financial services industry (banking, insurance, securities, asset manage-
ment) still had strong untapped economic and employment growth potential and is-
sued a White Paper in December 2005, entitled “Financial Services Policy 2005–2010”
detailing the subsequent implementation phase of the FSAP. The policy explores the
best ways to deliver effectively further benefits of financial integration to industry and
consumers alike. Priorities include ensuring sound implementation and enforcement
of existing rules; driving through better regulation principles into all policy making;
enhancing supervisory convergence; creating more competition between service pro-
viders and the expansion of EU’s external influence in globalizing capital markets.

44. A number of other EU initiatives complemented the FSAP. In 2000, the European
Council reaffirmed the need to achieve Community financial market integration, call-
ing for the acceleration and completion of the FSAP by 2005. These initiatives in-


14     Th Int rn l M rk t
cluded the Company Law Action Plan (CLAP) and the Commission’s Communication,
Internal Market Strategy-Priorities 2003 –2006 (see paragraph 52). The Commu-
nication drew upon previous Internal Market Strategies and aimed at strengthen-
ing the Internal Market in the face of its enlargement. Of the numerous goals that
this Communication prioritized, the two most urgent were the implementation of
outstanding FSAP legislation and the development and implementation of “better
governance.” Priorities were revised to the following: (a) completing the legisla-
tive reforms as laid out in FSAP in 1999, (b) improving corporate governance and
(c) harmonizing company law.

45. A difficult problem in EU law-making results from the length of the procedure,
especially when working with directives to be transposed in national legislations. This
seemed to be especially harmful in the areas covered by the Financial Services Action
Plan. In 2001, a Committee of Wise Men on the Regulation of European Securities
Markets produced the Lamfalussy Report. This report sets out a transparent process
of policymaking and laid down a regulatory approach involving different levels of
measures and bodies36 in what has come to be known as the Lamfalussy Process. The
first level involves using the co-decision process with the Council and Parliament to
reach an agreement on the broad principles contained in the legislation. The second
level subsequently enhances the broad principles by adding measures for the actual
implementation of the first level legislation. These ﬁrst two levels aim to promote
greater transparency in the overall legislative process as well as greater consulta-
tion with stakeholders in the process. The next two levels of the Lamfalussy process,
Levels 3 and 4, are respectively the coordination of Member States’ implementation
efforts in an advisory capacity and the proper enforcement of the Lamfalussy meas-
ures across the EU. The Lamfalussy process overall has been praised for facilitating
the speed at which political agreement is reached on financial markets legislation.
Most notably, the process has been credited as a success for the timely delivery of
the Market Abuse Directive (2002), the Prospectus Directive (2003), the Market in
Financial Instruments Directive (2004), and the Transparency Directive (2004).37

46. Following the review of the Lamfalussy process carried out in 2007 by the
Commission, the Inter-Institutional Monitoring Group and the Council, the Commis-
sion initiated a range of actions with a view to strengthening the Lamfalussy pro-
cess, and in particular, cooperation between supervisors and convergence in their
practices. These included, amongst others, a review of national supervisory and
sanctioning powers; of voluntary delegation of tasks; of provisions on supervisory
cooperation and exchange of information; and of consistency of terminology in EU
financial services directives. However, the financial turmoil in 2007–2009 revealed
deeper weaknesses in the system and the need to further strengthen existing mecha-


36   Examples of these bodies were the European Securities Committee (ESC), the Committee of European Securities
     Regulators (CESR), the European Banking Committee (EBC), the Committee of European Banking Supervisors
     (CEBS), the European Insurance and Occupational Pension Committee (EIOPC), the Committee of European
     Insurance and Occupational Pensions Supervisors (CEIOPS), the Accounting Regulatory Committee (ARC), the
     Audit Regulatory Committee (AuRC) and the European Group of Auditors’ Oversight Bodies (EGAOB).
37   See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/securities/docs/lamfalussy/sec-2004-1459_en.pdf.



                                                                              Th Int rn l M rk t               15
nisms and institutions in order to better deal with cross-border and systemic cases.
Appropriate regulatory responses were necessary to prevent repetition of major
financial systemic crises. The foundations of the new structure were defined in a
report prepared under leadership of former IMF Chairman Jacques de Larosière, and
issued in February 2009.38

47. This report analyzed the financial crisis in order to determine the appropriate reg-
ulatory response. The de Larosière group put forward 18 detailed recommendations
including those to develop common rules for investment funds across all 28 EU coun-
tries; to cap bankers’ bonuses in line with shareholder interests; and to establish a
crisis management system for the EU’s financial sector. Subsequently the key princi-
ples were endorsed by the Commission, prompting the unveiling of a comprehensive
financial regulation and supervision reform. This reform includes a supervisory system
that combines much stronger oversight at EU level whilst maintaining a clear role
for national supervisors. Furthermore, it backs the proposal to set up an early warn-
ing body under ECB auspices with the objective of identifying and tackling systemic
risks and recommending a core set of regulatory standards throughout the EU. The
new European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB, the early warning body) and the European
System of Financial Supervisors (ESFS) started operating on 1 January 2011.39 ESFS,
composed of national supervisors and three new European Supervisory Authorities
(European Banking Authority (EBA), European Insurance and Occupational Pensions
Authority (EIOPA), and European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA)) have
stronger powers than the committees (CEBS, CEIOPS and CESR) that they replace.


Graphic 2: European System of Financial Supervision (ESFS)

                          European System of Financial Supervision (ESFS)



     Micro-prudential supervision                                             Macro-prudential Supervision
     » European Banking Authority (EBA)                    Information        European Systemic Risk Board
     » European Insurance and Occupational                                    (ESRB)
       Pensions Authority (EIOPA)
     » European Securities and Market                   Recommendation
       Authority (ESMA)

     Joint Committee of the ESAs
                                                                              National Authorities
     (cross-sectoral coordination)
                                                                              Competent for
     Joint Committee of the ESAs                                              Macro-prudential Supervision
     (cross-sectoral coordination)



38   See above footnote 33.
39   Regulations of the European Parliament and Council establishing the ESRB, the European System of Financial
     Supervision and the three Authorities are published in the Official Journal of the EU L.311 of 15 December 2010;
     Further details in DEMARIGNY F. McMAHON J.& ROBERT N. Review of the New European System of Financial
     Supervision – Part 1, European Parliament, Directorate for Internal Policies, Study, 2013.



16        Th Int rn l M rk t
48. At EU level, as well as globally, financial stability and strengthening the super-
vision of the financial sector are regulators’ priorities. The role of the three European
Supervisory Authorities is central in that respect. They, in particular EBA, had to
establish themselves in the middle of an unprecedented crisis of the European bank-
ing system. The new regulatory framework provides them with a major opportunity
to move towards the establishment of the Single Rulebook reducing fragmentation
of rules and practices. Ensuring a level playing field would provide equal conditions
of competition for financial service providers in the EU. Referring to the Lamfalussy
structure (see paragraph 44), the three Authorities have been given a greater role in
Level 2 in drafting delegated acts and implementing measures. At Level 3, they will
also develop, harmonize and strengthen supervisory methods.

49. The transformation into legislative measures of many proposals out of the de
Larosière Report should underpin a better functioning single market for financial ser-
vices. Additionally, the ensuing Eurozone crisis highlighted the need for a deeper
and better governed economic and monetary union for the single currency to work
in the long run. Therefore, the Head of States decided to build up a Banking Union
specifically but not only designed for countries which share the Euro. The Banking
Union includes a single supervisory mechanism (SSM-entrusted to the ECB)40 a com-
mon system for deposit guarantees (the system in place since 1994 was substantially
modified in 2014)41 a single resolution mechanism (SRM) and a single rule book.42
The SRM was the most difficult piece of legislation on which Member States had
to agree. Directive 2014/59/EU of 15 May 2014 established a framework for the
recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms.43


D. COMPANY LAW HARMONIZATION

50. Despite the Treaty of Rome’s establishment of the European Community in 1958,
significant disparities between Member States’ company law systems remained until
the 1970s. These disparities hampered a deepening of the Internal Market as, for
example, corporate board structures and accounting practices differed greatly be-
tween the Member States. Therefore, a number of Member States actively insisted
that the grant of the right of establishment to companies from all Member States
be counterbalanced by at least some degree of harmonization of national company
laws. One key objective of company law harmonization was to avoid regulatory arbi-
trage, whereby companies could choose to incorporate in a Member State with lax
company laws and then establish themselves in other Member States. Two further


40   Council Regulation (1024/2013/EU) of 15 October 2013 conferring specific tasks on the European Central Bank
     concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions, OJEU 29 Oct. 2013
41   Directive 2014/49/EU of 16 April 2014 on deposit guarantee schemes, OJEU 12 June 2014
42   State of play of the Banking Union on 1.10.2014:
     See: http://ec.europa.eu/finance/general-policy/banking-union/index_en.htm
43   OJEU 12 June 2014. It was followed by Regulation (EU) No 806/2014 establishing a establishing uniform rules
     and a uniform procedure for the resolution of credit institutions OJUE 30 July 2014. The SRM, as well as the
     SSM, require the adoption of a number of other deleted acts and implementing measures, many of which still
     need to be adopted.



                                                                               Th Int rn l M rk t               17
objectives were to facilitate the freedom of establishment of companies and to guar-
antee legal certainty in intra-Community operations.

51. European company law harmonization was also seen as an integral part of an
industrial policy to make European companies more competitive. Directives and
regulations had to provide European companies with instruments and rules to fa-
cilitate cross-border mergers and cooperation to allow them to trade and restruc-
ture at a European level.44 Policymakers also realized the need for specific action to
harmonize financial reporting and financial disclosure practices throughout the EU.
These measures were seen as necessary to attain comparability and equivalence of
company financial information in order to protect creditors and other third parties.
Harmonization was achieved through a series of EU Company Law Directives: the
Fourth Company Law Directive on annual accounts of companies with limited liability
(1978); the Seventh Company Law Directive on consolidated accounts of companies
with limited liability (1983); the Eighth Company Law Directive on the approval of
persons responsible for carrying out the statutory audits of accounting documents
(1984); the Banking Accounts Directive (1986); and the Insurance Accounts Directive
(1991). These directives evolved over time. Most of them were substituted by new
legislations that are discussed in greater detail in Section III of this guide.

52. As one of its main objectives, the FSAP (1999) called for an EU-wide review of
financial reporting. It reiterated the importance of comparable, transparent, and reli-
able financial information for efficient and integrated financial markets. In particular,
the FSAP highlighted the need to consider how this objective could be aligned with
international best practices, which in the Commission’s view included International
Accounting Standards (IAS). In 2002, a Regulation requiring publicly-traded entities
to prepare their consolidated accounts in accordance with IAS (now IFRS) was issued
(see paragraph 110).45

53. The 2002 Winter Report underlined the need for immediate action on im-
proving the EU framework for corporate governance. This led to the Commission’s
Communication on Company Law and Corporate Governance in 2003: “Modernizing
Company Law and Enhancing Corporate Governance in the European Union: A Plan to
Move Forward”. The Plan, known as the Company Law Action Plan (CLAP), adopted on
21 May 2003, proposes a set of initiatives aimed at strengthening shareholders’ rights,
reinforcing protection for employees and creditors, and increasing the efficiency and
competitiveness of European business. It also details a series of corporate govern-
ance initiatives aimed at boosting confidence in capital markets. The CLAP is based on
a comprehensive set of proposals, grouped under six important chapters: corporate
governance; capital maintenance and alteration; groups and pyramids; corporate re-
structuring and mobility; the European Private Company; and cooperatives and other

44   The Third Directive (1978) on mergers and the Sixth Directive (1982) on divisions, as well as the Directive on
     cross-border mergers (2005) and the Regulations on the Statute for a European Company (2001) and on the
     European Economic Interest Grouping (1985) fall within this category.
45   Within this paper, publicly-traded companies are those companies with securities admitted to trading on a
     regulated market in the European Union.



18        Th Int rn l M rk t
forms of enterprises. It led to the adoption of two Recommendations and a Directive
amending the Fourth and Seventh EU Company Law Directives (see Box 1). These Rec-
ommendations and Directive are discussed in greater detail in Section III of this guide.


Box 1: Measures adopted in June 2006 (DIR 2006/46/EU) based on
       measures proposed in the CLAP

     Enhanced corporate governance                    Publicly-traded companies required to
     disclosure                                       issue a “corporate governance statement”
                                                      in their annual report to cover issues
                                                      such as whether the company complies
                                                      with a corporate governance code,
                                                      information about shareholders’ meet-
                                                      ings and the composition and operation
                                                      of the board and its committees.

     Confirming at EU level the collective            Board members to be collectively
     responsibility of board members for              responsible for annual and consolidated
     annual and consolidated accounts                 accounts as well as key non-financial
                                                      information.

     Increasing disclosure of group                   Companies required to disclose related-
     structure and relations,                         party transactions, including “other types
     both financial and non-financial                 of related parties” not previously
                                                      included in the Fourth Directive.



54. A new comprehensive review took place in 2012. In its Consultation Paper, the
European Commission noted that European company law is a cornerstone of the
internal market. EU company law has evolved significantly over the last 40 years.
The adoption of new company law initiatives has become more difficult although the
cross-border dimension of business has grown tremendously both from a company
and from a consumer perspective.46 The Commission’s Communication of 12 Decem-
ber 2012 “Action Plan: European company law and corporate governance – a mod-
ern legal framework for more engaged shareholders and sustainable companies”47
outlines the initiatives which the Commission intends to take in order to modernize
the company law and corporate governance framework. Improvements include in
particular initiatives increasing the level of transparency on corporate governance
reporting, shareholder oversight of related party transactions and the information
available on groups and recognition of the concept of ‘group interest’. The Commis-
sion also plans to improve the framework for cross-border operations of EU compa-
nies and to adopt a proposal codifying and merging major company law Directives.


46    EC Consultation on the future of European Company Law:
      http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/docs/2012/companylaw/questionnaire_en.pdf
47    See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:52012DC0740:EN:NOT



                                                                            Th Int rn l M rk t      19
3.                    Accounting and Auditing in
                      the Acquis Communautaire


55. The Treaty of Rome set out conditions to closely coordinate Member States’ eco-
nomic policies and bring about the completion of the Internal Market, based on the
principle of an open market economy with free competition. Although the Treaty in
its original form did not mention the harmonization of accounting and auditing in the
EU, such harmonization grew in importance with the increasing efforts to complete
the Internal Market, particularly with regards to company law harmonization. The
many differences between national systems of accounting, auditing and company
law were perceived to hinder trade and the movement of capital within the EU. Thus,
the harmonization of accounting and auditing across the EU became a means by
which greater transparency and comparability of financial reporting could facilitate
freer trade and movement of capital across Member States (see Box 2: Examples of
the Reasons for Harmonization). This section summarizes those parts of the acquis
communautaire which relate to accounting, financial reporting, and auditing.


Box 2: Examples of the Reasons for Harmonization48

     1. Creditors                                       Align safeguards to protect creditors of
                                                        Limited Liability Companies.

     2. Investors, financial analysts,                  Need to be able to understand the
     parent-companies, etc.                             annual/consolidated accounts of
                                                        European companies whose shares they
                                                        might wish to buy, hold, or sell. Also
                                                        need to appraise the performance of
                                                        subsidiaries and appraise other European
                                                        companies for potential takeovers.

     3. Preparers                                       Within multinationals, the effort of
                                                        accountants to prepare and consolidate
                                                        accounts is much simplified if annual
                                                        accounts from all around the EU were
                                                        prepared on the same basis.




48    Adapted from Christoper Nobes, Robert Parker (2004), Comparative International Accounting,
      Eighth Edition, Harlow, United Kingdom



20        Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
A. ACCOUNTING: THE ACQUIS COMMUNAUTAIRE AS IT APPLIES TO
   CORPORATE SECTOR ACCOUNTING

56. Historically, two directives form the base of the acquis communautaire on cor-
porate sector financial reporting: the Fourth EU Company Law Directive (1978)49
(“the Fourth Directive”) which covers annual accounts50 of companies, and the
Seventh EU Company Law Directive (1983)51 on consolidated accounts (“the Seventh
Directive”). In adopting these two directives, the EU was attempting to harmonize
accounting. However, the directives include dozens of provisions that begin with ex-
pressions such as “Member States may permit or require […].” Given this flexibility,
the resulting harmonization achieved within the EU was not complete. This might be
explained, to some extent, by the differences in the “purposes of various national
accounting systems in the EU. They include the differences between creditor orienta-
tion in the traditional Franco-German systems and investor orientation in the Anglo-
Dutch systems; between law/tax-based rules and private sector standards.”52

57. Two additional directives were issued to cover the specific nature of the banking
and insurance sectors; the Banking Accounts Directive of 1986,53 and the Insurance
Accounts Directive of 1991.54 Taken together, these four directives are the funda-
mental pillars of the acquis communautaire on corporate sector accounting. They
did much to harmonize national legislations with respect to the obligation to prepare
annual and consolidated accounts, as well as the audit and publication of accounts.

58. However, EU policy-makers recognized in the mid 1990’s that greater harmoniza-
tion of financial reporting was needed for efficient functioning EU capital markets
in an increasingly globalized world. This led to amendments to these directives and
the adoption of Regulation (EC) No 1606/2002 of the European Parliament and the
Council of July 19, 2002 on the application of International Accounting Standards
(now IFRS). Regulation (EC) No 1606/2002 requires companies whose securities are
admitted to trading on a regulated market of any Member State (hereafter referred
to as ‘publicly-traded companies’) to present their consolidated accounts in accord-
ance with endorsed IFRS. The key legislation is summarized below (section ii).

59. In line with a program of simplification of existing EU legislations, the Small Busi-
ness Act (2008) and the Single Market Act (2011), the Fourth and Seventh Directives
were substantially revised in 2013. Expected positive effects of the review of the
accounting directives include a reduction of administrative burden on micro and

49   For a recent consolidated version of the Fourth EU Company Law Directive,
     see http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:1978L0660:20090716:EN:PDF.
50   “Annual accounts” was the term used in EU Company Law Directives when referring to legal entity or
     individual financial statements of a company.
51   For a recent consolidated version of the Seventh EU Company Law Directive,
     see http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:1983L0349:20090716:EN:PDF.
52   Christoper Nobes, Robert Parker (2004), op. cit., p. 96.
53   For a recent consolidated version of the Banking Accounts Directive,
     see http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:1986L0635:20060905:EN:PDF
54   For a recent consolidated version of the Insurance Accounts Directive,
     see http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:1991L0674:20060905:EN:PDF



                                 Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir                    21
small enterprises (“think small first”) as well as qualitative improvements for other
enterprises in the scope of the directives. An additional objective was to increase the
clarity of the text for lawmakers and users in general. The revision process resulted in
a new single Accounting Directive covering both single company financial statements
and consolidated financial statements. The Directive 2013/43/EU on the annual
financial statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain
types of undertakings was approved on 26 June 2013.55 It has to be transposed in the
legislation of EU Member States by 20 July 2015. Accordingly, Directives 78/660/EEC
and 83/349/EEC were repealed.

60. This third edition of the guide (section i below) will follow the structure of the
new Accounting Directive. However, considering that the provisions of the Fourth
and Seventh Directives remain relevant until the deadline for transposition, we iden-
tify the main differences between the current and the future systems.


i. The foundations of the acquis communautaire on
   corporate sector accounting
a. The EU default regime for annual and consolidated financial statements

The Accounting Directive applies to limited liability companies
61. The Accounting Directive is the backbone of the acquis communautaire on
financial reporting for limited liability companies established within the EU. It is based
on the Treaty’s provision allowing coordination of legislations with a view to making
equivalent throughout the Union the safeguards which are required by Member States
of companies, for the protection of the interests of members and others, (Article 50,
2g TFEU). The Accounting Directive is part of the European Company Law whereas
in other part of the world, for instance in the USA, financial reporting standards are
enforced through securities regulations.56 In other words, the purpose is here to pro-
tect a wider group of users including shareholders, lenders and other creditors, em-
ployees, etc. i.e. a larger group than investors on capital markets. This is emphasized
by Recitals 3 and 4 preceding the text of the Directive: “Annual financial statements
pursue various objectives and do not merely provide information for investors in capi-
tal markets but also give an account of past transactions and enhance corporate gov-
ernance.” As far as undertakings with limited liability are concerned, this is of “special
importance for the protection of shareholders, members and third parties”.

62. The Directive covers the annual financial statements and consolidated financial
statements of limited liability companies. Article 1.1(a) sets out the types of com-
panies in each Member State, which fall under the scope of the Directive. Article 1
provides a full list of all legal forms of undertakings covered by the Directive detailed
by each EU Member State (e.g., in the United Kingdom: public companies limited by
shares or by guarantee, private companies limited by shares or by guarantee).

55   OJ EU L.182 of 29.06.2013 – http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32013L0034:EN:NOT
56   A relatively similar approach is adopted in the EU concerning the application of IFRS (see below – section III,A,ii)



22        Accountin         nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
63. Against the background of the Small Business Act, a proposal was made to leave
the very small limited companies (micro-entities) out of the scope of the Accounting
Directive. The argument was that few of these companies develop their business in
more than one Member State. Freedom of establishment is not an issue for them.
The principle of subsidiarity should fully apply. The argument was disregarded in the
European Parliament, which confirmed the approach adopted in the Fourth Directive
in 1978: the requirement to prepare and to publish financial statements is the price to
pay for benefiting of a limited liability. If a difference has to be made, it has to result
from the level of requirements, which cannot be the same for small or large companies.

64. In application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality, partnerships are
out-scoped from obligations of the Directive. Usually, the members of a partnership
do not benefit from a limited liability regime. Partnerships do not represent the same
kind of financial risk for creditors. However, in some cases, a fully liable member of a
partnership can be a limited liability company. Article 1.1 (b) of the Accounting Directive
includes these partnerships within its scope because, ultimately, members of such part-
nerships in fact have limited liability for the partnership’s obligations. Annex II provides
a full list of unlimited legal forms of undertakings covered by the Directive detailed by
each EU Member State (e.g., in the United Kingdom: partnerships, limited partnerships,
unlimited companies). More broadly, Recital 6 of the Directive states: “The scope of
this Directive should be principles-based and should ensure that it is not possible for an
undertaking to exclude itself from that scope by creating a group structure containing
multiple layers of undertakings established inside or outside the Union.”

65. A parent undertaking is required to prepare consolidated financial statements if it
has legal or economic control over subsidiary undertakings (wherever they are estab-
lished). If a parent undertaking is itself a company falling within the scope of Article 1
of the Accounting Directive, it has to prepare both annual financial statements and
consolidated financial statements. However, nothing prevents a Member State to re-
quire undertakings which do not fall within the scope of Article 1 to prepare consoli-
dated financial statements (Recital 30). Consolidated financial statements integrate
the assets and liabilities, profits and losses of the parent company and all of its subsidi-
ary undertakings, after elimination of intra-group transactions and intra-group profits.
Subsidiaries are entities which are controlled by the parent company. Article 22 de-
fines the conditions to be a subsidiary. It does not modify substantially the concept
of control as described in the Seventh Directive. Control will result from a majority of
voting rights, the right to appoint a majority or remove a majority of the members of
the administrative, management or supervisory body and the right to exercise a domi-
nant influence over an undertaking pursuant to agreements with fellow shareholders
or members. In certain circumstances control may be effectively exercised where the
parent holds a minority or none of the shares in the subsidiary. Similarly to the Seventh
Directive, the new text also provides for an optional regime of proportional consoli-
dation in the case of joint operations, and also for a number of exemptions including
in favor of sub-groups of companies if they are part of a larger group preparing and
publishing audited consolidated financial statements in accordance with the Directive,
or in an equivalent manner where the parent company is not established in the EU.


                          Accountin     nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir             23
66. Not-for-profit undertakings are excluded from the scope of the Accounting
Directive.

The Accounting Directive applies a “building blocks” approach from
micro to large-sized companies
67. The methodology of the Fourth and Seventh Directives was to provide require-
ments applicable to the larger companies while granting exemptions to medium-
sized and even more exemptions for small companies. The Accounting Directive
adopts another approach: essential requirements apply to all undertakings including
micro entities. More detailed rules and additional disclosures are imposed to larger
undertakings according to their size. This will permit the legislator to clearly define
the size of the undertakings to which it wants a new and additional requirement to
apply, without multiplying the number of exemptions.

68. The new Directive defines 4 levels of undertakings: micro, small, medium-sized
and large (not including public-interest entities to which Regulation (EC) 1606/2002
on the application of IFRS applies as explained later). Additionally, the text defines
3 levels of groups of undertakings. The thresholds used by the Directive to define
each level of undertaking are both for annual and consolidated financial statements:
balance sheet total, net turnover and average number of employees during the
financial year. The undertaking must be within any two of the three thresholds
indicated in the table below (box 3) for two successive accounting periods. The values
of the monetary thresholds are regularly increased to take into account monetary
and economic developments.57


Box 3: Thresholds defining categories of undertakings and groups

                                       Balance sheet total                 Net turnover         Average number of
                                                  (000 €)                        (000 €)               employees

     Micro entity                                      ≤ 350                       ≤ 700                         ≤ 10
     Small undertaking                              ≤ 4.000                     ≤ 8.000                          ≤ 50
     Optional increase for                          ≤ 6.000                   ≤ 12.000                           ≤ 50
     Member States
     Medium-sized                                 ≤ 20.000                    ≤ 40.000                         ≤ 250
     undertakings
     Large undertaking                            > 20.000                    > 40.000                         > 250
     Small group                                    ≤ 4.000                     ≤ 8.000                          ≤ 50
     Medium-sized group                           ≤ 20.000                    ≤ 40.000                         ≤ 250
     Large group                                  > 20.000                    > 40.000                         > 250


57    In order to adjust for the effects of inflation, the Commission shall at least every five years review and,
      where appropriate, amend, by means of delegated acts, these thresholds, taking into account measures of
      inflation as published in the Official Journal of the European Union.” (Article 3.13 of the Accounting Directive)



24         Accountin         nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
69. Small groups are exempted from the obligation to draw up consolidated finan-
cial statements and a consolidated management report, except where any affiliated
undertaking is a public-interest entity. Member States may exempt medium-sized
groups from these obligations.

70. There are large differences among Member States regarding how thresholds are
set nationally. These reflect differences in policymaking which may be explained by:

» Concerns about the potential inclusion of “public interest” companies: some
  Member States are concerned that accepting the thresholds set out in the direc-
  tive may result in including fairly large companies where full financial information
  is of interest to financial institutions, public and private shareholders and to the
  public in general.
» Concerns about the impact on SME financial management practices:
  some Member States are concerned that the relief options may affect the
  SMEs’ financial management practices and, indirectly, the processes of
  tax collection by Governments.
» The perception by some Member States that higher thresholds for defining SMEs
  are a key way of limiting the administrative burdens for companies.

71. On 18 December 2008 the European Parliament adopted a non-legislative reso-
lution stating that the accounting directives are often very burdensome for small
and medium-sized companies. In line with this resolution, on 14 March 2012, the
EU Parliament and Council amended the Fourth Directive to include a hyper-simplified
accounting regime to a newly defined category of micro-entities.58 This amendment
was considered in the overhaul of the Fourth Directive, which was simultaneously
prepared by the EC. Therefore the Accounting Directive (2013) goes for a maximum
harmonization. It prevents Member States from adopting lower thresholds in the
definition of small undertakings. Member States are even allowed to increase, at a
maximum by one third, the default thresholds for small undertakings’ turnover and
balance sheet total.

72. By contrast, a public-interest entity, including listed companies, shall be treated as
a large undertaking regardless of its net turnover, balance sheet total or average num-
ber of employees during the financial year. Consistent with the overarching investor
protection policy objective of the EU, the simplifications and exemptions available to
small and medium-sized companies do not apply to publicly-traded SMEs (Article 40).

Financial Reporting Principles – Recognition and Measurement
73. The Accounting Directive (2013) states that the objective of the annual accounts
is to provide a true and fair view of the financial position and performance of the
company, which would normally be obtained by applying the provisions of the direc-
tive. However, in exceptional cases the directive requires a departure from the provi-
sions of the directives if that is needed to provide a true and fair view. This so-called

58   OJ EU L.81 of 21 March 2012; http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:32012L0006



                                Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir                   25
“true and fair view override” has been extensively discussed and remains a heavily-
debated topic in the context of international accounting standard setting.59

74. The Directive contains minimum recognition and measurement principles (re-
ferred to as “valuation rules” in the directives).60 Article 6.1 defines general account-
ing principles, which can be summarized as follows:
» Amounts recognized in the balance sheet and profit and loss account shall be
  computed on the accrual basis;
» The opening balance sheet for each financial year shall correspond to the closing
  balance sheet for the preceding financial year;
» Set-off between asset and liability items, or between income and expenditure
  items, is prohibited;61
» Items recognized in the financial statements shall be measured in accordance
  with the principle of purchase price or production cost;
» The undertaking shall be presumed to be carrying on its business as a going concern;
» Accounting policies and measurement bases shall be applied consistently from
  one year to the next;
» Recognition and measurement shall be on a prudent basis;
» Components of asset and liability items shall be valued separately;
» Items in the profit and loss account and balance sheet shall be accounted for
  and presented having regard to the substance of the transaction or arrangement
  concerned;
» Requirements set out in this Directive regarding recognition, measurement, pres-
  entation, disclosure and consolidation need not be complied with when the effect
  of complying with them is immaterial. However, Member States may limit the
  scope of this principle to the presentation of financial statements and disclosures.

75. The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting of the International
Accounting Standards Board (IASB) states “Accrual accounting depicts the effects of
transactions and other events and circumstances of a reporting entity’s economic
resources and claims in the period in which those effects occur, even if the resulting
cash receipts and payments occur in a different period” (OB17). This is a fundamental
and generally accepted accounting principle; it is usually opposed to “cash account-
ing”, which recognizes the effects of transactions when cash is received or payments
occur. The Fourth Directive imposed the respect of accrual accounting principles in
all circumstances. By way of simplification, the Accounting Directive 2013 provides
however a limited option to Member States, to allow micro entities to apply some
form of cash accounting (Article 36 a).

76. Historical cost (purchase price or production cost) remains the default measure-
ment regime in the Accounting Directive 2013. However, by way of derogation,

59   For example, refer to Alexander, D. (1993), A European true and fair view?, European Accounting Review,
     Vol. 2, No. 1.
60   It should be noted that the Directive includes very few recognition principles. For example, the principles govern-
     ing the recognition of the revenue from the sale of goods or the rendering of services are only briefly set out.
61   Exceptions to this principle are however possible; See Article 6.2



26        Accountin         nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
Article 7 permits Member States to provide for an alternative measurement basis of
fixed assets at revalued amounts. This article is narrower than the Fourth Directive
which authorized other methods to deal with the consequences of inflation. Fur-
thermore, with the adoption of Regulation (EC) No 1606/2002 and the subsequent
endorsement of individual IFRS,62 new recognition and measurement principles be-
came part of the acquis communautaire, in particular measurement at fair value.
The Fourth and Seventh Directives were amended in 2001 and 2003 to allow the use
of fair value and to pave the way for the endorsement of IFRS. As a consequence,
Article 8 of the Accounting Directive 2013 provides for specific rules related to valua-
tion at fair value of financial instruments, including derivatives. Member States may
even permit or require fair value measurement of specified categories of assets other
than financial instruments. The Directive defines how fair value will be determined,
whether changes in fair value will be included in the income statement or directly in
equity, and what information needs to be disclosed in the notes.

77. Moreover, some recognition and measurement options allow Member States
to closely align financial reporting requirements with tax accounting.63 This may be
explained by the fact that “in most continental European countries […], the tradi-
tional paucity of ‘outside’ shareholders has meant that external financial reporting
has largely been invented for the purposes of protecting creditors and for govern-
ments, as tax collectors or controllers of the economy. […] It also seems likely that the
greater importance of creditors in these countries leads to more careful (prudent,
conservative) accounting.”64 This approach raises questions concerning some princi-
ples mentioned above mainly those of prudence, and substance over form. Prudence
is highly debated because some preparers (ab)use it to validate undervaluation of
assets or overvaluation of liabilities for taxation purpose. The Directive also author-
izes applications of this principle, for instance related to provisions65 that would not
be fully in line with IFRS. Despite the risk of misinterpretation, prudence should
however continue to play an important role.66 “Substance over form” raises similar
problems, which generated to long discussions in the preparation of the Directive.
Therefore Article 6.3 allows Member States to provide for exceptions to this principle.

78. An undertaking which draws up consolidated financial statements applies the
same measurement bases as are applied in its annual financial statements. However,
Member States may permit or require that other measurement bases be used. We


62   To be adopted for application in the EU a standard must meet the conditions set out in Article 3 of Regulation
     (EC) No 1606/2002: Its application must result in a true and fair view of the financial position and performance
     of an enterprise; it must be conducive to the European public good; and it must meet basic criteria as to the
     quality of information required for financial statements to be useful to users.
63   Gielen F. and Hegarty J.(2007) “An Accounting and Taxation Conundrum: The Relationship between Corporate
     Income Tax, Accounting and Financial Reporting: A Pan-European Perspective in the Context of Adoption of
     International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)” World Bank, Washington
64   Nobes C. and Parker R. (2004), op. cit., p. 23.
65   Article 6 states: “Only profits made at the balance sheet date may be recognized” and 6.5: “Member States may
     permit or require the recognition of all foreseeable liabilities and potential losses arising in the course of the
     financial year concerned or in the course of a previous financial year, even if such liabilities or losses become
     apparent only between the balance sheet date and the date on which the balance sheet is drawn up.”
66    See for instance EFRAG Bulletin (2013), “Getting a Better Framework: Prudence”, EFRAG, Brussels.



                                  Accountin         nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir                            27
highlight Article 24 of the Directive: “Where assets included in consolidated finan-
cial statements have been the subject of value adjustments solely for tax purposes,
they shall be incorporated in the consolidated financial statements only after those
adjustments have been eliminated.” This means that, in principle, it will be easier to
comply with the objective of true and fair view in consolidated financial statements
than in the annual accounts.

Presentation of Annual Financial Statements and Disclosures
79. Both annual financial statements and consolidated financial statements must
include a balance sheet, a profit and loss account, and notes on the accounts. The
Directive does not require a cash flow statement or a statement of changes in equity.
However, Article 4.1 states: “Member States may permit or require undertakings
other than small undertakings to include other statements in the annual financial
statements in addition to the documents referred to in the first subparagraph.”

80. The Accounting Directive 2013 sets out standardized formats for the lay-out of
the balance sheet and the profit and loss accounts (the number of possible layouts
has been reduced compared to the Fourth Directive). It describes the nomenclature
and the terminology of items in the balance sheet and profit and loss account. It
also defines the minimum contents of the notes to the annual accounts. However,
the Directive does not impose a uniform chart of accounts as exists, for example, in
Belgium, France or Spain.

81. The “building block approach” applies mainly in the presentation of financial
statements. The lay-out and also the number of notes to the accounts vary according
to the size of the undertaking.
» Micro-entities have to provide minimum information in the balance-sheet and
  the profit and loss account as explained in Article 36; additionally the number of
  notes to the accounts is strictly limited (Article 16.3).
» Small companies can be allowed to draw up abridged balance sheet and profit
  and loss accounts (Article 14.1); as for micro-entities, the number of notes to the
  accounts is strictly limited (Article 16.3).
» Medium-sized companies can be allowed to prepare aggregate profit and loss
  information (Article 14.2), to disclose a larger but still reduced number of
  information in the notes (Article 17) and not to draw up consolidated accounts
  (Article23).
» Large companies and public interest entities are not entitled to benefit from
  exemptions. They are submitted to the largest number of disclosures (Article 18).

82. The Accounting Directive 2013 requires the same standardized formats for the
layout of the consolidated balance sheet and the consolidated profit and loss state-
ment as for annual financial statements. It further sets out a number of essential
adjustments resulting from the particular characteristics of consolidated accounts as
compared with annual accounts (e.g., minority interests).




28    Accountin    nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
83. The Directive defines the minimum contents of the notes to the annual financial
statements. Some notes explain the basis for recognition and measurement of items.
Others provide a disaggregation of amounts in the balance sheet or the profit and
loss account. Undertakings are also required to disclose off-balance-sheet arrange-
ments and related-party transactions in the notes. The list of disclosures is similar for
consolidated financial statements but the undertaking must add specific information
about the subsidiary undertakings included in the consolidation, such as their regis-
tered office and the proportion of the capital held by the parent undertaking.

Non-Financial Information
84. The management report and the consolidated management report are not
components of financial statements. They are however important elements of finan-
cial reporting because their main purpose is to provide the reader with a balanced
and comprehensive analysis of the development and performance of the undertak-
ing’s business and of its position, together with a description of the principal risks
and uncertainties that it faces. Article 19 of the Accounting Directive requires that
the analysis includes both financial and, where appropriate, non-financial key perfor-
mance indicators relevant to the particular business, including information relating
to environmental and employee matters. This Article provides a list of non-financial
information to be included in the management report that is supplemented by
Article 29 concerning the consolidated management report. Where a consolidated
management report is required in addition to the management report, the two
reports may be presented as a single report (Article 29.3).

85. Member States may exempt micro and small undertakings from the obliga-
tion to prepare management reports. Medium-sized undertakings must prepare a
management report but Member States may exempt them from the obligation to
disclose non-financial information relating to environmental and employee matters
(Article 19.3 and .4).

86. Non-financial information remains an area for future development. The Euro-
pean Commission proposed on 16 April 2013 a directive enhancing the transpar-
ency of certain large companies on social and environmental matters. The Directive
was approved on 22 October 2014 and published in the Official Journal on 15 No-
vember 2014. Large public-interest entities (mainly listed companies and financial
institutions) with more than 500 employees will be required to disclose relevant
and useful environmental and social information in their management reports.
Disclosures relate to policies, risks and results as regards environmental matters,
social and employee-related aspects, respect for human rights, anti-corruption and
bribery issues, and diversity on the boards of directors, well beyond what is currently
required by Article 29 of the Accounting Directive 2013.

87. Public interest entities are required to include a corporate governance state-
ment in their management report. This statement refers to the corporate governance
code to which the undertaking is subject. It provides information on the composition
and operation of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies and their


                         Accountin    nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir            29
committees. It also provides a description of the main features of the undertaking’s
internal control and risk management systems in relation to the financial reporting
process.

88. A new kind of disclosure has been introduced in Chapter 10 of the Accounting
Directive in 2013: “Member States shall require large undertakings and all public-
interest entities active in the extractive industry or the logging of primary forests to
prepare and make public a report on payments made to governments on an annual
basis.” This country by country reporting should enhance transparency of payments
made to governments of resource-rich countries.

Publication, Responsibility and Statutory Audit
89. The Accounting Directive 2013 (Article 30) requires undertakings falling within
its scope to publish their financial statements, consolidated financial statements,
management report, consolidated management report, and the statutory auditor’s
report by filing them with a commercial register (e.g., the Companies House in
the United Kingdom). The publication of the accounting documents follows the
mechanisms set out in the First EU Company Law Directive (the “First Directive”
2009/101/EC). This Directive requires Member States to provide for appropriate
penalties in the case of failure to disclose these accounting documents. Recital 39 of
the Accounting Directive strongly encourages Member States to develop electronic
publication systems, already existing in a number of countries, which allow under-
takings to file accounting data, including statutory financial statements, only once and
in a form that allows multiple users to access and use the data easily. Member States
may, however, exempt undertakings from the obligation to publish the management
report where a copy of all or part of any such report can be easily obtained upon
request at a price not exceeding its administrative cost.

90. Small undertakings may be exempted from the obligation to publish the full
set of information included or accompanying financial statements. Not only may
Member States exempt them from preparing and publishing management reports
but they may also exempt them from the requirement to publish the profit and loss
account. (Article 31.1) Micro undertakings can even be totally exempted from pub-
lication of their financial statements provided that the balance sheet information
contained therein is duly filed with at least one competent authority designated by
the Member State concerned. (Article 36.1.d)

91. The members of the administrative, management and supervisory bodies of the
company must be collectively responsible at least to the company for the annual
financial statements, the consolidated financial statements, the management report,
the consolidated management report and, when required, the corporate governance
statement. Article 33 of the Accounting Directive, initially introduced into legislation
in 2008, translates a recommendation made in the Winter Report.

92. The scope of statutory audit also derives from the Accounting Directive which
requires that, except for the exemptions available for small companies, annual ac-


30    Accountin     nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
counts of all limited liability companies be audited by an approved statutory audi-
tor. The statutory auditors are also required to express an opinion concerning the
consistency of the annual report with the annual accounts. A comprehensive regime
applicable to statutory auditors is defined by the Directive 2006/43/EC that if further
commented in section III.B of this guide.


b. Directive on the Annual Accounts of Banks and
   other Financial Institutions (The “ Bank Accounts Directive”)

93. The Fourth and Seventh Directives acknowledged the special nature of the activ-
ities of banks and other financial institutions (hereafter referred to as “banks”) and of
insurance undertakings by allowing Member States not to bring those bodies within
the scope of the directives when implementing them. The gap in respect of banks
and other financial institutions was filled by the Bank Accounts Directive, and the gap
in respect of insurance undertakings was filled by the Insurance Accounts Directive.

94. The Bank Accounts Directive (86/635/EEC)67 applies to annual and consolidated
accounts of banks established in the EU regardless of their legal form (but not to
branches, see paragraph 106). The Bank Accounts Directive covers the same areas as
the accounting directives and most general provisions are to be read across directly
from them. Apart from applying these read-across provisions to banks, the Directive
sets out specific balance sheet and profit and loss statement layouts; it determines
what items should be included under each statement heading; it requires a number
of additional disclosures in the notes to the accounts; it establishes specific measure-
ment principles; and it adapts the consolidation requirements set out in the Seventh
Directive.

95. The provisions set out in the Directive contain a number of Member State options:

» Hidden reserves – Member States have the option to allow banks to understate
  by up to 4 per cent the value of certain assets (e.g., loans and advances). The
  principal arguments for the maintenance of these “hidden reserves” – which had
  been widely used in the past – related to the importance of maintaining confi-
  dence and thus stability in financial markets and the consequent need to smooth
  out the fluctuation in profits from year to year inherent in the banking business.
  The principal arguments against the maintenance of the “hidden reserves” were
  that they limit the usefulness of the profit figure in the accounts as an indica-
  tor of performance and that their existence is inconsistent with the need for
  creditors and shareholders to be in a position to make informed assessments of a
  bank’s financial strength, its short-term performance and long-term trends.
» Fund for general banking risks – If the “hidden reserves” option is not exercised,
  Member States have the option to permit banks to create a fund for general

67   For the most recent consolidated version of the Bank Accounts Directive,
     see http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:1986L0635:20060905:EN:PDF



                               Accountin       nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir                31
  banking risks; if “hidden reserves” are not permitted, the Directive requires that
  banks be permitted to create such a fund. The fund is intended as a means of
  allowing banks to set aside amounts required to cover ‘the particular risks associ-
  ated with banking’ and is disclosed as a balance sheet liability.
» Foreign currency translation – The general rule was that assets and liabilities
  should be translated at the spot rate at the balance sheet date. Member States
  may, however, require or permit assets held as non-monetary assets to be
  translated at the rates ruling on the dates of their acquisition. Outstanding
  forward and spot exchange transactions should be translated at the spot rates of
  exchange ruling on the balance sheet date. However, Member States may require
  forward transactions to be translated at the forward rate ruling on the balance
  sheet date. The Directive also included a number of other options regarding
  foreign exchange translation.

96. There is some doubt as to whether the application of the specific recognition
and measurement possibilities of the Bank Accounts Directive provides a true and
fair view of the financial position and performance of banks. Also, the many options
available to Member States hinder comparability within the EU. At the time of the
adoption of the Directive, the most important policy prerogative appeared to be
maintaining public trust in the stability of the banking sector through allowing in-
come smoothing and the creation of reserves. The requirement to apply endorsed
IFRS changed this drastically for publicly-traded banks, which prepare consolidated
accounts (see paragraph 110).

97. Since IFRS became mandatory for the consolidated accounts of publicly-traded
banks, the Committee of European Banking Supervisors (which is now transformed
into the European Banking Authority – EBA) has issued guidance on a standardized
financial reporting framework for banks based on IFRS (FINREP).68 This framework
should enable banks to use the same standardized data formats and data definitions
for financial reporting in all countries where the framework is applied. This is in-
tended to reduce the reporting burden for banks that have cross-border operations,
and lower barriers to the development of an efficient internal market in financial
services. These Guidelines have been frequently revised to increase harmonization
as well as to reflect changes in the accounting standards and Capital Requirements
Directive. Changes in IFRS endorsed by the European Commission have been incor-
porated into the revised FINREP. Based on the new Capital Requirement Directive
CRD.IV, the EBA should develop an implementing technical standard replacing
FINREP Guidelines.

98. EBA has also published Guidelines on Common Reporting (COREP).69 These
guidelines are intended to be used by banks when preparing prudential reports to
be sent to any EU Supervisory Authority according to the new capital framework


68   See http://www.eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/Supervisory-Reporting
69   See http://www.eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/supervisory-reporting/guidelines-on-common-report-
     ing-2011-



32       Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
established in the new Capital Requirements Directive (CRD.IV), which implements
the revised international capital framework (Basel III) in the EU. Following the adop-
tion of the CRD.IV, EBA should develop a set of implementing technical standards on
supervisory reporting replacing existing Guidelines.70


c. Insurance Undertakings Directive (the “ Insurance Accounts Directive”)

99. The Insurance Accounts Directive (91/674/EEC)71 draws on a large number of the
provisions in the Fourth and Seventh Directives which had not, until then, applied
to insurance undertakings. Notwithstanding a few exceptions (e.g., undertakings
which are not companies within the meaning of Article 54 TFEU and certain bodies
or mutual associations), the Directive applies to undertakings engaged in life, non-life
or reinsurance business.

100. Financial statements of insurance undertakings comprise a balance sheet, a
profit and loss account, and notes. The Directive requires that the accounts be pre-
pared in accordance with its detailed provisions and by reference to the accounting
directives72 requires that individual and consolidated accounts give a true and fair
view of the financial position and performance of insurance undertakings. While the
Directive broadly harmonizes accounting for insurance undertakings in the EU, the
existence of numerous options restricts comparability. The requirement to apply en-
dorsed IFRS changed this drastically for publicly-traded insurance undertakings which
prepare consolidated accounts (see paragraph 110).

101. The differences from the requirements which are imposed on companies
in general (through the accounting directives) include, but are not limited to, the
following issues:

» Valuation of investments – Most of the assets of insurance undertakings are
  investments held to meet future liabilities to policyholders and therefore there
  is considerable interest in the method of valuation employed. The categories
  of fixed and current assets required by the accounting directives are abandoned
  in favor of a single concept of investments which includes all lands and build-
  ings.73 The Directive states that investments may be valued either according to
  historical cost principles or at current value (values according to the non-chosen
  option should however be presented in the notes). It does not seek to choose
  between the merits of either method.


70   A final draft “Implementing Technical Standard on Supervisory Reporting (COREP, COREP Large Exposures and
     FINREP) has been adopted by the EBA and submitted to the European Commission in July 2013 and is available
     on the EBA’s website: http://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/359626/EBA+ITS+2013+02+%28Draft+ITS+
     on+supervisory+reporting%29.pdf/f3e58351-8aec-4827-8e8e-628525122414
71   For the most recent consolidated version of the Insurance Accounts Directive,
     see http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31991L0674:EN:NOT
72   References to the Fourth and Seventh Directives must be construed as references to the Accounting Directive
     (2013). A correlation table is provided for in Annex VII (Article 52).
73   Land and buildings occupied by the insurance undertaking must be disclosed separately.



                                Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir                        33
» The fund for future appropriations – A Member State may permit an insurance
  undertaking to include amounts whose allocation either to policyholders or to
  shareholders remains undetermined at the close of the financial year. It is largely
  a holding account to enable a smooth ﬂow of surplus to emerge.
» Deferred acquisition costs – The Directive requires that the costs of acquiring
  insurance policies be deferred in accordance with the accounting directives
  insofar as a Member State decides not to prohibit deferral.
» Technical provisions – The Directive requires insurance undertakings to draw
  sector specific provisions, including technical provision for unearned premiums,
  life assurance provision, claims outstanding and equalization provisions.74

102. The European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) was
established as a part of a European System of Financial Supervisors to supervise the
financial sector in the European Union. It is carrying out a significant amount of work
to improve the links between annual/consolidated accounts and supervisory report-
ing by insurance undertakings. This issue is particularly important in the context of
the Directive 2009/138/EC of 25 November 2009 on the taking-up and pursuit of the
business of Insurance and Reinsurance (Solvency II) as it relates to supervisors’ needs
for accounting information.75

103. The prudential directives76 and more specifically in future the Solvency II Direc-
tive require every insurance undertaking to submit to the supervisory authorities
the information which is necessary for the purposes of supervision. Article 35 of the
Solvency II Directive empowers the European Commission and EIOPA, each in their
field of competence to specify the required information, with a view to ensuring to
the appropriate extent convergence of supervisory reporting.

104. However, Member States have to a large extent cross-used financial report-
ing and supervisory reporting requirements to arrive at a situation where the same
accounting rules are used for both purposes. Several Member States use the same
set of accounts in principle without adjustments; others perform certain adjustments
or require additional information for supervisory purposes. A few Member States
have more extensive supervisory reporting rules, in certain cases leading more or
less to a separate set of prudential financial statements. However even these sepa-
rate financial statements normally take their starting point in the annual and consoli-
dated accounts.

105. The European Commission evaluated different accounting alternatives for the
Solvency II project. In that context, there appears to be increasing alignment between

74   Provision to compensate the frequent fluctuation in claims that characterizes natural events
75   The Solvency II Directive (OJ-EU, L 335 of 17.12.2009) is a fundamental and wide-ranging review of the
     current insurance Directives to ensure adequate policy-holder protection in all EU Member States.
     The transposition date has been postponed to 1 January 2016 (Directive 2013/58/EU – OJ-EU, L 341 of
     18.12.2013) because the Solvency II Directive needs to be amended in order to take into account the
     new supervisory architecture for insurance, namely the setting-up of the EIOPA.
     http://ec.europa.eu/finance/insurance/solvency/solvency2/index_en.htm
76   See Directive 73/239/EEC Article 19, Directive 79/269/EEC Article 23.



34        Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
the unfolding proposals for Solvency II and the IASB project on Insurance Contracts
(Phase II). The IASB issued a revised exposure draft for a standard on insurance con-
tracts in June 2013 which could be finalized in 2014. The Committee of European
Insurance and Occupational Pensions Supervisors (which is now transformed into
the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority – EIOPA) advised the
European Commission on the development of Solvency II considering that disclo-
sures made by insurance undertakings under financial reporting, listing or other legal
or regulatory requirements may be relied upon to fulfill the equivalent supervisory
disclosure requirements.77


d. Other relevant Company Law Directives and “soft law” Instruments

106. A number of other important directives and “soft law” instruments relate to
accounting, including:
» Directive 2009/101/EC on coordination of safeguards for the protection of the in-
  terests of members and third parties: 78 Among other things, this Directive requires
  companies to publish specific company information in a commercial register or
  companies register in the Member State in which they are registered. Member
  States shall ensure that the filing of all documents is possible by electronic means.
  Financial information which is required to be published in accordance with
  EU directives must be part of documents available in the register. A copy of the
  whole or any part of the documents must be obtainable on application by paper
  means or by electronic means as the applicant chooses.
» Directive 2012/30/EU on coordination of safeguards which, for the protection
  of the interests of members and others, are required by Member States of com-
  panies, in respect of the formation of public limited liability companies and the
  maintenance and alteration of their capital, with a view to making such safeguards
  equivalent.79 This Directive sets forth the means of coordination of safeguards for
  the “minimal equivalent protection for both shareholders and creditors” of public
  liability companies. It provides therein two principles which Member States must
  adhere to, i.e. (i) the minimal capital with which a company must initially begin and
  subsequently maintain, and (ii) the shareholders’ rights regarding the issuance of
  new capital and the payment for shares. It includes detailed rules on the formation
  and the maintenance, increase or reduction of their capital. Profit distribution is
  also regulated.
» Directive 2011/35/EU concerning mergers of public limited liability companies and
  Directive 82/891/EEC concerning the division of public limited liability companies
  know as Third and Sixth Directives.80

77   CEIOPS “Advice to the European Commission on Supervisory Reporting and Public Disclosure in the
     Framework of the Solvency II project” CEIOPS-DOC-03/07, March 2007
78   See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX:32009L0101.
     Before 21 October 2009, this Directive was referred to as the First Company Law Directive – 68/151/EEC
79   See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32012L0030:EN:NOT
     Before 25 October 2012, this Directive was referred to as the Second Company Law Directive (77/91/EEC)
80   Third Directive: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32011L0035:EN:NOT and
     Sixth Directive: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32011L0035:EN:NOT



                                 Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir                        35
» Directive (89/666/EEC) on Disclosure Requirements in Respect of Branches:81
  The Eleventh Directive, adopted in 1989, sets forth the disclosure requirements
  for branches of companies operating in Member States. These branches can be of
  a company under the jurisdiction of another Member State or of a third country.
  While subsidiaries of companies incorporated in one Member State fall under
  the jurisdiction of the host Member State, the treatment of foreign branches of
  a company was unclear until the adoption of the Eleventh Directive. Directive
  89/117/EEC on Accounting Documents of Branches of Foreign Credit and Financial
  Institutions82 extends the scope of the Eleventh Council Directive to include
  branches of credit institutions.
» Recommendation 2001/453/EC on Recognition, Measurement and Disclosure
  of Environmental Issues in the Annual Accounts and Annual Reports of EU
  Companies:83 This Recommendation was adopted in order to address the lack of
  harmonization of Member States ’ rules and definitions as to the disclosure of
  environmental information. Because this information was considered unreliable or
  often lacking altogether, this Commission Recommendation seeks to set a standard
  for disclosure. It will be largely superseded by the new Directive on Non-Financial
  Information (see paragraph 84).


B. FINANCIAL REPORTING FOR ISSUERS ON
   EU REGULATED FINANCIAL MARKETS

i.    Developing Integrated and Liquid Capital and Financial Services Markets

107. The above mentioned accounting directives brought about a degree of har-
monization and improvements in the quality of financial information across the EU.
However, by the end of the 1990s it was clear that financial statements drawn up in
compliance with the Fourth and Seventh Directives did not fully help to achieve the
policy objectives of the EU, including the creation of an integrated market in financial
services as set out in the FSAP adopted in May 1999.

108. In a Communication of 1995,84 the European Commission acknowledged that
the Fourth and Seventh Directives do not provide answers to all the problems facing
the preparers and users of accounts and accounting standard setters. The result of
this last problem is that large European companies seeking capital on the interna-
tional capital markets, most often on the New York Stock Exchange, are obliged to
prepare a second set of accounts for that purpose. This is burdensome and costly
and constitutes a clear competitive disadvantage. Four possibilities were considered:

81   See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/smartapi/cgi/sga_doc?smartapi!celexplus!prod!DocNumber&lg=en&type_
     doc=Directive&an_doc=1989&nu_doc=666
82   See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31989L0117:EN:HTML
83   See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/oj/2001/l_156/l_15620010613en00330042.pdf;
     More recently, the EC proposed a directive on disclosure of non-financial and diversity information by certain
     large companies and groups – see above paragraph 85
84   EC Communication “Accounting Harmonisation: A new strategy vis-à-vis international harmonisation”
     doc COM (1995), 14 November 1995.



36        Accountin         nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
(1) To exclude listed companies from the scope of application of the Directives
and free them to follow other rules; (2) To update the Accounting Directives, to in-
clude technical solutions for the various accounting issues which have not yet been
dealt with; (3) To develop a comprehensive set of European accounting standards;
(4) To adopt under conditions international accounting standards which have a clear
prospect of recognition in the international capital markets. The last solution was
considered to be the most feasible. In 2000, the EC outlined a strategy designed to
help eliminate remaining barriers to cross-border trading in securities, in particular
by recommending that there be one set of accounting standards so that company
accounts throughout the EU are more transparent and can be more easily compared.
The EC indicated that the adoption of IFRS (then International Accounting Standards)
was the way forward.85

109. Right at the outset, the European Commission stressed two fundamental
preconditions for achieving its policy objectives, i.e.:
» The need for legal certainty: To achieve this, the EC contemplated the establish-
  ment of an endorsement mechanism with a two-tier structure consisting of a
  technical level and a political level at EU level to confirm the standards that will
  have to be applied (See Box 4: Major Bodies involved in the Endorsement of IFRS in
  the EU).
» The need for proper enforcement: The Communication noted that high quality
  accounting standards will not automatically guarantee transparent financial
  reporting per se; rigorous and disciplined application is vital to the credibility
  of accounts. To achieve this, the EC stressed the need for high-quality statutory
  audit (which partly led to the revision of the Eighth EU Company Law Directive as
  discussed in paragraph 129) as well as strengthened co-ordination among European
  securities regulators in order to establish equivalent, high-level enforcement of
  financial reporting throughout the EU.


ii. Regulation (EC) 1606/2002 on the Application of IFRS

110. Regulation (EC) 1606/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the
application of IFRS86 (“Regulation 1606/2002”) was issued on July 19, 2002. It requires
publicly-traded companies, including banks and insurance companies, to prepare
their consolidated accounts in accordance with IFRS endorsed by the EU for financial
years beginning January 1, 2005.87 Within this paper, “publicly-traded companies” are
those companies with securities admitted to trading on a regulated market in the EU
(See Box 4: Regulated Market). Understanding what a “regulated market” entails is
therefore important to assess the actual scope of Regulation 1606/2002.

85   EC Communication “The EU’s Financial Reporting Strategy: The Way Forward” doc. COM (2000)359 of
     13 June 2000
86   See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:2002R1606:20080410:EN:PDF.
87   The Regulation allows Member States to defer the application of certain provisions until 2007 for those
     companies publicly-traded both in the EU and on a regulated third-country market which are already applying
     another set of internationally accepted standards as the primary basis for their consolidated accounts
     as well as for companies which have only publicly-traded debt securities.



                                 Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir                         37
Application of IFRS in Annual Accounts
111. In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, Regulation 1606/2002 gives
Member States the option to permit or require publicly traded companies to prepare
their financial statements in conformity with endorsed IFRS. As of the date of this
publication, a minority of Member States have exercised the option to require the
use of IFRS in their financial statements by listed companies (e.g. Bulgaria, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Estonia, Greece, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta and Slovakia). Addition-
ally, eight Member States used the option to permit IFRS in the annual accounts
for listed companies. The Commission updates regularly a table summarizing the
intentions/decisions of Member States and EEA countries concerning the use of
options in Regulation 1606/2002.88


Box 4: Regulated Market

     A “regulated market” is defined in Directive 2004/39/EC of the European
     Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on markets in financial instruments
     (MiFID). However, the European Parliament and Council agreed on a text sub-
     stantially revising this directive. The text was formally approved in Parliament on
     15 April 2014 and came into force on 2 July 2014. Although it no longer provides
     a “definition”, Article 47 of the new Directive states that “Member States shall
     reserve authorization as a regulated market to those systems which comply with
     the provisions of this Title.” This allows a clear identification of the scope of the
     concept of regulated market.

     In accordance with Article 58 of the recast MiFID Directive (Article 47 of the
     current text), each Member State draws up a list of the regulated markets for
     which it is the home Member State and forwards it to the Securities regulator.89
     ESMA publish and keep up-to-date a list of all regulated markets on its website.

     In the UK, for example, the Main List is a “regulated market”. By contrast, the
     Alternative Investment Market (“AIM”) is an “exchange-regulated market” (under
     MiFID, exchange-regulated markets are now referred to as “multilateral trading
     facilities” (MTFs). Therefore, companies quoted on AIM are not subject to the
     requirements of Regulation 1606/2002.


112. Also, Member States may extend this permission or this requirement to other
companies as regards the preparation of their consolidated accounts and/or their an-
nual accounts. All Member States have to some extent exercised the option to allow
other companies to use IFRS for their consolidated financial statements. By contrast,
few Member States allow (or, to a lesser extent, require) not publicly traded com-


88    The last published survey closed on 1 July 2010:
      http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/accounting/docs/ias/ias-use-of-options_en.pdf.
89    See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/securities/isd/index_en.htm.



38        Accountin         nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
panies to use IFRS in their annual accounts. This is largely explained by the fact that
IFRS are (increasingly) developed to address the needs of large, publicly accountable
entities as implicitly recognized by the IASB’s Basis for Conclusions of the IFRS for
Small and Medium-sized Entities (IFRS for SMEs). The IASB noted that “circumstances
of SMEs can be different from those of larger, publicly accountable entities in several
ways, including:
a. The users of the entity’s financial statements and their information needs;
b. How the financial statements are used;
c. The depth and breadth of accounting expertise available to the entity; and
d. SMEs’ ability to bear the costs of following the same standards as the larger,
   publicly accountable entities”.

Legal Certainty
113. The IASB is the body which issues International Financial Reporting Standards
(IFRS).90 However, IFRS are not automatically adopted by the EU as they are issued by
the IASB. Instead, each standard must first be endorsed individually by the European
Commission before it can enter into force. Article 3 of Regulation 1606/2002 sets
three conditions that individual IFRS must meet in order to be endorsed and adopted
for use under this Regulation:
» Its application must result in a true and fair view of the financial position and
   performance of an enterprise: this principle is considered in the light of the
   accounting directives but does not imply a strict conformity with each and every
   provision of those directives;
» It must be conducive to the European public good (this is sometimes interpreted
   as follows: “IFRS accounts should build the foundation of a level playing field for
   European companies to compete for financial resources on EU and international
   capital markets); and
» It must meet basic criteria as to the quality of information required for accounts
   to be useful to users (i.e., the understandability, relevance, reliability and
   comparability required of financial information needed for making economic
   decisions and assessing the stewardship of management).

114. As of the date of this publication, the European Commission has endorsed or is
about to endorse all existing standards or amendments to standards (IAS and IFRS)
issued by the international standard setter and which are still applicable. However,
concerning financial instruments, some differences continue to exist. IAS 39 was ap-
proved with a “carve out” of some paragraphs concerning fair value hedge account-
ing. IASB intends to replace IAS 39 in different phases. These standards and proposed
standards are very much debated in Europe and none of them has been endorsed
so far. The endorsement process requires time. Consequently, there will always be a
risk that some standards become applicable in Europe at a later date than the one
defined by the IASB.91 Regulation 1606/2002 also requires that interpretations of the

90   See http://www.iasb.org/Home.htm.
91   EFRAG frequently updates the Endorsement Status Report. The report contains an overview per issued standard
     and interpretation, listing the date of the endorsement date and the date the endorsed standard/interpretation was
     published in the Official Journal of the European Union. See http://www.efrag.org/content/default.asp?id=4090



                                  Accountin         nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir                            39
standards be endorsed following the same procedure. All interpretations by SIC be-
fore 2001 and the IFRS Interpretation Committee after this date were also approved
so far by the European Commission.

115. The endorsement process established by the Commission in accordance with
Regulation 1606/2002 involves a number of stakeholders (as illustrated in Box 5:
Major Bodies involved in the endorsement of IFRS in the EU). The endorsement
mechanism was established to act expeditiously on Standards and Interpretations
adopted by the IASB. It also provides a framework to deliberate, reflect and exchange
information on IFRS among the main stakeholders, in particular national accounting
standard setters, supervisors in the fields of securities, banking and insurance, cen-
tral banks including the European Central Bank, the accounting profession and users
and preparers of accounts.


Box 5: Major Bodies involved in the Endorsement of IFRS in the EU

     1. The European Financial Reporting Advisory Group (EFRAG),92 is a private
        sector initiative set up in 2001 by a number of parties in Europe involved in
        financial reporting (e.g., users, preparers, the accountancy profession, national
        standard setters). Its work can be categorized into two main tasks: providing
        input to the IASB in the standard-setting process, and providing technical
        advice to the European Commission on the application of IFRS in Member
        States. When the IASB issues a new standard, EFRAG reviews it and issues an
        opinion on it; EFRAG also elaborates an analysis on costs and benefits of each
        single IFRS for both EU users and preparers and forwards the documents to the
        EC. EFRAG is made up of a Technical Expert Group (TEG), which conducts the
        majority of the technical evaluation and advice, and a Supervisory Board to
        ensure European interest and legitimacy. EFRAG is to act in the interest of
        Europe as a whole, not in any national or other interest to avoid sectarian biases.
        EFRAG’s technical group meets on a monthly basis and advises the Supervisory
        Board that responds to the Commission with endorsement advice within two
        months of an IFRS being published by the IASB.93 The EU contributes to the
        funding of EFRAG,94 the role of which has been confirmed in the Report of
        Philippe Maystadt, Special Advisor to the EC issued in November 2013.95

     2. The Accounting Regulatory Committee (ARC) 96 was established by Article 6
        of Regulation 1606/2002 to provide the EC with an opinion on proposals to
        endorse new IFRS and amendments thereto. It is composed of high-level

92    See http://www.efrag.org/
93    The Standard Advice Review Group established in 2006 to supervise the endorsement process,
      although not formally abolished, is no longer active;
      See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/accounting/governance/committees/sarg/index_en.htm
94    Regulation (EU) No 258/2014 of 3 April 2014 establishing a Union programme to support specific activities
      in the field of financial reporting and auditing for the period of 2014-20, OJ EU, L 105 of 8 April 2014
95    See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/accounting/docs/governance/reform/131112_report_en.pdf
96    See http://ec.europa.eu/finance/accounting/governance/committees/arc/index_en.htm



40         Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
        Member State representatives, mainly from the respective Ministries of
        Finance, and is chaired by the EC. The ARC decides on the applicability of the
        IFRS within the EU based on existing Member State and Community legislation.

     3. The European Commission first receives the technical opinion from EFRAG.
        The EC then makes a proposal to either adopt or reject the standard (or amend-
        ment) and submits this proposal directly to the ARC along with a report detail-
        ing the standard and its conformity with the existing accounting directives. The
        Commission can endorse the standard if:
        » the ARC approves the standard and the European Parliament and the
          Council do not oppose; or
        » in the event the ARC does not approve the standard, the Commission may
          override the ARC’s refusal with support from the Council and the European
          Parliament.

     4. When the ARC issues a positive opinion on a standard, the Commission then
        forwards it on to the Parliament and to the Council , which have a three-month
        period to scrutinize the standard. Should the Parliament97 or the Council98
        oppose the proposed standard, the Commission may not adopt it.



116. Regulation 1606/2002 required the European Commission to assess the opera-
tion of this Regulation and to report thereon to the European Parliament and to the
Council by 1 July 2007 at the latest. A report was issued on 24 April 2008, concluding
that “the value of the accounting information supplied has increased and IFRS have
generally been applied consistently in the EU. The level of consistency between IFRS
accounts is likely to increase over time as preparers and auditors gain experience with
applying the new accounting framework.” However, the governance of the IASB and
the influence of Europe, which was the main region in the World having introduced
a mandatory requirement to apply IFRS, raised questions and generated debates in
the European Parliament. After important constitutional reforms of the IASB in 2009,
2010 and 2013, the EC decided to assess the EU endorsement mechanism and in
particular the effectiveness of the arrangements in securing cooperation between
EFRAG and national standard setters in Europe. A report was tabled by Mr. Philippe
Maystadt, former President of the European Investment Bank, as Special Advisor to
the EC in November 2013.99 The Report confirms: “The initial objective that moti-
vated the adoption of IFRS by the European Union does not seem to be challenged
in Europe. Moreover, the G20 maintains its support for a single set of global quality
rules. The IFRS are the best choice at the moment.” However it recommends the im-
provement of the IFRS adoption criteria and substantial changes in the governance of
EFRAG to better involve national standard setters in the decision process.


97    See http://www.eurparl.europa.eu/news/public/default_en.htm
98    http://www.consilium.europa.eu/showPage.aspx?id=1&lang=en
99    See http://ec.europa.eu/finance/accounting/governance/reform/index_en.htm


                                Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir   41
Proper Enforcement
117. The European Commission had recognized that only properly enforced IFRS
would bring about the expected policy objectives (see paragraph 109). Proper
enforcement was one of the pre-conditions for the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) to eliminate the need for reconciliation between IFRS and
U.S. GAAP for European companies issuing securities on U.S. capital markets.

118. In this context, Regulation 1606/2002 requires Member States to take appropri-
ate measures to ensure compliance with IFRS. The Committee of European Securities
Regulators (CESR) has developed a common European approach to enforcement. It
published two statements on enforcement activities: Standard n°1 on Enforcement
of standards on financial information and Standard n°2 on Co-ordination of Enforce-
ment Activities.100 This task is taken over today by the European Securities and
Market Authority (ESMA).101 Within CESR and now ESMA, the European Enforcers
Coordination Sessions (EECS) act as a peer pressure group. National accounting en-
forcers meet on a regular basis to discuss enforcement cases and to identify issues
that need further coordination or action at European level in order to improve the
quality of financial statements. The objective is to contribute to supervisory conver-
gence through the consistent and timely implementation of Community legislation
in the Member States. ESMA maintains a database with the relevant enforcement
decisions taken by independent EU National Enforcers in respect of financial state-
ments. The purpose of this is to increase convergence amongst enforcers’ activi-
ties across Europe. The most relevant of these decisions are published on the ESMA
website.102

Interaction between Regulation 1606/2002 and the Accounting Directive
119. With the adoption of the Regulation 1606/2002 and the subsequent endorse-
ment of individual standards, IFRS have become part of the acquis communautaire.
The Regulation does not supersede the existing accounting directives which co-exist
with the Regulation. However, since the accounting directives apply to companies
through their transposition into national law, there is no direct interaction between
the accounting directives and the Regulation; only the latter is directly applicable to
companies. Specifically, the interaction is one between national law and Regulation
1606/2002.

120. The issue of interaction is only relevant to the extent that a national law deals
with the same subject matter as the Regulation. Some aspects of national laws trans-
posed from the accounting directives deal with matters outside the scope of the
Regulation and will continue to apply (e.g., the responsibility for the preparation of
accounts, the requirement for a statutory audit, the requirement for publication of
accounts). In 2003, the EC commented on these matters and clarified the interac-

100   See respectively http://www.esma.europa.eu/system/files/03_073.pdf and
      http://www.esma.europa.eu/system/files/04_045b.pdf
101   http://www.esma.europa.eu/system/files/2014-807_-_final_report_on_esma_guidelines_on_enforcement_of_
      financial_information.pdf
102   See http://www.esma.europa.eu/index.php?page=contenu_groups&id=58&docmore=1#doc



42        Accountin       nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
tion between the directives (as implemented by Member States) and Regulation
1606/2002.103 The applicability of IFRS for SMEs is further discussed in Chapter IV.B.


iii. Other Relevant Financial Market Directives

121. Transparency Directive (2004/109/EC): 104 The Transparency Directive addresses
one of the central priorities set out in the FSAP, i.e. the transparency of financial
information supplied by issuers whose securities are admitted to trading on a regu-
lated market. It applies to European issuers but also to issuers incorporated in third
countries. Regulation 1606/2002 had already paved the way for a convergence of
financial reporting standards throughout the EU for those issuers. The Transparency
Directive builds on this approach with regard to annual and interim financial report-
ing. It requires that:

» an issuer shall make public its annual financial report at the latest four months
  after the end of each financial year; and
» an issuer of shares or debt securities shall make public a half-yearly financial
  report covering the first six months of the financial year as soon as possible after
  the end of the relevant period, but at the latest two months thereafter.

122. The annual financial report must include the audited financial statements, the
management report including the corporate governance statement, and statements
made by the persons responsible within the issuer, whose names and functions must
be clearly indicated, to the effect that, to the best of their knowledge, the accounts
prepared in accordance with the applicable accounting standards give a true and fair
view of the assets, liabilities, financial position and profit or loss of the issuer and the
undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole.105 Where the issuer is
required to prepare consolidated accounts, the audited financial statements shall be
drawn up in accordance with IFRS. Some exceptions are authorized however when
accounting standards of the third county where the issuer is established are consid-
ered to be equivalent (see paragraph 127).

123. Quarterly financial reporting generated controversial discussions and ulti-
mately a modification of the Transparency Directive in 2013.106 The initial text of the
Directive did not explicitly mandate quarterly information but, based on the experi-
ence in the US and in some Member States, it was generally accepted that it would
improve investors’ protection. Article 6.3 asked the EC to provide a report on this
issue by 2010. Although a DG MARKT report of 27 May 2010 was rather positive



103   See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/accounting/docs/ias/200311-comments/ias-200311-comments_en.pdf
104   See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:2004L0109:20080320:EN:PDF
105   Issuers active in the extractive or logging of primary forest industries are required to publish an additional
      country by country report on payments made to governments.
106   Directive 2013/50/EU of 22 October 2013 OJ-EU L 294, 6.11.2013:
      See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32013L0050:EN:NOT



                                  Accountin         nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir                         43
towards quarterly reporting,107 another decision was ultimately adopted. In order to
reduce the administrative burden and to encourage long term investment, Member
States may no longer require quarterly financial information, since the revision of the
Directive in 2013. (Article 3.1) The Directive provides however an option under strict
conditions, allowing the home Member States to require issuers to publish additional
periodic financial information on a more frequent basis. (Article 3.1a) Where the
issuer is required to prepare consolidated accounts, the condensed set of financial
statements shall be prepared in accordance with IAS 34.

124. The European Commission adopted on 8 March 2007 a Directive laying out de-
tailed rules for the implementation of certain provisions with regard to the harmoni-
zation of the transparency requirements prescribed within the original Transparency
Directive, such as disclosure of certain voting rights; of the issuer’s choice of home
Member State; of the condensed set of half-yearly financial statements; and of any
major holdings or changes thereto.108

125. The Transparency Directive envisages, with effect from 1 January 2020, that
all annual financial reports should be prepared in a single electronic reporting for-
mat provided that a cost-benefit analysis has been undertaken by the ESMA. The
electronic reporting format, with due reference to current and future technological
options should be proposed in a draft regulatory technical standards to be submitted
by ESMA to the European Commission by the end of 2016 (Article 4.7).

126. Prospectus Directive (2003/71/EC):109 The Prospectus Directive regulates the
laws in relation to the drawing up and the publication of prospectuses when securi-
ties are offered to the public and/or admitted to trading on a regulated market in the
EU. It is a maximum harmonization directive in relation to the contents and format
of prospectuses and as such, Member States may not impose disclosure provisions
in addition to those required by the Directive. One of the major consequences of the
Directive is the “passport”, i.e. the ability to raise capital in any of the 28 Member
States with the production of a prospectus drawn up and approved in one Member
State. This was one of the central priorities set forth in the FSAP in 1999 (see para-
graph 36). Directive 2010/73/EU of 24 November 2010 amends the original version
of the Prospectus Directive in order to reduce the burdens weighing on companies
within the Union to the necessary minimum without compromising the protection of
investors and the proper functioning of the securities markets in the Union.

127. The Prospectus Directive requires that issuers include consolidated accounts
prepared in conformity with the requirements of Regulation 1606/2002, i.e. en-
dorsed IFRS. Some exceptions are authorized however when accounting standards


107   Paragraph 11, See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/securities/docs/transparency/directive/com-2010-
      243_en.pdf. This view was also supported by a majority in the consultation organized by the EC on
      the modernization of the Transparency Directive (Feedback statement of 17 December 2010 p. 8.2)
      See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/securities/docs/transparency/transparency-consultation-summary_en.pdf
108   See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2007:069:0027:0036:EN:PDF
109   See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:2003L0071:20080320:EN:PDF



44         Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
of the third country where the issuer of securities is incorporated are considered to
be equivalent.

128. Equivalence mechanisms: Both the Transparency Directive and the Prospectus
Directive establish a mechanism for the determination of equivalence of accounting
standards applied by third country issuers of securities. The objective is to exempt
them from providing reconciliation with IFRS. The mechanism for the determina-
tion of equivalence is described in the Commission’s Regulation (1569/2007/EC)110
of 21 December 2007. First, the Regulation defines the meaning of equivalence and
the conditions for the acceptance of third country accounting standards for a limited
period. The equivalence decision is taken by the EC after consulting with ESMA on
the technical aspects of the assessment of equivalence including the convergence
program or the progress towards adoption of IFRS.

129. The Generally Accepted Accounting Principles of the USA, Japan, China,
Canada, South Korea and India were found to be equivalent to IFRS as adopted by
the EU. Issuers established in these countries may use financial statements drawn
up in accordance with their local GAAP to provide historical financial information.
The decision concerning some of these countries (China, Canada, South Korea, and
India) is temporary; authorizations have been given for financial years starting before
1 January 2015.111 The issue is further discussed in Chapter IV.A.


C. AUDITING: THE ACQUIS COMMUNAUTAIRE AS IT APPLIES TO
   CORPORATE SECTOR AUDITING

130. In 2006, the European Parliament and European Council issued a new Eighth Direc-
tive on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts (2006/43/EC)112
that repealed and replaced the previously existing Eighth Company Law Directive
issued in 1984 (the “initial Eighth Directive”). In 2014 this Directive was revised,
published in the Official Journal of the EU on 27 May 2014, and a new Audit Regulation
was adopted. The revised Directive includes measures to strengthen the independ-
ence of statutory auditors, make the audit report more informative, and strengthen
audit supervision throughout the Union. The Regulation introduces stricter require-
ments on the statutory audits of public-interest entities, such as listed companies,
credit institutions, and insurance undertakings, to reduce risks of excessive familiarity
between statutory auditors and their clients, encourage professional skepticism, and
limit conflicts of interest. Member States have until 14 June 2016 to implement the
revised Directive. The Regulation will also become directly applicable in mid-2016 to
ensure that by the time of its application, every Member State will have put in place
the provisions necessary to comply with the Directive.

110   OJ-EU L340 of 22.12.2007;
      See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2007:340:0066:0068:EN:PDF
111   To that purpose, Regulation (EC) n°1569/2007/EC was amended by Regulation 310/2012/EC on 21 December 2011;
      See http://ec.europa.eu/finance/accounting/third_countries/index_en.htm
112   See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/oj/2006/l_157/l_15720060609en00870 107.pdf



                                 Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir                       45
131. The overall objective of the Audit Directive (2006), was to improve and harmo-
nize audit quality and to support public confidence in the statutory audit function.
To that end, the Directive set out requirements on (a) education and training,
(b) approval and registration of statutory auditors and audit firms, (c) ethical
principles and auditor independence, (d) auditing standards, (e) quality assurance,
(f) public oversight, (g) the appointment and removal of auditors, and (h) audit
committees for public interest entities. In addition, the Directive aimed to improve
the functioning of the Internal Market via provisions on recognition of auditors from
other Member States and lowering restrictive rules on ownership and management
of audit firms. The Directive also promoted regulatory cooperation within the EU,
and deals with the approval of auditors from third countries and the registration of
audit firms from third countries.

132. Although this Directive was not yet fully operational in all Member States,
the European Commission decided to assess its effects in the light of the banking
crisis of 2008. A Green Paper “Audit Policy: Lessons from the Crisis” published on
13 0ctober 2010113 aimed at generating public debate on, among other topics, the
role of auditors; governance and independence of audit firms; concentration in the
audit market; and how Member States organized oversight of audit firms. One year
later, the EC proposed amendments to the Audit Directive (2006) to enhance the
single market for statutory audits and a Regulation of public interest entities audits
(PIEs). These proposals were heavily debated, notably because they suggested using
the legal instrument of a regulation leading to maximum harmonization. Also many
competences would have been transferred to the securities regulator ESMA. After
two years of discussions and many amendments to the initial proposals, a political
agreement was eventually reached and the legislations were published in the Official
Journal on 27 May 2014.114 Amendments to the Audit Directive (2006) need to be
transposed into national laws by 17 June 2016. An additional Regulation shall apply
from the same day.

Legislative approach
133. The Audit Directive (2014) is a minimum harmonization directive and, as such,
Member States are allowed to enact more stringent or additional requirements.
However, it prevents spill-over effects from more stringent national regulations
in the case of group audits and issuers from other Member States. Furthermore,
the Directive supports the idea of home-country control on the basis of mutual
recognition of equivalence and promotes close co-operation between Member State
regulators. The Committee of European Auditing Oversight Bodies (CEAOB),115

113   Doc. COM(2010) 561 final;
      See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/docs/2010/audit/green_paper_audit_en.pdf
114   The Audit Reform includes two pieces of legislation (1) Directive 2014/56/EU of 16 April 2014 amending
      Directive 2006/43/EC on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts – See a consolidated
      version of the Audit Directive at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:02006L0043-20140616-,
      and (2) Regulation 537/2014/EU of 16 April 2014 on specific requirements regarding statutory audit of
      public-interest entities – http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32014R0537.
115   Until the reform of 2014, cooperation between European audit regulators was facilitated by the European
      Group of Auditors’ Oversight Bodies (EGAOB), which had a less formal status and reduced competences.



46         Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
established by Article 30 of the Regulation (2014), carries out coordinating tasks in
cases provided for in the new Regulation. It will also contribute to the improvement
of the cooperation mechanisms regarding oversight of public interest entities’ audit
firms or the networks they belong to.

134. In line with the principle of proportionality, the Regulation sets out more
stringent and/or additional requirements for the statutory audits of PIEs. Areas where
stringent rules are determined include, notably, prohibited non-audit services to
audit clients, transparency report by audit firms, appointment of statutory auditors
and their fees, duration of the engagement, external quality assurance and oversight.
The Directive defines PIEs as publicly traded companies, banks, and insurance under-
takings. It allows Member States to expand the definition of PIEs.

135. Based on Article 290 TFEU, both the Directive and the Regulation allow the
Commission to adopt delegated acts on certain provisions such as auditing standards,
ethics and independence, quality assurance and the equivalence of third-country
systems of quality assurance, discipline, and public oversight. The procedure involves
Member States through the Audit Regulatory Committee and the European Parliament.

Education and Training
136. The new Audit Directive (2014) does not change education and training require-
ments. The Audit Directive (2006) made few changes to the minimum requirements
on education and training as compared to the initial Eighth Directive. The education
and training cycle includes university entrance or the equivalent level at the start, the
completion of theoretical instruction, three years of practical training, some of which
must be with a statutory auditor or audit firm, and a final examination of profes-
sional competence equivalent to university degree level (Article 6). The Directive lists
the curriculum subject matters for the theoretical instruction, including accounting,
auditing, tax, civil, commercial and company law. Furthermore, statutory auditors
must undergo continuing education programs in order to maintain their approval
and registration.

Approval and Registration of Statutory Auditors and Audit Firms
137. Only persons who have met the qualification requirements and are of good re-
pute can be approved as statutory auditors. They must be registered in an electroni-
cally accessible public register before they can conduct statutory audits. Procedures
for the approval of statutory auditors who have been approved in other Member
States are restricted to the requirement to pass an aptitude test or to complete an ad-
aptation period as defined in the Directive. The CEAOB should seek a convergence of
the requirements of the adaptation period and the aptitude test and at least enhance
the transparency and predictability of the requirements (Directive – Article 14).

138. The new Audit Directive (2014) also requires the approval and registration of
audit firms. Article 3 sets out restrictions on ownership and management of audit
firms. Natural persons having the relevant knowledge (or, should Member States de-
cide so, statutory auditors) or other audit firms shall have at least a majority of the


                         Accountin    nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir            47
voting rights and represent a majority of members in the administrative or manage-
ment body. The majority threshold should not exceed 75% in the latter case. This
is to ensure that the statutory audits cannot be compromised by other commercial
interests or undue influence. The European Commission proposals to remove these
restrictions have been rejected by the European Parliament in 2013.

139. Under the initial Eighth Directive, some Member States required these majorities
to be in the hands of nationally approved auditors and audit firms, preventing foreign
ownership and management of national audit firms. Such restrictions on approval are
no longer possible, and Member States must allow statutory auditors or audit firms
approved in other Member States to own and manage audit firms in their country.

140. Statutory auditors carrying out an audit on behalf of an audit firm should
always be approved and registered in the host Member State. An audit firm which
is approved in a Member State is entitled to perform statutory audits in another
Member State provided that the key audit partner who carries out the statutory
audit on behalf of the audit firm complies with the conditions to be approved in the
host Member State.

Ethics and Independence
141. The Audit Directive (2006) included stipulations on professional ethics (public
interest, integrity, objectivity and professional competence), independence, and con-
fidentiality/professional secrecy. The provisions of EU law are broadly comparable
to the Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants issued by the International Ethics
Standards Board for Accountants (IESBA). However, in Europe as in other parts of
the world, the rules on independence have been heavily debated. Member States
have diverging views as to what discretion can be given to the auditor to self-assess,
the risks to their independence. Based on the principle of proportionality, the Audit
Directive (2014) still provides a general system applicable to all statutory audits but
the Audit Regulation (2014) adds a number of restrictions, which will apply to audi-
tors of public interest entities.

142. The new Audit Directive (2014) keeps the independence requirements of the
Audit Directive (2006) that built upon the initial Commission’s Recommendation on
auditor independence,116 whereby the statutory auditor self-assesses the risks to his
independence and applies mitigating safeguards (Article 22). Independence rules ap-
ply at least during both the period covered by the financial statements to be audited
and the period during which the statutory audit is carried out. Statutory auditors or
audit firms may not carry out a statutory audit if their independence is affected by
any existing or potential conflict of interests or business or other direct or indirect
relationship between the statutory auditor, the audit firm or the network to which
the audit firms belongs, and the audited entity.


116   Commission Recommendation of 16 May 2002 “Statutory Auditors’ Independence in the EU:
      A Set of Fundamental Principles” OJ-EU L 191 of 19 July 2002;
      See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2002:191:0022:0057:FR:PDF



48        Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
143. The auditor shall not own financial instruments, hold or have a material and
direct beneficial interest in or engage in any transaction in any financial instrument
issued, guaranteed, or otherwise supported by any audited entity. Employment by
audited entities of former statutory auditors, or of employees of statutory auditors
or audit firms, is also restricted as it can represent a risk to the independence of the
auditor. In order to mitigate the familiarity risk, the key audit partner must be rotated
at least every seven years. The firm will also organize a gradual rotation mechanism
with regard to the most senior personnel involved in the statutory audit.

144. The Audit Regulation goes much further by introducing prohibitions of non-
audit services. Prohibited services include services that involve playing any part in
the management or decision-making process of the audited entity; bookkeeping
services; designing and implementing internal control or risk management proce-
dures; valuation services; a number of tax services; legal services; human resources
services, etc. Although, the Regulation applies directly to audit firms, the text allows
Member States to grant some exceptions to these prohibitions. Where the statutory
auditor belongs to a network, no member of such network is allowed to provide any
prohibited non-audit services to the audited entity, to its parent undertaking or to its
controlled undertakings within the Union.

145. Before accepting or continuing an engagement for a statutory audit of a PIE,
a statutory auditor or audit firm shall assess and document his independence and
more specifically the compliance with the provision of the Regulation. Annually, the
statutory auditor or the audit firm has to submit an additional report to the audit
committee including a declaration of independence of partners and managers con-
ducting the statutory audit, and discuss with the audit committee the threats to their
independence and the safeguards applied to mitigate those threats. The auditor’s
assessment of his independence is complimented by other safeguards, such as the
audited entity having to disclose in the notes to its financial statements the audit fee
and the fees for non-audit services paid to its statutory auditor or audit firm.

Auditing Standards and Audit Report
146. The International Standards on Auditing (ISA) are broadly applied in most
EU Member States. Article 26 of the Audit Directive (2006) opened the way for the
European Commission to make use of ISA compulsory through a mechanism of adop-
tion similar to what is applied for IFRS. Recital 13 of this Directive states “It is impor-
tant to ensure consistently high quality in all statutory audits required by Community
law. All statutory audits should therefore be carried out on the basis of interna-
tional auditing standards approved by the Commission.” No deadline was set for the
Commission to adopt ISA. The Directive as amended in 2014 sets out basic conditions
before ISA could be adopted. The issue is further discussed in Chapter IV.D.

147. The proportionality of ISA was heavily debated in the EU and globally. Some
auditors argued that their application in smaller undertakings would be difficult and
increased costs. Furthermore, in some countries, limited assurance of the accounts
of small undertakings have been accepted instead of a statutory audit. Both issues


                         Accountin     nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir             49
have been addressed with the Audit Directive (2014) revision, further discussed in
Chapter IV.D.

148. The Audit Directives (2006 and 2014) contain a specific provision on interna-
tional group audits, for which the group auditor should be solely responsible and
have appropriate documentation concerning the audit of components in third coun-
tries. The Directive prescribes that the individual auditor shall sign the audit report
to stipulate his professional accountability.

149. Article 28 of the new Audit Directive defines the structure of the audit reports
and the types of audit opinions. It confirms that the report should be prepared in
accordance with the requirements of the international auditing standards adopted
by the EC. As far as public interest entities are concerned, the Audit Regulation
additionally requires, in support of the audit opinion, a description of the most sig-
nificant assessed risks of material misstatement – including assessed risks of material
misstatement due to fraud, a summary of the auditor’s response to those risks and,
where relevant, key observations arising with respect to those risks.

150. The new auditor report will also include a statement about the auditee’s ability
to continue as a going concern. Article 25a of the Audit Directive (2014) states very
clearly that “Without prejudice to the reporting requirements referred to in Article 28
of this Directive and, where applicable, Articles 10 and 11 of Regulation (…), the scope
of the statutory audit shall not include assurance on the future viability of the audited
entity or on the efficiency or effectiveness with which the management or adminis-
trative body has conducted or will conduct the affairs of the entity.” Article 28 2.e, to
which it refers, introduces a new and important requirement relating to the ability of
an audited company to continue its operations: it requires a statement in the audi-
tor’s report on any material uncertainty relating to events or conditions that may cast
significant doubt about the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern.

151. The auditor establishes a formal procedure when they suspect, or have reason-
able grounds to suspect, irregularities including fraud with regard to the financial
statements of the audited entity. The auditor should then “inform the audited entity
and invite it to investigate the matter and take appropriate measures to deal with
such irregularities and to prevent any recurrence of such irregularities in the future”.
Where the audited entity does not react properly, the auditor has a duty to inform
the authorities. The future role of auditors and auditors’ reporting is further dis-
cussed in Chapter IV.B.

152. In PIEs, the audit firm shall submit an additional report to the audit commit-
tee of the audited entity. The Audit Regulation (2014) defines the content of this
report which is intended to cover, among other elements listed in Article 11, audit
methodology, significant deficiencies in the internal financial control system, events
or conditions identified in the course of the audit that may cast significant doubt on
the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern, actual or suspected non-compliance
with laws and regulations, assessment of valuation methods and aspects of ethics.


50    Accountin     nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
Internal Organization of Audit Firms and Quality Assurance
153. The International Quality Control Standards (ISQC1) issued by the IAASB re-
quires audit firms to comply with a number of principles of good governance.
Article 24a of the Directive as amended in 2014 inserts most of these principles in
the EU legislation. The scale and complexity of the firm’s activities can influence the
compliance with these requirements but the statutory auditor or the firm should be
able to demonstrate to the competent authority that such policies and procedures
designed to achieve compliance are appropriate. To this end, Article 24b imposes
extensive documentation requirements.

154. Audit firms that audit PIEs must present an annual transparency report with
information on the firm’s (a) legal structure, (b) governance and ownership, (c) net-
work arrangements, (d) systems of internal quality control, and (e) basis of partners’
remuneration.

155. Internal quality assurance must be supplemented by a system of external in-
dependent quality assurance covering all statutory auditors and audit firms. The
Directive defines the scope of the quality review/inspection as an assessment of
compliance with auditing standards and independence requirements. Member States
are required to establish a system that is independent from the reviewed statu-
tory auditors and audit firms; has secure and independent funding; has sufficient
resources; is of sufficient quality; and is submitted to public oversight. Quality assur-
ance must take place at least every six years (every three years for statutory audits of
public interest entities), with the overall results being published annually and, where
needed, followed up on.

156. When carrying out quality assurance reviews of the statutory audits of annual
or consolidated financial statements of medium-sized and small undertakings, re-
viewers should always consider that the auditing standards are designed to be
applied in a manner that is proportionate to the scale and complexity of the business
audited entity. Article 29 of the Directive as amended in 2014 invites Competent
Authorities to remember this principle in order to apply quality assurance proce-
dures proportionally.

157. Conversely, the principles of quality assurance for PIEs are reinforced by the
Audit Regulation 2014. On the one hand a provision of the Audit Directive requires
that an engagement quality control review be performed to assess whether the
auditor could reasonably have come to the opinion and conclusions expressed in the
draft audit report. On the other hand, the external quality control is strengthened.
Several rules are taken over from the Commission’s Recommendation (2008/362/EC)
of 6 May 2008 the on external quality assurance for statutory auditors and audit
firms auditing public interest entities.117 Detailed guidance is given on the independ-
ence of reviewers but also on the scope of inspections on reporting and recommen-
dations to auditors and audit firms.

117   See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2008:120:0020:0024:EN:PDF



                                 Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir           51
System of Public Oversight
158. Each Member State must establish an effective system of public oversight.
This means that the body (ies) involved should be governed by a majority of non-
practitioners knowledgeable in areas relevant to statutory audit but independent
from statutory auditors and audit firms. The Member States are responsible for
designating the Competent Authorities to carry out the duty of public oversight.
The European Commission publishes a list of the Competent Authorities in charge of
public oversight activities in the Member States.118

159. Two different models of public oversight co-exist: a direct oversight of statutory
auditors and audit firms by an independent (public) body, and an indirect system
of oversight where an independent (public) body(ies) has the ultimate oversight re-
sponsibility but can delegate some of these responsibilities to professional or other
bodies. In 2006, the indirect model was adopted in the EU. Article 32.4 of the Direc-
tive provides that “The system of public oversight shall have the ultimate respon-
sibility for the oversight of (a) the approval and registration of statutory auditors
and audit firms, (b) the adoption of standards on professional ethics, internal quality
control of audit firms and auditing, and (c) continuing education, quality assurance,
and investigative and disciplinary systems.”

160. The legislative reform of 2014 adopts a mixed approach: As suggested by the
EC communication on quality assurance (see above paragraph 153), the oversight
of firms auditing public interest entities would become a direct system, prohibit-
ing most delegations to professional bodies, in particular external quality review
(Article 38a of the Audit Regulation 2014). However delegations would remain
possible notably for the oversight of other statutory auditors and audit firms.

161. Supervision of audit networks and audit firms that have cross-border activities
requires the public oversight authorities of the Member States to exchange infor-
mation and to coordinate their operations at EU level and with third countries. The
CEAOB established by the Audit Regulation (2014) (see paragraph 133) will be re-
sponsible for coordinating tasks and improving the cooperation between oversight
Bodies in the EU and globally.

Appointment and Dismissal of auditors – role of audit committees in PIEs
162. In order to keep a sufficient arm’s length distance between the management of
the company and the auditor, the auditor must be appointed by the general meeting
of shareholders. The statutory auditor or audit firm cannot be directly selected by
the management. The Directive also specifies that the dismissal of auditors during
their mandate can be done only on proper grounds and must be communicated to
the public oversight authority.

163. PIEs must have an audit committee with specified tasks such as monitoring the
financial reporting process and statutory audit. The audit committee is an important

118   See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/auditing/docs/dir/100201_competent_authorities_SAD_en.pdf



52        Accountin        nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir
element for safeguarding audit quality and auditor independence, and it is involved
in the selection of the auditor. The statutory auditor must report to the audit com-
mittee on key matters arising during the audit and on independence issues. The
Directive provides several exemptions from the audit committee requirement, such
as for subsidiaries and investment undertakings.

164. One of the objectives of the legislative reform of 2014 was to improve market
conditions. To that end and as far as PIEs are concerned, several provisions of the
Audit Regulation establish rules on the appointment of audit firms, the tender pro-
cedures, the role of audit committees in the selection procedures and the maximum
duration of the engagement (rotation of audit firms).

Approval and Registration of Third-country Auditors and Audit Firms
165. Competent authorities of Member States may approve third-country auditors
as statutory auditors. These third-country auditors are subject to the same approval
procedure as Member State auditors wishing to carry out audits in a second Member
State, mandating good repute as well as the above mentioned educational require-
ments (see paragraph 137).

166. Third-country (i.e., non-EU) auditors and audit firms are equally subject to reg-
istration where they audit a company which has equity and/or debt traded on an
EU Member State regulated market. This may be waived in some cases with regard
to debt securities traded by professional investors. Registered third-country auditors
and firms will be subject to the same systems of oversight, quality assurance, and
investigation and penalty systems as their EU equivalents. Third-country auditors and
auditing entities may be exempted from these requirements if their domestic system
has been deemed as equivalent to the EU system with respect to public oversight,
quality assurance, investigations and penalties. The Audit Directive also sets out pro-
cedures of cooperation with competent authorities from third-countries, as regards
working arrangements and the transfer of working papers or other documents.




                        Accountin    nd Auditin in th Acquis Commun ut ir           53
4.                    A Look Forward


167. The EU has made great strides in harmonizing corporate sector accounting
and auditing within its Member States, resulting in the adoption of the 2014 Audit
Directive and Regulation, and 2013 Accounting Directive. After this period of intense
activity, and once the legislation has been implemented by Member States, a period
of relative stability is expected, although a number of policy and implementation
issues will require ongoing attention. These include: (A) endorsing and using IFRS in
the EU; (B) enhancing auditors’ reporting; (C) financial reporting for SMEs; (D) audit-
ing and other assurance for SMEs; (E) adopting International Standards on Auditing
(ISA); and (F) strengthening audit oversight systems.


A. ENDORSING AND USING IFRS IN THE EU

168. The adoption and harmonization of financial reporting standards is an issue
of ongoing relevance. IFRS are currently mandatory only for consolidated financial
statements of companies whose securities are issued on regulated markets, but
companies can choose to have their Individual financial statements prepared under
IFRS. The 2013 Maystadt Report confirmed that “IFRS are the best choice at the mo-
ment … ” but recommended some improvements to the IFRS adoption criteria, and
substantial changes in the governance of EFRAG, now underway, to better involve
national standard setters in the decision-making process and enhance the EU’s role
in international accounting standard setting. Consideration of how IFRS might be
applied, and the principles under which IFRS are endorsed, in the EU is still ongoing.
Progress is expected following a Commission public consultation in 2014 to evaluate
the effectiveness of the IAS Regulation and better understand: (i) the impact of using
IFRS in the EU, (ii) how far IFRS have met the initial objectives of the IAS Regulation,
(iii) whether these objectives are still relevant, and identify areas for improvement.

169. Work towards adoption of a global set of accounting standards, and ensuring
their consistent application, will continue to be of interest. Responses to a 2011 IASB
consultation paper suggested that, after a period dominated by convergence pro-
jects, there was now greater interest in addressing matters related to the practical
application of IFRS.119 Consistent application is a concern for securities supervisors in




119   See above mentioned IASB Feedback statement, p. 6



54        A Look Forw rd
countries applying IFRS and in the US.120 In its consultation paper on the revision of
the CESR Standard n°2 on enforcement (see para. 118), ESMA considered the need
for a common European approach to achieve a proper and rigorous enforcement
regime to underpin investors’ confidence in financial markets and avoid regulatory
arbitrage by issuers in the EU Single Market: “The objective of enforcement of finan-
cial information included in harmonized documents is to contribute to a consistent
application of the relevant reporting framework”.121


B. ENHANCING AUDITORS’ REPORTING

170. New audit reporting requirements will significantly impact the role of auditing
for PIEs. Audit Regulation requirements on the content of the audit report for PIEs, as
well as those introduced by the IAASB in the ISA, will change the way auditors com-
municate on audits with shareholders, audit committees, and regulators. Benefits
will include a better understanding of the work performed by statutory auditors
on financial statements and related information in the management report and of
their view on the going concern of the audit company, role in detecting and prevent-
ing fraud, and a clearer understanding of the state of their independence vis-a-vis
their clients. Successful implementation of these modifications will depend on the
diligence of audit and securities regulators and audit firms, especially those in inter-
national networks. The risk is that auditors either use boiler-plate language to avoid
undue exposure to legal liability, or audit report practices become too diverse. The
securities and the markets regulators face the difficult challenges of monitoring the
quality of the new audit reports and, for PIE audits, ensuring consistent quality in
auditors’ reports and effective communication on specific issues.

171. The auditor is now expected to include an opinion in his report concerning
non-financial information, more broadly all information included in the management
report. Article 34 of the Accounting Directive (2013) requires the auditor to state
whether the management report is consistent with the financial statements for the
same financial year, and whether the management report has been prepared in ac-
cordance with the applicable legal requirements. Considering the growing number of
disclosures to be provided by management in their report, this reflects a significant
increase in auditors’ responsibilities. It remains unclear whether the auditor must
always express a formal opinion, or only when there is a specific observation on how
management reported.




120   In April 2004, CESR issued its Standard no. 2 on Financial Information – Coordination of Enforcement aiming
      at achieving the necessary coordination and convergence of enforcement activities carried out by EU National
      Enforcers. http://www.esma.europa.eu/system/files/03_317c.pdf; A similar concern is expressed in the
      US-SEC Staff Report on IRSs of 13 July 2012 (p.15)
      See http://www.sec.gov/spotlight/globalaccountingstandards/ifrs-work-plan-final-report.pdf
121   Guidelines on enforcement of financial information – Consultation Paper 19 July 2013, paragraph. 1 –
      See http://www.esma.europa.eu/system/files/2013-1013_consultation_paper_-_guidelines_on_enforcement_
      of_financial_information.pdf



                                                                                      A Look Forw rd            55
172. The communication between auditors and supervisors should be enhanced as a
consequence of the new Regulation. Mechanisms for this communication will need to
be further defined by national regulators. Article 12 of the Audit Regulation requires
that an effective dialogue be established between the competent authorities super-
vising credit institutions and insurance undertakings and the statutory auditor(s)
and audit firm(s) carrying out the statutory audit of those institutions and undertak-
ings. The auditor has a duty to report promptly to the competent authorities super-
vising the PIE or the audit firm itself, any information of which he has become aware
while carrying out that statutory audit concerning (a) material breach of the laws,
regulations or administrative provisions governing the PIE, (b) a material threat or
doubt concerning the possibility to continue as a going concern, and (c) the qualified
opinion, adverse opinion or disclaimer that the auditor intends to issue.


C. FINANCIAL REPORTING FOR SMEs

173. The EU focus on SMEs, reflected in efforts to simplify financial reporting re-
quirements contained in the 2013 Accounting Directive, will continue. One option
available to Member States is the introduction of a new category of micro-entities,
with minimum reporting requirements. Using a building-blocks approach, the Direc-
tive increases requirements for financial statements and other disclosures gradually,
depending on the size of the undertaking. This allows small companies to draw up
abridged accounts and notes to the accounts, and gives exemption from the require-
ment for a statutory audit as well as from drawing up an annual report. Member
States can also choose to allow medium-sized companies to adopt a different layout
for the profit and loss account, to present aggregate balance sheet information, not
to draw up consolidated accounts, and to exclude non-financial information from the
annual report.

174. Although not an option under the Accounting Directive, there is potential for
the simplified IFRS for SMEs standard to serve as a basis for credible national ac-
counting systems for medium-sized companies. Several EU Member States expressed
their interest in IFRS for SMEs when they were launched by the IASB 2009 though
none yet use them. A European Commission public consultation on their use in the
EU elicited no clear response.122 In the UK and Republic of Ireland, a standard ap-
plicable to medium-sized and large entities not applying IFRS is based on the IFRS
for SMEs, but with significant modifications (FRS 102). Denmark, Hungary and the
Netherlands are considering allowing some entities to apply IFRS for SMEs. While
the 2013 Accounting Directive does not refer directly to the IFRS for SMEs, EFRAG
concluded, in a 2010 study commissioned by the EC,123 that there were very few
inconsistencies between the EU Accounting Directives and IFRS for SMEs that would
prevent a Member State requiring/allowing this standard to be applied for companies


122   See http://ec.europa.eu/finance/accounting/sme_accounting/index_en.htm
123   EFRAG Compatibility Analysis: IFRS for SMEs and the EU Accounting Directives of 3 June 2010,
      http://www.efrag.org/news/detail.asp?id=548



56         A Look Forw rd
falling outside the scope of Regulation 1606/2002. The 2013 Accounting Directive
reduces these differences further, bringing them down potentially to one of a tempo-
rary nature related to unpaid capital, with the use of the right Member State options.


D. AUDITING AND OTHER ASSURANCE FOR SMEs

175. The 2014 Directive requires Member States to ensure that auditing standards
are applied in a manner that is proportionate to the scale and complexity of the busi-
ness of the entity. The applicability of ISA to medium-sized or other non-listed un-
dertakings has been widely discussed in Europe because of the costs of compliance
and of keeping the required documentation. Professional bodies could be required
by Member States to provide further guidance on the proportionate application of
auditing standards to medium-sized companies. Competent authorities need to take
account of the proportionate application of the standards when undertaking quality
assurance reviews and in relation to inspections (Article 29.3).

176. Review engagements for small companies may be a good alternative to obtain
some assurance on small companies’ financial statements without having to bear
the cost and the complexity of an audit. Although the proportionality of ISA is now
broadly recognized, expectations of small businesses application of the audit process
have differed. The Fourth Directive in 1978 did not require small companies’ annual
accounts to be audited but some Member States nevertheless imposed this. Some
Member States such as Lithuania and Estonia, require limited review engagement
for small companies but not statutory audits, providing a limited assurance which
reduces the risk to an acceptable level in the circumstances of the engagement.124
The European Parliament’s Committee on Legal Affairs considered formally recog-
nizing the usefulness of limited assurance engagements for the accounts of small
undertakings, instead of a statutory audit. The final text of the 2014 Audit Directive
and Regulation do not refer to limited assurance engagements, but they remain a
voluntary option for small companies.




124   IAASB, “ISAE 3000 (Revised), Assurance Engagements Other than Audits or Reviews of Historical Financial
      Information” December 2013;
      See http://www.ifac.org/sites/default/files/publications/files/ISAE%203000%20Revised%20-%20for%20IAASB.pdf



                                                                                   A Look Forw rd            57
E. ADOPTING INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS ON AUDITING (ISA)

177. A key change to the Audit Directive (2014) is that “Member States shall require
that statutory auditors and audit firms comply with international auditing standards
adopted” by the Commission, although no target date is set for adoption. The previ-
ous legislation allowed, but did not require, the European Commission to adopt ISA
for statutory audits of annual and consolidated accounts.

178. European Commission research concluded that, “on balance, an adoption of
the clarified ISA through the EU would contribute to the credibility and quality of
financial statements and to audit quality in the EU, and to a greater acceptance of
audit reports outside of their home jurisdictions within and outside of the EU. There
are significant net benefits expected from ISA adoption through the EU”.125 A public
consultation revealed an overwhelming majority in favor of adoption of ISA at EU
level.126

179. Article 26.3 of the Audit Directive (2014) sets out preconditions for ISA to be
adopted, i.e., whether the standards (1) have been developed with proper due care,
in a transparent manner, under public oversight and are generally accepted interna-
tionally; (2) contribute to a high level of credibility and quality of the annual and con-
solidated financial statements; (3) are conducive to the Union public good; and (4) do
not amend or supplement the Directive (however some exceptions are foreseen to
this last condition). It is relevant to note that the adoption of ISA requires translation
into each of the 23 official languages of the EU and publication in full in the Official
Journal of the EU. Where the Commission has not endorsed an ISA covering a specific
subject, EU Member States are allowed to apply their national auditing standards.
However, once an ISA is endorsed, statutory audits must be conducted in accordance
with the endorsed ISA. Member States may add audit procedures or requirements to
ISA only if those audit procedures or requirements stem from specific national legal
requirements relating to the scope of statutory audits.

180. The adoption of ISA will now result from a “delegated act” as defined by
Article 290 TFEU. The Commission will determine whether the ISA meet the require-
ments set in Article 26.3, assisted by a Committee of Member States representatives.
The delegated act enters into force if there are no objections from the European
Parliament or the Council within 4 months (extension is possible to 6 months) of
notification of the act. The delegation can be revoked at any time. The delegation is
time limited to 5 years after the entry into force of the Directive (Article 48a). After
this period the Commission will report on how it used the delegated powers and the
delegation will be extended for 5 additional years, unless opposed by the European
Parliament or the Council.




125   See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/auditing/docs/ias/study2009/summary_en.pdf
126   See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/auditing/docs/isa/isa-final_en.pdf



58        A Look Forw rd
F. STRENGTHENING AUDIT OVERSIGHT SYSTEMS

181. The Audit Regulation represents a major step towards harmonization across
the EU of public oversight and quality assurance systems of significant audits. Im-
plementation of the Regulation will require additional funding to further develop
the operational capacity of oversight and quality assurance systems of PIEs as the
Regulation (see paras. 153-156) forbids the delegation of the following tasks: (i) the
quality assurance system, (ii) investigation referred to in article 23 of the Regulation
and article 32 of the Directive arising from that quality assurance system or from a
referral by another authority, and (iii) sanctions and measures related to the quality
assurance reviews or investigation of statutory audits of PIEs.

182. National legislators need to decide whether the public oversight system will
only review PIEs engagements, in which case the professional body will continue
inspecting the same audit firms to cover non-PIEs, or have just one institution under-
taking both inspections. More robust public oversight systems require more and new
resources. Various funding mechanisms co-exist in the EU today, from Government
funding to levies imposed on statutory auditors and audit firms. Funding mechanisms
will need to provide enough funds to enable effective oversight while preserving
independence from the audit profession.

183. Identifying, attracting, and retaining competent staff, with appropriate local
knowledge, to operate the quality assurance of PIEs audit remains a challenge. The
competence of these individuals is generally correlated with their professional audit
experience, often with international audit network firms. Public oversight authorities
must be able to offer salary and benefit packages that are competitive with the ones
offered by these firms. Additionally, the salaries of the staff that work for public over-
sight institutions may be constrained by government pay scale in some countries;
some Member States have established their public oversight systems as independent
agencies to bypass this issue.

184. Increased cooperation across Europe will be necessary as public oversight
systems build up their operations and skills to fulfill their new responsibilities. This
cooperation also makes sense given the number of PIEs audits operated internation-
ally. While the quality assurance system should respect the principle of home country
regulation and oversight by the Member State in which the statutory auditor or the
audit firm is registered, a future option could be to have quality assurance teams
review audits at EU level, replicating the system put in place for banking supervision
by the European Central Bank for systemic banks. The CEAOB will coordinate tasks
and improve cooperation between oversight Bodies in the EU and globally and be a
forum to allow peer institutions to share their experience and support each other. At
international level, the International Forum of Independent Audit Regulators (IFIAR)
is playing this important role of sharing knowledge among peers and organizing train-
ing for audit supervisory bodies.




                                                                  A Look Forw rd       59
        Annex: Timeline

         Enlargements                    A&A LegislationCompany                                                                 Treaties
                              1950                                                                                1952 Treaty of Paris
                                                                                                                  »   European Coal and Steel
                                                                                                                      Community (ECSC)
1957 Original 6 countries:
Germany, France, Luxembourg,
Belgium, Italy, Netherlands                                                                                       1957 Treaty of Rome
                                                                                                                  »   European Economic Community
                              1960                                                                                    (EEC)
                                       1968 1st Company Law Directive                                             »




                                                                        Company law harmonization
                                                                                                                      Euratom
                              1970                                                                                »   Legal Basis for company
                                                                                                                      law harmonization
1973 Denmark, Ireland,
United Kingdom accede
                                                                                                                  »   Consultation Procedure



                                       1978 4th Company Law Directive
                              1980
1981 Greece accedes                    1983 7th Company Law Directive

                                       1984 8th Old Company Law
                                       Directive on Audit

                                       1986 Company Law Directive
1986 Spain, Portugal accede                                                                                       1987 Single European Act:
                                       on Banking
                                                                                                                  » Internal Market
                                                                                                                  » Cooperation Procedure
                              1990     1991 Company Law Directive
                                       on Insurance Undertakings                                                  1992 Treaty on European Union
                                                                                                                  (Maastricht):
                                                                                                                  » European Community(EC)
                                                                                                                  » Introduced Co-decision procedures
1995 Austria, Finland,
                                                                                                                  » Introduced Subsidiarity Principle
                                       1995 IAS communication
                                                                        Capital market and internationalization




Sweden accede
                                                                                                                  » Euro as common currency

                                                                                                                  1997 Treaty of Amsterdam
                                                                                                                  » Strengthened the role of
                                                                                                                    European Parliament
                              2000
                                       2002 Regulation 1606/2002                                                  2002 Treaty of Nice, Enlargement
                                                                                                                  Treaties
2004 Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,                                                                              2004 European Constitution
Malta, Poland, Slovak Republic,        2005 Directive updating the                                                (not ratified)
Slovenia accede                        4th and the 7th Company Law
                                       Directives

                                       2006 New 8th Company Law
                                       Directives                                                                 2007 Treaty of Lisbon
2007 Bulgaria, Romania accede                                                                                     » Amended EU and EC Legislation
                                                                                                                  » Strengthened the role of
                              2010                                                                                  European Parliament

2013 Croatia accedes                   2013 New Accounting Directive

                                       2014 Amendment to Audit
                                       Directive and Regulation




        60       Ann x: Tim lin
Table of Acronyms



ARC      Accounting Regulatory Committee
AuRC     Audit Regulatory Committee
CEAOB    Committee of European Audit Oversight Bodies
CEBS     Committee of European Banking Supervisors
         (EBA since 1 January 2011)
CEIOPS   Committee of European Insurance and Occupational Pension Supervisors
         (EIOPA since 1 January 2011)
CESR     Committee of European Securities Regulators
         (ESMA since 1 January 2011)
CFRR     Centre for Financial Reporting Reform
CLAP     Company Law Action Plan
COREPER Committee of Permanent Representatives
         (part of the Council of the European Union)
Council  Council of the European Union
DG       Directorate General
DG MARKT Directorate General for Internal Market and Services
EaP      Eastern Partnership
EBA      European Banking Authority
         (before 1 January 2011 CEBS)
EC       European Commission
ECJ      European Court of Justice
ECON     Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs
ECSC     European Coal and Steel Community
EEA      European Economic Area
EEC      European Economic Community
EFRAG    European Financial Reporting Advisory Group
EIOPA    European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority
         (CEIOPS before 1 January 2011)
ENP      European Neighbourhood Policy
ESMA     European Securities and Markets Authority
         (CESR before 1 January 2011)
EU       European Union
FEE      Fédération des Experts Comptables Européens/Federation of
         European Accountants (representative organization for the accountancy
         profession in Europe)
FSAP     Financial Services Action Plan
IAASB    International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board
IAS      International Accounting Standards


                                                      T bl of Acron ms     61
IASB      International Accounting Standards Board
IASC      International Accounting Standards Committee transformed
          into IASB in 2001
IFAC      International Federation of Accountants
IFIAR     International Forum of Independent Audit Regulators
IFRS      International Financial Reporting Standards
ISA       International Standards on Auditing
MEP       Member of the European Parliament
SAP       Stability and Association Process
SEA       Single European Act
SEC       US Securities and Exchange Commission
SME       Small and Medium Enterprises
SSM       Single Supervisory Mechanism
SRM       Single Resolution Mechanism
TEG       Technical Expert Group of EFRAG
TFEU      Treaty on the functioning of the European Union
U.S. GAAP United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles




62     T bl of Acron ms
Index



Accounting Directive (2013) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v, 22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 54, 55, 56, 60
Accounting Regulatory Committee (ARC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 15, 40
Acquis Communautaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i, ii, iii, v, 1, 3, 4, 20, 21, 22, 27, 42, 45, 63
Annual Reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19, 31, 36, 56
Audit Directive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 57, 58
Auditor Independence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46, 48, 53
Audit Regulation . . . . . . . . . . . v, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60
Case Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
CESR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15, 16, 42, 55, 61
Co-decision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2, 9, 15, 60
Comitology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8, 10, 61
Common Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1, 3, 11
Company Law Action Plan (CLAP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12, 15, 18, 61
Company Law Directives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9, 18, 19, 21, 35, 60
Company Law Harmonization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i, 1, 17, 18, 20, 60
Consolidated Accounts . . 9, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 28, 31, 32, 33, 34, 37, 38, 43, 44, 45, 46, 56, 58
Consultation Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1, 8, 9, 60
Cooperation Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2, 9, 60
COREPER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7, 61
Corporate Governance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8, 15, 18, 19, 22, 29, 30, 43
Council . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 25, 36, 37, 38, 41, 45, 58, 61
Court of Auditors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Credit Institutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v, 17, 36, 45, 56
Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 38, 39, 42
de Larosière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13, 16, 17
Endorsement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27, 37, 39, 40, 41, 42
European Banking Authority (EBA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16, 17, 32, 33, 61
European Commission . . . . . . ii, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 19, 29, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 40,
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41, 42, 44, 46, 48, 49, 52, 56, 58, 61
European Court of Justice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7, 8, 61
European Economic Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 38, 61
European Economic Community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1, 2, 60, 61
European Financial Reporting Advisory Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40, 41, 54, 56, 61, 62
European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16, 34, 35, 61
European Neighborhood Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i, 3, 61
European Parliament . . . . . . . . . . . . 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 16, 21, 23, 25, 37, 38, 41, 45, 47, 48,
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57, 58, 60, 62
European Securities and Markets Authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16, 38, 42, 44, 45, 46, 55, 61




                                                                                                                      Ind x           63
Financial Services Action Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12, 14, 15, 18, 36, 43, 44, 61
Insurance Undertakings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v, 31, 33, 34, 35, 45, 47, 56, 60
Internal Market . . . . . . i, v, 2, 3, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35,
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45, 46, 47, 56, 60, 61
International Accounting Standards (IAS) . . . v, 18, 21, 31, 33, 34, 35, 37, 39, 45, 47, 56, 61, 62
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26, 35, 39, 40, 41, 54, 56, 62
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) . . . . vi, 21, 22, 24, 27, 32, 33, 37, 38, 39, 40,
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 49, 54, 55, 56, 62
International Financial Reporting Standards for Small and Medium Enterprises (IFRS for SMEs)
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi, 39, 43, 56
International Standards on Auditing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i, v, 49, 54, 55, 57, 58, 62
Lamfalussy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12, 15, 17
Limited Liability Companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20, 22, 23, 31, 35
Maastricht Treaty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2, 5, 9, 60
Member States . . . . . . . . i, iii, v, vi, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26,
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51,
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 59
Practical Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Primary Legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Principle of Proportionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 23, 47, 48
Professional Competence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47, 48
Prospectus Directive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15, 44, 45
Public Oversight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii, v, 46, 47, 51, 52, 53, 58, 59
Public Register . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Qualified Majority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Quality Assurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v, 46, 47, 51, 52, 53, 57, 59
Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46, 47, 52, 53
Regulation 1606/2002 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21, 24, 27, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 57, 60
Secondary Legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Single European Act . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2, 11, 60, 62
Single Market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 21, 46, 55
Soft Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5, 35
Subsidiarity Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2, 5, 11, 23, 38, 60
Theoretical Instruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Treaty of Amsterdam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2, 9, 60
Treaty of Lisbon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2, 5, 6, 9, 12, 60
Treaty of Nice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2, 60
Treaty of Paris . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1, 60
Treaty of Rome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1, 2, 3, 9, 11, 17, 20, 60
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) . . . . . . . . . 2, 5, 6, 22, 33, 47, 58, 62
Winter Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12, 18, 30




64        Ind x
www.worldbank.org/cfrr




                   With the generous support of




                          European Union
