DIALOGUE FOR
CLIMATE ACTION
Climate action starts with dialogue
Voluntary principles for catalyzing climate action
through dialogue
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Lead Coordinator – Principles on Dialogue for Climate Action
•	 Sumit Manchanda – Program Manager, Public-Private Dialogue, World Bank Group


Drafting Committee
•	 Alexios Pantelias – Green Competitiveness Global Solution Lead, World Bank Group
•	 Anja Robakowski-Van Stralen – Operations Analyst, World Bank Group
•	 Etienne Kechichian – Senior Private Sector Development Specialist, World Bank Group
•	 John Michael Diamond – Communications Consultant, World Bank Group
•	 Jonathan Miles McKenna – Consultant, World Bank Group
•	 Kristina Ifeoma Nwazota – Senior Communications Officer, World Bank Group
•	 Naz Beykan – Knowledge Management Consultant, World Bank Group
•	 Sumit Manchanda – Program Manager, Public-Private Dialogue, World Bank Group


Contributors
•	 Amit Khare – Manager, Country Programs, CLASP
•	 Aris Vrettos – Programme Director, University of Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership
•	 Eric Gibbs – Senior Director, Country Programs, CLASP
•	 Fatih Demiray – International Regulatory Affairs & Compliance Manager, Arçelik A.Ş.
•	 Fatih Ozkadi – Sustainability Director, Arcelik A.S.
•	 Ferdaus Ara Begum – CEO, Business Initiative Leading Development (BUILD)
•	 Guy Henley – Associate, Carbon Trust
•	 Ian De Cruz – Strategic Engagement Director, New Climate Economy
•	 Ivan Jaques – Senior Energy Specialist, Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP)
•	 James Close – Director, Climate Change CCSA, World Bank Group
•	 Janne Peljo – Specialist, Resource-wise and Carbon-neutral Society, SITRA
•	 Mari Pantsar – Director, Resource-wise and Carbon-neutral Society, SITRA
•	 Nicolette Bartlett – Senior Programme Manager, University of Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership
•	 Nigel Topping – Executive Director, We Mean Business
•	 Oren Ahoobim – Associate Partner, Dalberg Global Development Advisors
•	 Peter Bøgh Hansen – Chief Consultant, Danish Industry
•	 Stuart Orr – Head, Water Stewardship, World Wildlife Fund (WWF)
•	 Thibaud Voïta – Programme Officer, Energy Efficiency, Sustainable Energy for All (SE4All)
•	 Thomas Kerr – Principal Industry Specialist, World Bank Group
•	 Tom Jennings – Director, Policy & Markets, Carbon Trust
ENDORSING PARTNERS
OUR COMMITMENT TO A COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE

In keeping with the spirit of open dialogue, the principles set out below stem from an open, multi-round discussion
undertaken between February and April 2016 in preparation for the Dialogue for Climate Action conference in
Vienna in May 2016. We, the undersigned Partners, seek to promote successful outcomes in climate change policy
through the private sector, civil society, and the public sector working together with equal voices in prioritizing
issues and identifying solutions. Structured dialogues are one important way to achieve that objective. Successful
dialogue combines leadership with a sustainable, structured, and inclusive process.
Through our commitment to these collaboratively drafted principles and a Community of Practice, we seek to
improve the quality of these dialogues and thereby increase the ability of key stakeholders to play an active role in
the design of policies and initiatives that tackle climate change. The principles will serve as good-practice guidelines
to build upon and inform implementation. We are committed to contributing to building and maintaining an active
Community of Practice that is focused on delivering and learning from these climate dialogues. We also agree to
actively advocate for broader use of these principles by other actors.




       Yana Watson Kakar                                              Thomas Bustrup
       Global Managing Partner, Dalberg Global                        Deputy Director General, Danish Industry
       Development Advisors




       Hakan Bulgurlu                                                 Mari Pantsar
       CEO, Arçelik A.S.                                              Director, Resource-wise and carbon-neutral
                                                                      society, SITRA




       Asif Ibrahim                                                   Nigel Topping
       Chairman, BUILD                                                Executive Director, We Mean Business




       Tom Delay                                                      Polly Courtice
       Chief Executive, Carbon Trust                                  LVO, Director, University of Cambridge
                                                                      Institute for Sustainability Leadership




       Christine Egan                                                 John Roome
       Executive Director & CEO, CLASP                                Senior Director, Climate Change
                                                                      World Bank Group




       Anabel Gonzalez                                                Abdelouahed Fikrat
       Senior Director, Global Practice on Trade &                    General Secretary, Moroccan Ministry of
       Competitiveness World Bank Group                               Environment
PRINCIPLES FOR DIALOGUE ON CLIMATE ACTION




The challenge posed by climate change demands collective action by governments, industries, and societies
at large, both in terms of the threats it poses and the opportunities it presents. The private sector, with its
significant financial resources and dedication to innovation, has a leading role to play in the urgent global effort
to reduce the negative effects of climate change and create the healthy, thriving zero-carbon economy of the
future. CEOs from industries ranging from textiles to technology companies have pledged to scale-up efforts
and investment in climate action and over 1,000 global businesses are asking for a meaningful price on carbon.
Private sector involvement can take many forms, from development of new technologies and financial instruments
to participation in policy development. Maximizing the participation in this global endeavor requires a robust,
structured dialogue for action on climate change. When governments establish inclusive dialogue with the private
sector as well as international organizations, civil society, and communities, they can produce better integrated
and more comprehensive strategies capable of addressing a crisis whose impacts extend from remote villages and
islands to the planet as a whole.
The variety of climate change issues, country contexts, and business types points up the need for equally varied and
inclusive engagements. Experience with producing development solutions through organized dialogue provides a
ready-made foundation which can be reinforced by leveraging a set of principles as good practices.
The historic agreement reached in Paris at the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP21) last December codifies the
need for private sector involvement in transitioning the global economy toward a resilient, low-carbon future
without compromising growth. Signatories must turn the principles of climate change mitigation and adaptation
into action, and this cannot be achieved through government action alone.
To support countries as they undertake the formidable task of implementing the Paris Agreement, a group of public
and private sector partners has come together to form a community of practice, starting with the development of
a set of six principles to support the establishment and enhancement of climate dialogues at the global, regional,
national, and local levels. Dialogues can help build trust, close knowledge gaps, catalyze action, and generate a
sense of combined ownership of solutions. For the private sector, effective dialogues can increase quality and
predictability of the business environment in a green economy. In emerging markets, they can provide a path to
growth for small and medium enterprises and a means of moving people out of poverty.
Effective climate dialogue can produce a range of proposals and strategies, including: voluntary actions by the
private sector and other key actors for adaptation and mitigation; legal and regulatory reforms (including removal
of fossil fuel subsidies and pricing carbon) to accelerate innovation, incentivize public-private partnerships (PPPs),
reward good behavior, and discourage bad behavior; access to finance for businesses large and small and for
citizens; and strategies to encourage efficient management, strengthened governance, and behavioral change
among businesses and consumers.
Dialogues are under way in the climate change space, and public-private dialogue is a proven tool with a long
track record of success in developing countries. These principles when leveraged as good practices are focused on
bringing the public and private sectors together into a single, common and well-structured platform to identify
challenges and implement solutions in the climate change space.
SIX PRINCIPLES TO GUIDE ESTABLISHMENT OF
EFFECTIVE DIALOGUES ON CLIMATE CHANGE


    1. INCLUSION
      Climate dialogues should bring together a wide variety of public, private, and civil society
      stakeholders able to integrate global challenges with regional environmental and economic
      needs. Private sector representation should span formal to informal and large to micro
      enterprises, giving them a voice in decisions that impact them directly. Inclusive dialogues will be
      needed at both national and sub-national levels, with effective coordination between them.

    2. URGENCY
      Climate change poses an immediate as well as long-term threat. Pacific islands and low-lying
      states confronting rising seas, glaciers disappearing, and city dwellers enveloped in health-
      endangering smog are but a few examples. Dialogues should be driven by the need for
      ambitious and urgent action prioritized based on country context and the most pressing local
      and regional challenges posed by climate change.

    3. AWARENESS
      To be informed of the multiple challenges of climate change, but also the range of solutions and
      possible actions, requires a drive for awareness within the climate dialogue process. This includes
      respectful attention to the varying opinions of stakeholders as well as knowledge-sharing and
      the building of a common understanding of issues and opportunities among stakeholder groups.
      Awareness-building is a continuous process that should occur at national and sub-national levels.

    4. EFFICIENCY
      Participation in dialogues, while inclusive, should be appropriate to the country context so as
      to encourage efficiency in decision-making. An effective governance framework coupled with
      a well-structured process will avoid gridlock and enable participants to identify, prioritize, and
      resolve issues through climate action. Leadership from government and the private sector should
      aim to convene and motivate diverse stakeholders to work together effectively toward solutions
      aimed at meeting ambitious targets.

    5. TRANSPARENCY
      To build trust, climate dialogues must be transparent in their agendas, discussions, and outcomes
      and must function in a consistent and predictable manner. Policies, goals, and timelines
      concerning data-sharing and confidentiality, online presence, and dialogue participants,
      governing structure, and process should be made public. The confidentiality of sensitive
      business-related data must be respected.

    6. ACCOUNTABILITY
      Accountability in a dialogue helps build trust, confidence, and a sense of ownership. Inclusive
      dialogues should reach a common understanding of targets and results through a transparent
      process. To build accountability, dialogue recommendations must be fact-based and data-
      driven so that impacted parties can be confident they are based on a solid foundation. Results
      of recommendations should be trackable to accurately measure performance and achievements
      stemming from the dialogue.
