CASE STUDY

Preventing Blindness in China
Aier Eye Hospital: Efficient Management Leads to Clear
Vision for Millions of Chinese


November 2015
ABOUT IFC
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution focused exclusively on leveraging
the power of the private sector to tackle the world’s most pressing development challenges. Working with private
enterprises in more than 100 countries, IFC uses its capital, expertise and influence to help eliminate extreme poverty
and promote shared prosperity.

ABOUT THE CASE STUDY
Expanding access to quality and affordable health care is a central element to eliminating extreme poverty and promoting
shared prosperity. The World Bank Group has a goal of ending preventable deaths and disability through Universal
Health Coverage (UHC). In many developing countries, governments do not have the capacity to service the entire
population and private health care providers often play a critical role in meeting the needs of society.

IFC’s health practice is developing case studies that demonstrate the contribution of the private sector to achieving global
and national health care goals. Through a focus on efficiency and innovation, certain business models can provide better
outcomes at a lower overall cost to society. 

WRITTEN BY
This case study was written by Ann M. Casanova with inputs from Ioan Cleaton-Jones, Charles Dalton, Linshuo Hao,
Alicia Jie Hu, Edward Hsu, Edward Chung Nin Keung, Chris McCahan, Elena Sterlin, and Jiadi Yu. Content was largely
drawn from a report developed for IFC “Aier Eye Hospital Case Study: Private Hospital Case Study” by Dr. Vivian Chen.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A special note of appreciation is extended to Aier Eye Hospital Group. Photo credits: Aier Eye Hospital Group. The
author is grateful for the many insights provided by IFC colleagues. Special thanks to Elizabeth Price for communications
advice and Irina Sarchenko for the creative design. 

DISCLAIMER
The findings, interpretations, views and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) or of the World Bank or the
governments they represent. While IFC believes that the information provided is accurate, the information is provided on
a strictly “as-is” basis, without assurance or representation of any kind. IFC may not require all or any of the described
practices in its own investments, and in its sole discretion may not agree to finance or assist companies or projects that
adhere to those practices. Any such practices or proposed practices would be evaluated by IFC on a case-by-case basis
with due regard for the particular circumstances of the project.

RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
© International Finance Corporation 2015. All rights reserved.

The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law.
Table of Contents

Eye Care For All 	                                 1

Efficient Business Model Promotes Quality Care	    5

Strong Core Values 	                              13

Partnerships	                                     15

The Role of IFC	                                  19

Conclusion	                                       21
iv | Preventing Blindness in China
EYE CARE FOR ALL


A 10-year-old girl named Yan Yan was from an impoverished family
living in a small, poor village in Guizhou province, China. Her parents
had serious mental health and substance abuse problems, so she lived
with her 82-year-old grandmother. Yan Yan was cooking dinner at home
when her right eye was struck directly by an arrow
shot by her brother, who was playing with his home-                            Yan Yan fully recovered
made bow and arrow. Her right eye was lacerated, and                           her sight thanks to the
                                                                               specialists she saw through
she lost sight in it completely. Yan Yan was taken to a                        the Aier network.
few hospitals in Guizhou Province, and each hospital
said she would not be able to recover her sight.
Two weeks after the injury, her case came to the attention of management
at Aier Eye Hospital. They quickly arranged for Yan Yan to be seen at the
local Aier Guizhou Hospital. All of the expert ophthalmologists in the Aier
network were consulted through a video conference, and they discussed
Yan Yan’s treatment plans. They determined that Yan Yan needed to go to
Aier Chengdu Hospital, the only hospital in Western China possessing the
endoscopic equipment required for her treatment. Aier Guizhou Hospital
arranged the logistics and accommodations, and even purchased new
clothes for Yan Yan.

Immediately after she arrived at Aier Chengdu hospital, the most experienced
specialist there examined Yan Yan. Her eye injury was very serious – delayed
treatment and severe bleeding made it difficult to check the retinal and
optic nerve. In addition, bacteria in the eye could cause endophthalmitis,
an inflammatory condition that damages vision. A treatment plan was
developed, and the first stage operation on Yan Yan lasted two hours. The
surgery went very well, and a few hours after the surgery, Yan Yan could
begin to vaguely see through her right eye. After a second surgery, Yan
Yan later fully recovered her sight.1




  	 Aier Corporate Social Responsibility Report, 2013.
  1




                                                                                     Preventing Blindness in China | 1
The rapid, compassionate, response reflects the strong core values that drive the company. Mr. Chen
Bang, founder and Chairman of Aier Eye Hospital Group, explains, “First we are a hospital, and
then an enterprise. We try to help all people, rich or poor, to enjoy healthcare.”2 Aier provides high
quality treatment to all Chinese, regardless of their socio-economic level or whether they live in rural
or urban arears. To date, Aier Eye Hospital Group has helped nearly 20 million3 Chinese people
prevent blindness and continue to be productive members of society.

In a country of 1.4 billion people, where 18 percent of the world’s blind population resides and where
blindness is growing at a rate of 6 percent per year, the Chinese government has sought to address
the nation’s massive problem – particularly for avoidable blindness, such as that caused by cataracts.4
Recognizing that it does not have the capacity to combat all treatable blindness
through public institutions, the government has progressively liberalized
policies to encourage more private sector participation. Liberalization has
included granting legal protection for profits derived from hospitals as
                                                                                    Aier helps prevent
income. “The reforms allowed the use of private capital to run for-profit                                   avoidable blindness such
hospital services, and Aier was one of the earliest pioneers to respond and                                 as cataract.
act quickly.”5

Aier Eye Hospital Group Company Ltd., was established in 2002 and
opened its first hospital in Changsha in early 2003. In China, most eye
surgery is done on an in-patient basis due to constraints found in the system.
Hospitalization for eye surgery occurs widely in China notwithstanding
that in many countries eye surgery is conducted on an out-patient basis.

The company promotes improved vision through four main business lines:
(1) LASIK6 surgery to correct shortsightedness, (2) cataract surgery to
eliminate blindness, (3) specialized eye surgeries or treatments of rare and
complex conditions, including corneal transplants, glaucoma, and retina
diseases, and (4) optometry diagnostic services, and corrective lens provision.

Since the company opened its first hospital 12 years ago, Aier has grown to a network of 100 hospitals
in more than 26 provinces. Today, Aier is the largest domestic ophthalmology institution in China
and it is growing very quickly. IFC played a catalytic role in Aier’s growth. In 2006, IFC provided
a RMB 64 million (US$ 8 million) loan to Aier to support the expansion of the hospital network, to
increase access to high quality eye care, and to demonstrate best practice to the medical community.
IFC’s investment positioned Aier for an IPO in 2009. The growth of the network has enabled it to
pursue a high-volume business model that has yielded strong financial results. In 2014, it had revenues
of US$ 378 million and net profits of US$ 49 million.7




  	 Ernst and Young. Winner Entrepreneur of the Year Award 2014. China.
  2



  	 This figure includes free examinations and screenings.
  3



  	 WHO: Blindness as a Public Health Problem in China.
  4



  	 Aier Eye Hospital Case Study: Private Hospital Case Study. Dr. Vivian Chen, pg. 3.
  5



  	 LASIK is a laser surgery that reshapes the cornea in order to improve visual acuity.
  6



  	 In 2014, Aier had RMB 2,402 million in revenues and RMB 313 million in net profits. The foreign exchange rate as of 		
  7



      September 16, 2015 was US$ 1: RMB 6.36. www.oanda.com


 2 | Preventing Blindness in China
STRATEGIC BUSINESS MODEL
The keys to Aier’s success as a private health care provider in China is found in a strategic business model that
emphasizes efficient management, high quality care, and strong core values. Aier’s success has been magnified because
it effectively leverages partnerships.




    E
            FFICIENT MANAGEMENT LEADS TO HIGH QUALITY

            To gain market share, Aier modernized the way ophthalmology care was undertaken in China. Aier
            maximizes service utilization of talent, equipment and infrastructure through its multi-tier network by
    allocating doctors and equipment to locations where they are needed most. It efficiently controls infrastructure
    costs by leasing buildings and retrofitting interior spaces to create a hospital environment. Further, it manages
    costs by purchasing in volume and negotiating discounts directly from suppliers, thereby enabling it to reach
    economies of scale.

    The network manages staff time efficiently which helps contain costs. The sequence, flow, and division of
    responsibilities are clearly established so that doctors get support from nurses and customer service staff
    which allows doctors to spend more quality time with patients. Clinical pathways clearly define standards and
    responsibilities for each staff member which leads to a low infection rate. The result is better quality for patients
    and greater access to eye care for the Chinese people.




    S
           TRONG CORE VALUES HELPS GROW THE BUSINESS

           Aier embeds core values into its business model and this has helped gain the trust of patients. Aier
           eliminated several corrupt practices that are commonplace at many other Chinese hospitals. It strictly
    prohibits the “red envelope,” or cash payments by patients to doctors. It eliminated unnecessary prescriptions
    of drugs and prohibited procurement malfeasance, practices that increase costs to patients. It makes prices for
    medical services transparent by publishing them in the lobby.




    P
            ARTNERSHIPS

            Aier has a deep commitment to community outreach. Through its Corporate Social Responsibility
            Program, which it implements through partnerships, Aier brings free or low cost diagnostic services to
    youth and elderly living in marginalized communities. Its CSR efforts enable it to diagnose more serious cases
    which need to be referred to its hospitals. Aier has pioneered innovative partnerships that have contributed
    to growth. Through its employee-shareholder program, Aier incentivizes key medical staff to invest in the
    company thereby enabling additional expansion of new Aier hospitals. The program also serves as a retention
    strategy for its key doctors. To address the skills shortage, Aier established the first public-private partnership
    with two different public universities to offer formal degree programs. Today, Aier trains 70 percent of its new
    ophthalmologists, thereby ensuring a steady stream of qualified doctors for its growing network.




The internal management procedures, standards, and policies that Aier has established provide a blueprint that
has enabled it to scale up quickly. This gives Aier an ability to replicate the model quickly and efficiently, while
safeguarding quality and cost-efficiency. As a result, the company serves as a benchmark for many local authorities
who send officials to Aier to learn from its model and replicate its practices in the public sector.




                                                                                                 Education Within Reach of All | 3
4 | Preventing Blindness in China
EFFICIENT BUSINESS MODEL
PROMOTES QUALITY CARE


As Aier entered the market it became clear that it would not be easy for a private company to earn
the public trust and build clients. Private medical care in China had been stigmatized for decades
in a way that is unique in emerging markets. Private care was considered to be of poor quality and
run with the sole mission of generating profits. If Aier was going to run a sustainable business,
it had to be the antithesis of the negative stereotype; it had to earn the trust of the public and the
government. It developed a competitive and efficient business model, which is centered on careful
management of costs, diversified revenue streams and positive medical outcomes.

Aier has accomplished positive results, although some of its expenses are
higher as compared to public hospitals. It pays 25 percent in corporate
                                                                                  The multi-tier hospital
taxes and it pays its doctors more, all with little government assistance to
                                                                                  network promotes
defray operating expenses. It can do this because it achieves high volumes.
It has reached economies of scale through the network and has a cross-
                                                                                  efficiencies and expands
subsidized pricing structure which allows it to leverage luxury services,         the reach of quality care.
thereby offsetting the cost of services for low-income patients. This is all
made possible through the hospital network model, which is a key part
of its success and long term sustainability.


MULTI-TIER HOSPITAL NETWORK

Aier adapted the classic multi-tier level of health care and adapted it to
ophthalmology while introducing it to the Chinese market. While the
model is typical in other countries, it did not previously exist in China.
The network allows Aier to take advantage of many synergies that stand
alone hospitals do not enjoy. “The network model also increases efficiency
and lowers cost, because it shares medical resources, such as doctors and
equipment across the three tiers.”8 The tiers serve as a fully functioning
ecosystem. Tier III and IV hospitals, located in secondary cities, serve
as the gateway, while Tier I and II hospitals provide technical support to
Tier III hospitals. Tier I also includes large cross-regional hospitals, such
as its flagship Shanghai Aier Hospital. The three-tier model, combined
with the process management standards (see below), allows Aier to deliver
consistent quality of care across the network.

  	 Chen at pg. 14.
  8




                                                                                           Preventing Blindness in China | 5
MULTI-TIER CHAIN MODEL
The multi-tier chain model helps achieve synergies among hospitals at different levels and follows
the good public health practice of offering primary, secondary and tertiary level care with a clear
chain of referral between levels in accordance with the complexity of the patient’s problem.
Aier Eye has also built two community centers in Changsha to provide access to eye care at the
community level.




      VI TIER                           III TIER                      II TIER                    I TIER
      HOSPITALS/
                                        HOSPITALS                    HOSPITALS                 HOSPITALS
       CLINICS


  Located at county                  Located in lower-tier,       Located in provincial    Located in Shanghai
  level, Tier IV hospitals           prefectural-level            capital cities, Tier     and serving as the
  and clinics focus on               cities, Tier III hospitals   II hospitals serve as    flagship Aier Hospital,
  screening, check ups               focus on optometry           the core business        as well as offering
  and basic diagnosis/               and diagnosis /              operating platform,      full-range of eye-care
  treatment for general              treatment for general        offering full range of   services, Shanghai
  eye diseases.                      eye diseases.                eye-care services to     Aier Hospital focuses
                                                                  patients.                on clinical/academic
                                                                                           research and provides
                                                                                           technical support to
                                                                                           tier II, tier III and tier
                                                                                           IV hospitals.



     THE LOWEST TIER III AND IV HOSPITALS EXTEND AIER’S BRAND AND GEOGRAPHICAL
            COVERAGE AND PROVIDE REFERRAL POINTS FOR PATIENTS TO TIER II AND I
     HOSPITALS. MEANWHILE, TIER I AND II HOSPITALS PROVIDE TECHNICAL SUPPORT TO
                                            THE TIER III AND IV HOSPITALS.




 6 | Education Within Reach of All
RENTING SPACE PROMOTES RAPID SCALABILITY

Aier has adopted a model that is “asset light” to minimize long-term investments in infrastructure
and free up capital to address other business needs. Aier found it was typically complex and time
consuming to acquire land and build a new hospital. Furthermore, the process of establishing a new
private hospital in China was long and required approximately 190 approvals from project initiation
to commencement of operations.9 After the IPO, Aier decided to buy buildings in larger markets and
rent space in smaller markets. This approach enabled Aier to expand faster into secondary cities and
strategically focus resources where larger investments were needed, such as for its flagship hospital
in Shanghai. Aier’s asset light model has contributed to its ability to scale up the network efficiently
and expand its health care footprint faster.


DIVISION OF LABOR KEEPS MANAGEMENT FOCUSED

Breaking away from the Chinese public hospital model, Aier split up the                                         Nurses can provide quality
responsibilities of the CEO, who has a business background, and the                                             care at lower cost.
President, who is a doctor. This allowed them to focus on their respective
core strengths of management and medicine. All hospitals follow this dual
management model. Each CEO is responsible for the overall administration
of the hospital from the business perspective. Responsibilities include:
business operation, patient service, external corporate affairs, and government
relations. Meanwhile, each president is responsible for medical treatment,
clinical quality standards, new technology application, academic research,
and professional exchanges. This bifurcated management model allows
the CEO to attend to broader management and administrative matters
and allows the hospital presidents to devote their energy and resources to
patient treatment. In contrast, public hospitals combine these functions
under the president, who is typically a physician and who often ends up
investing significant amounts of time to attend to administrative matters.


STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT OF PERSONNEL COSTS

Ophthalmology lends itself to standardization and clear divisions of labor. Aier has standardized and
mapped an efficient process flow to manage labor costs more efficiently. It has divided responsibilities
across all personnel and allocates simpler tasks to lesser trained, lower paid staff such as nurses,
technicians and optometrists. This strategy allows doctors to conduct more surgeries and drives
patient volume. Further, as compared to public hospitals, Aier runs its operating rooms longer per
day, enabling each doctor to perform more surgeries a day. “This practice reduces the cost of each
task and spreads the cost of the doctor, the most expensive member of the team, across many more
patients, reducing the cost per patient.”10


  9
   	 Comparatively, in most emerging markets and developed countries there are about 25 to 50 approvals required.
  10	
        Chen at pg. 29.




                                                                                                                      Preventing Blindness in China | 7
STATE OF THE ART TECHNOLOGY

Many eye surgeries have been largely standardized and made very safe with
the use of technology. Aier has made continuous and significant investments                                        Aier has emerged as the
in advanced equipment, helping it earn a reputation as the technology leader                                       technology leader in excimer
in excimer and cataract surgery in China. In 2008, Aier introduced TORIC                                           and cataract surgery
lenses for cataract surgery, which was a breakthrough for the Chinese market.                                      in China, because of its
In 2010, it introduced intraocular endoscopy and the use of laminar flow
                                                                                                                   significant investments in
operating rooms. “In 2013, Aier introduced the world’s top femtosecond
                                                                                                                   advanced equipment.
laser operation system and cataract femtosecond laser equipment for the
treatment of myopia and cataract.”11 Aier’s investments in technology raised
the bar for complex eye surgery in China and contributed to the company
receiving an award for the “Top Ten China - Medical Service Quality.”




SAFETY MANAGEMENT STANDARDS

While eye surgery in many countries is typically done on an out-patient basis,
due to constraints in the Chinese system, Aier had to set up hospitals to be
able to participate in the social health insurance system. This was necessary
in the local market even though there are more modern models available.
Notwithstanding that social health insurance system reimburses hospitals
based on the number of in-patient days, Aier reduced this practice to improve
efficiency and patient experience. Aier developed clinical pathways that
are more in line with standards in developed countries, thereby exceeding
the guidelines established by the Ministry of Health and Family Planning
Commission. For instance, in the case of cataract surgery, Aier reduces the
hospital visit from seven days at a public hospital to three days at an Aier
hospital. This is a good example of how the company focuses on patient
care rather than on maximizing profits.

At Aier, each eye disease treatment has a clinical pathway that covers process management standards for
the pre-operative, intra-operative and post-operative stages. It clearly defines quality standards for doctors,
nurses, technicians, operating environment, and medications. These standards minimize risk substantially
and contribute to a low infection rate of about 1 in every 10,000 eye surgeries, which is far better than in
the United Kingdom,12 which had an infection rate of 1 in every 1,820.

  11
       	 Chen at pg. 29.
  12	
        Royal College of Ophthalmologists, Cataract Surgery Guidelines. September 2010, pg 13. https://www.rcophth.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/2010-

        SCI-069-Cataract-Surgery-Guidelines-2010-SEPTEMBER-2010.pdf




 8 | Preventing Blindness in China
QUALITY TIME WITH PATIENTS

In public hospitals, thousands of patients that walk in the door on a daily basis spend the whole day
waiting to be seen by a doctor. With such long lines, doctors and nurses do not have the luxury
of spending quality time with patients.13 In contrast to public hospitals, advance scheduling helps
Aier to manage doctor and patient time more effectively and allows doctors to spend more quality
time with the patient.



PREVENTATIVE AND PRIMARY CARE
                                                                                                                   Aier offers preventative
Distinct from its public sector counterparts, Aier has introduced preventative
care through its “out-patient department.” It offers a variety of services such                                    screenings to detect
as: vision screening, optician services through retail outlets and community                                       myopia in children.
eye clinics that are independent from the hospitals. Aier piloted an eye care
partnership with the public school district in the city of Qingdao where it
offers a variety of myopia prevention services for students including: mass
vision screenings, free corrective lens prescriptions, and training teachers to
position students, blackboards, projectors, and visual aids at appropriate
distances to reduce the development of myopia in youth. The program helps
build the brand and helps to cross-market additional eye health services
to parents. The company expects to expand the program to other cities
in the future. As a result of these efforts, Aier’s preventative services serve
as a benchmark for preventative eye care in the Chinese market.




CENTRALIZED PROCUREMENT

Rather than each of its 100 hospitals handling purchases independently,
Aier maximizes its buying power by centralizing procurement of medical
equipment, hospital consumables, and medications. Eighty percent of
procurement is centralized and 20 percent is determined by the individual
hospitals. This strategy allows Aier to make purchases directly from the manufacturer and obtain
large volume discounts. In contrast, public hospitals manage procurement as independent stand-
alone hospitals, thus reducing their purchasing power. In addition, Aier carefully manages costs by
prohibiting any bribery from medical representatives and every price is transparent. The resulting
savings enables a more competitive pricing capacity.




  13
       	 Interview with Dr. Wang Lan: Aier Intech Eye Hospital. Beijing Relocation.com. January 7, 2013. Last visited on September 16, 2015.




                                                                                                                              Preventing Blindness in China | 9
PRICING STRUCTURE

Aier conducts research of the local markets. It carefully assesses price sensitivities and affordability by studying
the income capacities of the particular population served by each of its facilities. To set its pricing schedule, Aier
benchmarks to government prices to ensure that its fees for major eye treatments are aligned with or are lower than
those of public hospitals. It also takes into consideration the pricing schedule established by the public insurance
scheme. For some elective surgeries, such as LASIK, Aier charges more because it has earned the best reputation
in the industry, and it has the most advanced technology. Prices are then carefully targeted and revised depending
on local circumstances. Thus, pricing structures may vary from city to city.


DIVERSIFICATION OF REVENUE STREAMS

Aier analyzed its revenue streams by segmenting patients into the following four categories, reflecting their ability
to pay:

•	      Healthy patients with strong awareness of preventative care who are willing to pay

•	      High-end patients with high income

•	      Patients covered by government social insurance

•	      Patients eligible for social charity support


Today, several eye diseases are covered by basic social insurance programs, while elective surgeries or medical
services are paid for out of pocket. The diversified revenue stream allows Aier to provide affordable, competitive
and luxury services all under the same network, which facilitates a cross-subsidized pricing strategy that promotes
access for patients from all socio-economic groups.


CROSS SUBSIDIZED PRICE STRATEGY

Aier charges a premium price for discretionary medical services, which enables it to cross-subsidize services for
lower income patients. Aier charges higher prices for luxury services such as LASIK surgery, which provides
permanent vision correction to patients with myopia, hypermetropia and astigmatism. The surgery is a compelling
alternative to corrective lenses, particularly for a growing middle class. Since it is not covered by health insurance
it is provided to patients on an out-of-pocket payment basis. Aier is able to earn a reasonable profit off of elective
surgeries, which allows it to cross-subsidize health services for lower income patients. As a result, Aier accepts all
patients, regardless of income level; there is always a mechanism to cover the cost of care.


INSURANCE

Aier was able to access the social health insurance program on a limited basis in 2006, but this was rare for a
private hospital. Prior to 2009, private hospitals were in a strictly controlled market, dominated by public hospitals
and had virtually no access to the social health insurance programs. The healthcare reform of 2009 opened up
access to qualified, non-public healthcare facilities to receive payment from social health insurance. Most private




     10 | Preventing Blindness in China
facilities have historically not participated in the social health insurance, limiting many patients to seeking medical
attention at public hospitals. But Aier’s strong brand, good reputation and CSR efforts have helped Aier to gain
access to the insurance schemes earlier than its private sector peers.

It is worth noting that while the Chinese population enjoys virtually universal access to the basic social health
insurance program, the program does not cover all conditions and does not reimburse patients for all aspects of
treatment. So, while a large share of Aier’s patients may have access to social health insurance, a large share also
pays expenses out of pocket.


REVENUES

Notwithstanding the limitations on coverage, access to social health insurance is critically important as it means
the hospital can serve a greater number of patients and generate more revenues. Over time, as access and coverage
has grown, so have revenues. For instance, in 2006, only 4 percent of Aier’s revenues came from insurance, since
coverage was mainly for cataract surgery. Similarly, Aier’s flagship hospital in Shanghai did not have access to
the full social insurance program for many years, consequently it suffered losses for 8 consecutive years. In the
first half of 2013, it gained access to the insurance program, which led to a 23 percent increase in the number of
outpatient services and a 50 percent increase in total annual revenues. Today, social health insurance accounts
for 25 to 30 percent of Aier’s total revenues, slightly less than the 38 percent of total Chinese health expenditure
paid for by social health insurance.




REVENUE SHARE IN 2014
In 2014, the largest share—one quarter—of Aier’s revenues came from Lasik surgery. Cataract and optometry were
tied at 20 percent each. Medical examinations accounted for 13 percent while drug sales were 11 percent. To prevent
abuses, Aier limits revenues from drug sales to 12 percent.


     13%, Medical Examination                                                      Lasik, 25%


  7%, Anterior Segment
             Operation



      20%, Cataract                                                                         Optometry, 20%




                     11%, Drug Sales                                      Posterior Segment Operation, 4%


                                                                                            Preventing Blindness in China | 11
12 | Preventing Blindness in China
STRONG CORE VALUES


ETHICAL PRACTICES BUILD PATIENT TRUST

Aier’s success as a company depended on its ability to overcome a stigma historically associated with
privately provided healthcare that was unique to China. Chen Bang explained his strategy to earn
patient trust. “Industry standards and ethics are our minimum standard.”
Aier incorporated core values of honesty, integrity and transparency into
its business policies, practices and incentive structure. Doctors in China
                                                                                 Aier strictly prohibits  the
are often not well compensated, and in order to receive health services,
                                                                                   “red envelope,” a widespread
patients are expected to pay doctors additional fees, a practice known
as the “red envelope.” Despite this widespread practice in China, Aier              practice of providing
strictly prohibits under the table payments. First, Aier compensates its            doctors with under the table
doctors well. Then, it incentivizes doctors to report attempted bribes, and         payments.
the company fires those who accept them. It makes its prices transparent
by publishing the service fee schedule on a wall in the lobby. Patients are
advised that no other charge is expected.

Similarly, supplemental payments are prohibited in procurement. Equipment
is selected following an analysis of competing suppliers that takes into
consideration the negotiated price and medical quality – as verified by clinical
staff. A centralized procurement committee reviews recommendations
and makes the final selection.

In China, there is a widespread problem with doctors ordering unnecessary
prescriptions for the sake of generating revenues. To provide the best quality
care, Aier actively monitors and caps hospital revenue from prescriptions
at 12 percent, which is lower than the hospital average of between 30 to
40 percent.




                                                                                          Preventing Blindness in China | 13
14 | Preventing Blindness in China
PARTNERSHIPS


CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (CSR)

With the goal of providing greater access to eye health to people living at the base of the economic
pyramid and in frontier communities, Aier launched a corporate social responsibility (CSR) program.
Aier travels to frontier regions of China and runs free eye clinics in communities. It conducts public
education campaigns on eye care, offers free vision testing in schools
and provides free eyeglasses to low-income people. It conducts free eye
examinations in rural areas and refers cases that need additional treatment
                                                                                   Aier leverages partnerships
to Aier hospitals. Between 2003 and 2015, Aier conducted more than 2
million free eye diagnoses and screening examinations. The blindness               to provide high quality care
screening program referred between 20 to 30 percent of total Aier patients.14 1    at little to no cost to school
                                                                                   children and low-income
Through a cost-sharing partnership between the central government, local           communities.
governments, and rural social medical insurance, as well as local and
international charities, Aier provides free or subsidized cataract and glaucoma
surgeries for disadvantaged people. In 2013, through its “Prevent and
Treat Blindness” initiative it conducted nearly 90,000 cataract surgeries
at zero or low profit.

The result is a win-win for all because low-income communities get high
quality care at little to no cost. Governments advance public health objectives
at lower cost, and the company cultivates a positive social image. This helps
build the brand and contributes to the company’s growth. The company’s
ethical policies and practices have helped earn the trust of patients and
their families, as well as the government and insurance companies, which
has helped attract more patients to Aier.




EMPLOYEE - SHAREHOLDER INCENTIVE PROGRAM

In 2014, Aier introduced an innovative incentive program, whereby Aier invited senior physicians
and key medical staff to partner with the company as shareholders of new Aier hospitals. The cash
infusion enables Aier to establish new hospitals with the financial and professional buy-in of its

  14
       	 Chen at pg. 30.




                                                                                          Preventing Blindness in China | 15
key employees. When the profitability of the hospital reaches a certain level, the company can buy
back the shares from its partners at a fair price. The arrangement also provides opportunities to
physicians who were hesitant to open their own clinics, because of the high risks associated with
opening a new medical practice. Given the competitive landscape for top talent, the program acts
as an incentive to retain and motivate top doctors to stay with Aier over the long term, and it helps
to accelerate the establishment of new hospitals.

SPECIALIST TRAINING THROUGH PARTNERSHIPS

Today, Aier employs 2,000 ophthalmologists across its network. The company’s sustainable growth
depends on its ability to secure a steady stream of highly qualified doctors. Thus, Aier expanded its
residency and specialist training programs.

Aier pioneered the first public-private partnership in China between a
private hospital network and two public universities. It established “Aier
Academy of Ophthalmology” (2013) in partnership with Central South                The Aier Academy of
University, which offers formal degree programs for Masters and Doctoral
                                                                                  Ophthalmology further
level students and “Aier Medical School of Optometry” (2014) in partnership
                                                                                  strengthens its capacity
with Hubei Technology University. The Aier Eye Medical College program
allows Aier to further strengthen and expand its overall research, clinical,      to secure highly trained
and educational capacity needed for Masters and PhD programs, thereby             ophthalmologists, while
enhancing its medical prestige and talent reserves.                               expanding its research,
                                                                                  clinical and educational
The overall result of its residency and postgraduate training efforts has
                                                                                  capacity.
ensured a reliable supply of specialized ophthalmologist doctors. As of 2014,
Aier produced 70 percent of its needed new specialist ophthalmologists
in-house and recruits the other 30 percent. Few private hospital groups
in the world are able to satisfy such a large proportion of their specialist
doctor needs from in-house training.




 16 | Preventing Blindness in China
18 | Preventing Blindness in China
THE ROLE OF IFC


At the time of IFC’s investment in 2006, Aier was operating 8 eye-hospitals serving 40,000 patients. Its growth
had been restricted by a lack assets for security, since hospitals in China cannot mortgage their land or buildings.
IFC overcame this by obtaining a security interest in the equipment, intellectual property, and an equity pledge
against the borrower’s shares.

Chen Bang said, “IFC’s RMB 64 million (US$ 8 million) loan in 2006 with a low cost and long tenor was very
suitable for the healthcare industry because it requires a long investment cycle, which was crucial to Aier Eye’s
network expansion in the early stages of establishing 6 new hospitals. IFC brought to Aier international standards
and best practices in various aspects, such as medical quality management, operational improvement, as well
as social and environmental responsibility.” For IFC, Aier brought a good fit with the health sector strategy of
increasing medical access and expanding private sector capacity to address unmet societal needs.

The relationship with IFC provided a quality endorsement, positioning Aier for an IPO. Three years after IFC’s
investment, Aier was successfully listed on the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, the first listed medical institution in the
A-share market, where it raised RMB 882 million (US$ 139 million) to stimulate additional growth in China.
Since then, Aier has grown substantially and has a market capitalization of over US$4.8 billion today.




                                                                                         Preventing Blindness in China | 19
20 | Preventing Blindness in China
CONCLUSION


Over the last 12 years, Aier has become the largest private hospital group in China and the leader in treating eye
conditions. It has proved that the private sector is a key strategic partner, alongside the government, to achieve its
public health care objectives of combating blindness in China with very good patient outcomes and cost efficiency.
These results have validated the government’s strategy of involving the private sector to advance broader societal
goals and have greater impact. Further, the results reinforced the belief that private sector health care is essential
for expanding access to health care services to underserved communities in frontier regions.

Through efficient management, standardization and cross-subsidized pricing strategies, Aier has reduced the
overall cost of health care, while delivering effective patient outcomes for all socio-economic levels. It has achieved
high quality eye care health services through the development of clinical pathways, standardization, and hiring of
excellent doctors who use state of the art equipment to achieve positive patient outcomes.

Through its strong core values, Aier has brought integrity to the provision of private health care in China. Earning
the public trust has helped the company build the brand and access the social health insurance program. Through
partnerships, it has increased access for the base of the pyramid, while ensuring that it can continue to expand with
a reliable base of highly trained ophthalmologists. It has cultivated a business model that is scalable and sustainable,
and as Chen Bang anticipates, will continue to be in business “for the next 100 years.” Most importantly, Aier
has brought opportunities for millions of Chinese people to be productive and contributing members of society
by preserving their ability to see.




                                                                                             Preventing Blindness in China | 21
STAY CONNECTED

WEB: www.ifc.org/health

LINKEDIN: www.linkedin.com/company/ifc-health

TWITTER: #ifchealth
For more information about IFC’s investments in health please contact:

Elena Sterlin                                   Chris McCahan
Global Manager, Health and Education            Global Lead, Health Care
Email: Esterlin@ifc.org                         E-mail: cmccahan@ifc.org
Washington, D.C., USA                           Washington, D.C., USA
www.ifc.org/health                              www.ifc.org/health
www.ifc.org/education




2121 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20433
Tel. 1-202-473-1000


       24 | Preventing Blindness in China
