Survey findings
Market conditions for biomass-to-energy
projects in Ukraine




In partnership with:
In partnership with the Finnish Ministry of International Affairs, the Free State of
Saxony (Germany), and the Agency for International Business Cooperation within
the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs.




This material was prepared by IFC, a member of the World Bank Group.
The contents of this report are protected by copyright.
Neither this report nor its parts may be reproduced, copied, or distributed in any form
without attribution to the IFC Market Conditions for Biomass-to-Energy Projects in Ukraine
Survey Findings, 2015.
IFC encourages dissemination of this publication and hereby grants permission to the user
of this work to copy portions of it for the user’s personal, non-commercial use, without
any right to resell, redistribute, or create works derived from the contents or informa-
tion contained herein. Any other copying or use of this work requires the express written
permission of IFC, obtainable at the address below.
This report does not claim to serve as an exhaustive presentation of the issues discussed
herein and should not be used as a basis for making commercial decisions. Please approach
an independent legal counsel for expert advice on all legal issues.
Various equipment suppliers, technology developers, and other private companies are cited
in this report. IFC does not represent the interests of any such organizations, and reference
to specific organizations is made solely for information purposes.
The opinions and conclusions contained in this report do not necessarily reflect the opinions
of IFC, the Board of Directors of the World Bank, or its Executive Directors. IFC does not
guarantee the accuracy of the data herein and bears no responsibility whatsoever for any
consequence of their use.
All information and materials used in the preparation of this report are the property of IFC.
© 2015 International Finance Corporation
1 Dniprovsky uzviz, 3rd floor,
Kyiv 01010, Ukraine
Tel.: + 380 (44) 490 6400
Fax: +380 (44) 490 6420
Content

Acknowledgements and background ...........................................................4
Opening remarks .........................................................................................6
Preface and about the survey ...................................................................... 7
What would it take for Ukraine to realize this market opportunity? ............. 8
Executive summary ......................................................................................9
1. Municipal heat suppliers ......................................................................... 12
2. Pellet producers ..................................................................................... 19
3. Agricultural companies ..........................................................................25
4. Electricity offtake ..................................................................................30
5. Finance ..................................................................................................34
6. Ukrainian biomass-to-energy legislation ................................................ 37
Annex 1. Participants in the survey .............................................................38
Annex 2. Biomass facts and figures ...........................................................38
4




Acknowledgements
This report was prepared by a team of IFC staff, including Kristina Turilova, Viera Feckova,
Olga Iakymenko, Maria Kuznetsova, Roman Novikov, and Stratos Tavoulareas, as part of
the IFC Ukraine Resource Efficiency Program.

The Program is implemented in partnership with the Free State of Saxony (Germany),
the Finnish Ministry of Employment and Economy, and the Agency for International Business
and Cooperation of the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs.

The authors wish to thank GfK Ukraine, a leading market research company in the country, and
Tetiana Sytnyk for conducting the survey.

The authors also wish to express deep gratitude to the following companies and experts who pro-
vided valuable input in the preparation of this report.
    Bo Eske Nyhus, Senior Investment Manager, NEFCO;
    Georgii Geletukha, Chairman, Bioenergy Association of Ukraine (UABio);
    Mykola Kolomyichenko, President, Ukrainian Pellet Union;
    Petra Schwager, Program Manager, UNIDO.




Background
This report is based on the survey conducted in 2015 by GfK Ukraine. Its objective is to analyze
market conditions for biomass-to-energy projects in Ukraine, as well as their types, key drivers, and
barriers to implementation. The survey has been conducted among 200+ local stakeholders: pellet
producers, agricultural producers (agro-holdings), as well as municipal energy suppliers.
Survey findings
Market conditions for biomass-to-energy
projects in Ukraine
6




 Opening remarks


 The agricultural sector receives significant attention from NEFCO for its potential in bioenergy
 development and the reduction of emissions of climate gases. It produces one of Ukraine’s bulk
 export goods. Many of the agro-businesses are large and financially sound; and unutilized biofuels
 are available in excess quantities. The major challenge is the lack of experience developing solutions
 for replacing old boilers and incorporating residual waste from farming activities to achieve cost
 efficiency and farm-based climate-smart bioenergy systems.

                                                                                    Bo Eske Nyhus,
                                                                  Senior Investment Manager, NEFCO




    The development of bio- and biomass energy is of strategic importance for countries with a strong
    focus on agriculture, such as Ukraine. According to the World Bank, Ukraine’s agriculture sector
    contributed 11.8 percent value added to the country’s GDP in 2014. The country has enormous
    potential for the use of biomass for energy generation. Lastly, working with international partners
    and specialized agencies such as UNIDO, Ukraine can achieve impressive targets in terms of
    renewable energy and resource efficiency.

                                                                                    Petra Schwager,
                                                                            Program Manager, UNIDO
                                                                                                     7




Preface and about the survey


Biomass globally and in the EU

Globally, by 2050 biomass could provide 3,000 TWh of electricity, or around 7.5% of the world’s
generation, and could create 1.3 bill tons of CO2 equivalent emission savings per annum. In addition,
biomass could provide 22 exajoules (EJ) of final heat consumption in industry (15% of the total) and
24 EJ in the buildings sector (20% of the total) by said year.

According to an IEA report,1 biomass heat and electricity can already be competitive with fossil
fuels today. Satisfying the demand will require around 5-7 billion dry tons of biomass by 2050
for electricity and heat production. International trade in biomass thus will be vital to match the
demand and will require properly functioning value chains.

Potential use of biomass for energy generation is a significant part of the EU 2020 Energy Strategy
whereby heat and power production from biomass is expected to reach 1,650 TWh in 2020, making
more than doubling from today’s level of 800 TWh.2



Biomass in Ukraine

According to an IRENA report,3 Ukraine has the potential to increase renewable energy use tenfold
from 87 petajoules (PJ) in 2009 to 870 PJ of the total final renewable energy in 2030. Out of this,
73% is accounted for heat, 20% by electricity generation, and 7 % by transport. Nearly 80%
of this total comes from biomass technologies including heating buildings and industrial plants
(particularly district heating), power generation, and transport fuels.

Ukraine can contribute to the EU renewable targets, as imports of biomass to Europe will be
needed. Even if the “aggressive supply mobilization” scenario in Europe were to fully materialize,
annual imports of 150-750 TWh of primary energy would be needed to meet the EU targets. These
imports will probably be in the form of pellets for the most part, due to their lower transport costs.
The volumes above correspond to between 30 and 150 million tons of pellets, or the output from
50 to 300 large-scale pellet mills.

Given Ukraine’s unique climate and natural resources, biomass represents a strong market
opportunity for the country from the viewpoints of energy security, energy generation, and
integration into the biomass supply chain.




1
    OECD/IEA, 2012 Technology Roadmap: Bioenergy for Heat and Power.
2
    European Climate Foundation, 2010 Biomass for heat and power: Opportunity and economics.
3
    IRENA, 2015 REmap 2030: Renewable Energy Prospects for Ukraine.
8




What would it take for Ukraine to realize market opportunity?
The Ukrainian biomass-to-energy market is just starting to evolve. This survey has been launched to
gauge perceptions and attitudes towards this market opportunity among key local players. These
attitudes will shape investment and operational decisions in the short run, but the survey may also
reveal how they could change due to a better understanding of opportunities and thus lead to more
informed and appropriate decisions in the long run.

The survey has been conducted among 200+ local stakeholders: pellet producers, agricultural
producers (agro-holdings), as well as municipal energy providers. The survey was conducted in
January-March 2015. It gives insights into wider market players’ acumen and will be helpful for
policy decision makers to shape potential support responses, for vendors to understand potential
market opportunities, and for financial institutions to understand which financial instruments will
be best suited. We have supplemented the survey findings with some recommendations from tech-
nical and financial experts experienced in developing and financing similar projects in Europe and
globally. We hope that this report will provide useful information and support the future develop-
ment of the Ukrainian biomass market.
          Executive summary


The structure of the Ukrainian biomass-to-energy market is taking shape
The supply side of the market is represented by the forestry and wood processing companies and crop
and animal farms that are sources of biomass. Pellet producers process available waste into pellets. Boilers
for burning biomass are available in the market from either local producers or importers.

Biomass-to-energy facilities produce electricity and/or heat for a variety of users (industrial,
commercial, and residential). In some cases, users generate electricity and/or heat for their own
use. In others, (private or municipal) electricity/heat producers sell to end-users directly or through
the power grid. Biomass-to-energy facilities may use biomass only or in combination (co-fired)
with other fuels (oil, gas, or coal).

The demand side is represented by biomass-to-energy facilities:
   Companies or individual users that burn biomass to produce energy (electricity or heat) for
       in-house consumption. This segment includes industrial companies, crop and animal farms,
       individual households, schools, and hospitals which install biomass-burning boilers to
       receive energy. They may use own-sourced biomass or procure it, particularly from pellet
       suppliers.
   Private and municipal heat suppliers. The former install biomass boilers and sell heat to
       customers such as schools, hospitals, and small industrial plants. The latter use biomass boilers
       together with traditional fuel (mainly, natural gas) boilers to reduce the cost of energy.
   Electricity generators. These companies implement projects with the objective of selling
       electricity to the national grid. For instance, animal farms process biomass into biogas and
       sell electricity to the grid.

The Ukrainian biomass-to-energy market is rather fragmented. There is a lack of established links
in the market between players, which prevents it from smooth functioning.

The most robust segment of the market is that of municipal heat supply. Heat-supplying
companies, both municipal and private, are the most active users of biomass for energy generation:
   More than one third (36%) of all the surveyed heat-supplying companies use biomass
       boilers. Most of them run both gas and biomass boilers. Combined usage of traditional
       fuel and biomass (co-firing) is very rare among those polled.
   Another 27% of the total number of surveyed heat suppliers have designed a project to
       install biomass boilers.
10      Executive summary




     Demand for biomass-to-energy initiatives has been growing in Ukraine, being driven by the
     motivation of cost savings and increased efficiency. In the short term, the share of heat suppliers
     using biomass boilers could grow up to 63% of all the surveyed players. Despite the expanding
     share of municipal heat suppliers using biomass boilers in the total number of companies, the share
     of biomass in the overall volume of fuel consumed by the surveyed entities remains low (14%). The
     most common fuel is natural gas, with a share of 80% in the total volume of fuel used by municipal
     heat suppliers.

     Competition is intensifying in the heat-supplying segment of the biomass-to-energy market.
     Nearly a quarter (23%) of the surveyed municipal heat suppliers have reported cases of clients
     switching off the heat supply after installing their own biomass boilers. Schools, hospitals, and
     other social institutions are those most frequently named for discontinuing municipal heat supply
     and installing their own biomass boilers. These entities are also the most common clients for private
     heat suppliers using biomass.

     Private heat suppliers have been actively entering the biomass-to-energy market. They install
     and operate boilers generating heat to be delivered to clients (usually schools, hospitals, and small
     businesses).

     Another important segment of the biomass-to-energy market is industrial enterprises
     using biomass to produce energy for in-house needs. According to the survey of pellet pro-
     ducers, about 20% of their sales go to industrial enterprises. As a result, industrial enterprises and
     private heat suppliers are the key domestic customers of pellet producers in Ukraine.




                       BIOMASS-TO-ENERGY MARKET STRUCTURE IN UKRAINE


                                                                 Biomass -to-energy producers
                                Biomass
     Biomass supplies
                             processors and                                                  Electricity
      (main sources of
                               equipment          Energy for own        Heating energy        off-take
         biomass)
                                providers              use               for customers       (electricity
                                                                                           for the market)

                                         Supply and logistics of biomass
      Forestry              Pellet producers    Industrial           Private heat     Energy off-takers
      Wood                                        enterprises           suppliers        such as:
       processing            Boiler equip-       Crop and animal      Municipal heat    Animal farms
                              ment producers       farms                 suppliers          producing
      Agricultural
       companies                                  Individual                               biogas
      Other (for                                  users (house-                           Companies col-
       example, food                               holds, schools,                          lecting biogas
       processing)                                 hospitals)                               at solid waste
                                                                                            landfills



                                                                                               Electricity
                                                                                            supply to the grid
                                                                                  Executive summary    11




Although agricultural companies have direct access to biomass, they are not its leading
users for energy production. In total, 11% of all the surveyed agro-companies use their agri-
cultural waste for burning in their own boilers. About 14% have considered using crop residue in
boilers to reduce energy cost; 13% of the big farms have considered installing a biogas plant, but
only 2% have designed a project to install a biogas plant.

Agricultural companies are reluctant to sell their agricultural waste to pellet producers. Currently,
14% of the agro-companies reported that they cooperate with pellet producers and only 8% of
them plan to start doing so. In the meantime, 7% of the surveyed companies have already started
their own pellet production and 18% are going to do so. These companies are motivated to produce
pellets to use them for their own energy needs, as opposed to selling them widely to the market.

Electricity generation projects are very rare in Ukraine. The key to the implementation for
the implementation of these projects are the large initial investment in equipment, additional
investment in the electricity grid, technical risks, significant operation costs, and the instability of
green tariff regulation. In addition, co-firing of biomass with other fuels does not qualify for the
renewable feed-in tariff.

Financial constraints are the key impediment to further development. They include a high
bank loan interest rate, the need for a large initial investment in equipment, and the need for
additional investment in logistics and storage capacities for biomass.

Additionally, the shortage of biomass of required quality is considered the main risk when
it comes to implementing biomass-to-energy projects. The shortage of biomass and the
growing demand for it pushes prices up, which increases the cost of a project and the uncertainty
regarding the investment payback period.

The current biomass supply in Ukraine is unbalanced, which may lead to an even greater
biomass shortage in the future. Wood, including raw wood, unprocessed wood, and wood pellets,
is the main type of biomass currently used in Ukraine. The usage of agricultural waste is limited.

This imbalance creates the risk of unsustainable forest management and regional limits in
implementation of biomass-to-energy projects (they are mainly implemented in regions with
greater availability of wood).

Adjustment of the supply of biomass to meet the growing demand for it will require:
   Investment in collection and treatment of biomass, its storage, and logistics at all levels of
       the supply chain, including raw biomass suppliers, and
   Closer links and cooperation between market players, particularly among the agricultural
       companies and pellet producers.
                             1            Municipal
                                          heat suppliers

The most dynamically developing segment of the market is that of district heat supply.
Heat suppliers, both municipal and private, are the most active users of biomass to produce
energy:
   More than one third (36%) of all the surveyed heat-supplying companies use biomass
       boilers. Most of them operate both gas and biomass boilers. Combined usage of
       traditional fuel and biomass (co-firing) is very rare among those polled.
   Another 27% of the total number of heat suppliers surveyed have designed a project to
       install biomass boilers.

Despite the expanding share of municipal heat suppliers using biomass boilers in the total
number of companies, the share of biomass in the overall volume of fuel consumed by the
surveyed entities remains low (14%). The most common fuel is natural gas, with a share of 80%
in the total volume of fuel used by municipal heat suppliers.

Competition is intensifying in the heat supplying segment between municipal and private
suppliers. Nearly a quarter (23%) of the surveyed municipal companies have reported cases of
clients switching off the heat supply after installing their own biomass boilers. Schools, hospitals,
and other social institutions are those most frequently named for discontinuing municipal heat
supply and installing their own biomass boilers. These entities are also the most common clients
for private heat-supplying companies using biomass.

Private heat suppliers have been actively entering the biomass-to-energy market. They
install and operate boilers generating heat which is delivered to clients (schools, hospitals, and
small commercial companies). Their importance in the biomass-to-energy market is proven by
the evidence from the pellet producers survey. According to those polled in that survey, about
20% of their pellet sales go to private heat suppliers.
                                                                        Municipal heat suppliers   13




          There are    642
                    municipal heat
                    suppliers
                                                                              12.6
                    in Ukraine                     that serve                million
                                                                             apartments




                                                    500 thsd – 1 mln
                                              1%
         100 – 200 thsd
                              4%



                       10%
     above 1 mln

                                                                               less than 50 thsd
                                      Share of municipal               57%

                                        heat suppliers
                                      operating in cities
                      12%             by population size
  50 – 100 thsd




                                16%
             200 – 500 thsd
                                                                       Source: SSSU.


Biomass utilization and replacement of natural gas in district heating systems (budget-financed
consumers and commercial companies) is expected to rise to 3.2 bln m3 annually by 2020 (from
0.14 bln m3 in 2013).
Source: UABio.
14     Municipal heat suppliers




 Current and planned usage of biomass by heat-supplying companies

 In the short term, the share of heat-supplying
                                                                            Municipal heat supply is the
 companies using biomass boilers could go up to
                                                                            most dynamically developing
 63% of the total number of entities surveyed. This is
                                                                                   sector of the
 estimated as a sum of the shares of those currently
                                                                             biomass-to-energy market
 using biomass boilers (36%) and those that have a
                                                                                    in Ukraine
 project designed to install them (27%).4




         CURRENT AND PLANNED USAGE OF BIOMASS BY HEAT-SUPPLYING COMPANIES




              More than one third of
            the estimated number of
              heat suppliers surveyed                      36%
                have experience with
                      biomass boilers

                                                                                             Estimated number
                                                                                             of projects by
                                                                                             heat-supplying
                                                                                             companies which
                                                                                63%          will use biomass
                                                                                             for energy production
                                                                                             in the short term


      About half of the total number
         of companies surveyed are                          27%
          considering implementing
        biomass-to-energy projects

                                                   21%                  Yes, have developed a project


                                                              Yes, considering, but have not developed a project




 4
     The share of the total number of companies that use biomass is implied here. At the same time, they can use other
     types of fuels, such as gas, coal etc.
                                                                         Municipal heat suppliers   15




    There is a stable trend of public and commercial consumers replacing gas boilers with
biomass installations. During the 2014/2015 heating season, about 450 MWh of biomass
boilers were installed in the public sector alone.
    At present, wood biomass (like wood chips, firewood, and pellets) is the most commonly
used type of biomass for heat generation. Nevertheless, a number of schools and other public
buildings in rural areas, as well as agro-companies, resort to straw (both as bales and pellets)
for the same purpose. In our opinion, looking forward, the number of boilers running on
straw and other agro-waste (like maize stalks, maize cobs, and sunflower stalks) will increase
considerably while the rise in the number of wood-fired boilers will be comparatively limited.
    Another promising option for heat is the use of energy crops (like willow, poplar, and
miscanthus). This is due to the structure of available biomass resources in Ukraine, the main
constituents of which are agricultural residues and energy crops with a comparatively small
volume of wood biomass.
    We believe that the development of the market for biomass as a fuel will be accompanied
by increasing biomass prices, although this trend is not as pronounced as that of natural gas
and other fossil fuels. With the further development of the biofuels market and the entry of a
large number of competing suppliers, biomass prices will probably stabilize at a market-driven
level.

                                                                          Georgii Geletukha,
                                                                            Chairman, UABio
16      Municipal heat suppliers




     Current usage of biomass as fuel

     Natural gas is the main fuel used by municipal heat sup-
     pliers; it accounts for 80% of the total volume.                       The share of biomass in the
                                                                             total volume of fuel used
     Raw wood, unprocessed wood waste (sawdust, wood                               stands at 14%.
     chips), and wood pellets are the most commonly used
     type of biomass to produce energy by municipal heat                   Wood is the most commonly
     suppliers. The usage of agricultural waste is quite rare,              used types of biomass.
     as only one company mentioned using pellets made
     from sunflower husk.


     Raw wood and unprocessed wood waste is used by 32% of the surveyed companies, and its share
     in the overall volume of fuel used is 9%. Wood pellets are utilized by 21% of the companies and
     account for a 5% share of the total volume of fuel used. The key reason for choosing this kind
     of biomass is its accessibility compared to other options. Heat suppliers obtain raw wood, wood
     waste, and wood pellets either from forestry enterprises or from private companies. Two compa-
     nies have mentioned having in-house sources of biomass.



              CURRENT USAGE OF BIOMASS AS FUEL BY HEAT-SUPPLYING COMPANIES

        Types of fuel used                                                           Ways of using biomass
       % of the total number of                      Types of fuel used               % of the total number of
        companies surveyed                         % of the total volume used          companies surveyed

                                                                                      As co-firing        6
        86                           Natural gas


        32             Wood or wood waste

                                                     9
        21                Wood pellets                                          80
                                                    5                                 For a separate      94
        18                   Coal                     5                               plant

                                                    1
        5             Peat

                                                      Other
        2       Pellets from sunflower husk


                                                                                       Sample: 16 respondents
         Sample: 44 respondents                       Sample: 44 respondents
                                                                                          that use biomass


     Respondents were allowed to select multiple answers from the list of choices.
                                                                                   Municipal heat suppliers   17




Drivers and barriers for biomass-to-energy projects

The most frequently mentioned drivers that can
accelerate implementation of biomass-to-energy                       A decreasing price of biomass
projects are as follows:                                              is the key driver for its use.
   A decrease in biomass prices (this was
       mentioned by 86% as compared to 61% who
       mentioned an increase of prices for coal,
       heating oil, and natural gas as the driver to
       implement biomass projects),
   Government subsidies for a share of equipment purchase and installation costs (mentioned
       by 80% of the respondents),
   Stable biomass supply,
   Subsidies to bank loan interest rates.



                KEY DRIVERS TO IMPLEMENT BIOMASS-TO-ENERGY PROJECT
           % of all the surveyed heat-supplying companies which consider the driver to be important



         Decrease of biomass prices                                                                86

         Subsidies for equipment                                                              80
         purchase and installation costs

         Stability of biomass supply                                                     71

         Increase of price for coal,
         heating oil, and natural gas                                             61


         Subsidies to bank loan interest rates                                   59

Respondents were allowed to select multiple answers from the list of choices.

The key barriers are also related either to significant
upfront investment or to the lack of stability of
                                                                      High loan interest rates and
biomass supply. The top barriers to the implementation
                                                                    initial investment are perceived
of biomass-to-energy projects by heat-supplying
                                                                          as the key barriers for
companies are as follows:
                                                                      biomass-to-energy projects.
   A high loan interest rate,
   Large initial investment,
   A lack of confidence in stability of biomass supply,
   Additional investment required for biomass storage,
   A lack of government support for biomass-to-energy projects.
18    Municipal heat suppliers




                 KEY BARRIERS TO IMPLEMENT BIOMASS-TO-ENERGY PROJECTS
             % of all the surveyed heat-supplying companies which consider the barrier to be important



            High loan interest rates                                                                 80

            Large initial investment for                                                   66
            equipment purchase

            No confidence in stability                                             55
            of biomass supply

            Necessity of additional investment                                     55
            in biomass storage capacity

            Lack of government support
                                                                                   55
            of biomass usage


 Respondents were allowed to select multiple answers from the list of choices.


 When comparing technological risks related to producing energy from biomass and traditional
 fuel, the shortage of biomass of required quality is the key concern of heat-supplying companies.
 Another important risk associated with usage of biomass is that of unstable energy output (as a
 result of unstable quality and heat content in the input biomass). About half of the surveyed com-
 panies are concerned about the quality of equipment used for biomass burning.




         The key barriers to implementing biomass-to-energy projects identified in the survey are
     for the most part correct. However, this should be supplemented by another important im-
     pediment, i.e. the still subsidized price of natural gas for district heating.
         The drivers mentioned in the survey are desirable for accelerating biomass-to-energy
     projects but do not exist now. Among the available drivers we can point to the following:
     the increasing price of natural gas in the commercial sector and for those that own individual
     homes, availability of the feed-in tariff for renewable power that can enable introduction of
     biomass CHP plants, and availability of the stimulus tariff for heat produced “not from natural
     gas” for public sector consumers. In the near future, we expect that a similar stimulus tariff will
     be introduced for heat generated “not from natural gas” covering the general public heated
     through DH systems and also that a simplified procedure will be in place for allocation of land
     for construction of renewable energy installations.

                                                                                        Georgii Geletukha,
                                                                                          Chairman, UABio
       2                 Pellet
                         producers

Pellet producers represent the supply side of the biomass market. They process waste into
pellets, which are sold to municipal heat suppliers, industrial enterprises, and other customers
for production of energy.

The pellet producers are optimistic about their business prospects:
    About one third of those surveyed reported that their output volume increased in 2014
          as compared to 2013, while one fourth indicated a decrease in production. The output
          growth rate is estimated to be over 20% by most of the pellet producers which reported
          an increase in production.
    Pellet production is mostly a profitable business, as 61% of the pellet producers reported
          turning a profit in 2014. The share of loss-making pellet producers is 22%, according to
          the survey.
    Pellet producers are even more optimistic about their business prospects in 2015 as
          compared to 2014: 44% of them expect their business to expand, as compared to 7%
          who anticipate a decline.

Business prospects in the pellet market are not limited by strong competition. Most of the sur-
veyed producers do not feel any stringency in the market, with only 17% assessing competition
as strong. The pellet producers are not restrained by capacity limits and can easily expand pro-
duction: more than half of the surveyed pellet producers (59%) reported a capacity utilization
rate below 90%.

 Pellet production in Ukraine                                     Share of pellets
                                              10-20%              used in Ukraine              70%
 The total production reached about
 1,500 kilotons (kt) in 2014 and is
 expected to rise 5 times to 7,500 kt
 by 2020*




                                              80-90%                                           30%
                    7,500                                          Share of pellets
                                                 2012              exported to EU              2015
  1,500                                 80-90% of Ukrainian pellets were exported to EU countries till 2012.*
                                        In 2014-2015 the share of pellets used in Ukraine was increasing.
   2014             2020*               It is expected to reach 70% in 2015.
* The Ukrainian Pellet Union.           *CRES, 2012.
20      Pellet producers




     Production

     The most common pellet business in Ukraine is
     producing wood pellets. All the surveyed pellet                          The share of pellet producers
     producers manufacture wood pellets. Additionally,                         which increased production
     three companies produce pellets from sunflower husk.                     exceeded that of those who
     Other kinds of pellets produced in Ukraine include                         saw a decline in output.
     cereal straw pellets, corn stalk pellets, and sunflower                 One fourth reported a decrease
     stalk and head pellets. Each of them was mentioned by                      in production due to the
     one company only. More than half of those surveyed                        economic crisis and lower
     (54%) are focused solely on pellet production. The rest                           demand.
     combine it with other activities, the most common of
     which is wood processing.


                               PELLET PRODUCTION BUSINESS LANDSCAPE

              Types of pellets produced,                                           Other activities,
            % of the surveyed pellet producers                            % of the surveyed pellet producers

            Wood pellets,                                             Do not have other
            or briquettes                            100                  activity types                        54
               Sunflower
              husk pellets        7                                   Wood processing                  22

            Spiked cereals
             straw pellets      2                                                  Other      10

        Corn stalks pellets     2                                           Production/            7
                                                                         sales of boilers

          Sunflower stalks                                                  Production/
         and heads pellets      2                                      sales of charcoal           5

               Peat pellets     2                                 Forestry enterprise          2
 Respondents were allowed to select multiple answers from the list of choices.

 Volume of pellet production in 2014,                                                 3,001-5,000 tons
 % of the surveyed
 pellet producers                     1,001-3,000 tons
                                                                              12
                                                            36                              5,001-10,000 tons

                                                                                     12

 In most of the cases, the                                                             5
                                                                                             Over 10,000 tons
 annual volume of pellet
 production per company                                          15           20
 ranged from 1,000 to
 3,000 tons in 2014.                     Up to 1,000 tons
                                                                                     Hard to say
                                                                                               Pellet producers   21




Raw material supply

Wood waste is the main raw material for pellet
production, as it is used by 95% of the surveyed pellet               Wood waste is the main raw
producers, with its share reaching 87% in the total                   material for pellet production.
volume of raw materials. The use of agricultural waste
                                                                        Its share reaches 87% in the
is rare, with sunflower husk being mentioned most
                                                                                total volume.
frequently.

Raw materials are mainly supplied by external vendors,
88% of the total being procured from them, while the
remaining 12% are obtained from producers’ own en-
terprises. In most of the cases, the pellet producer co-
operates with 2 to 5 vendors on a regular basis. Frequent
changes of suppliers are usually avoided.




                     USAGE OF RAW MATERIALS FOR PELLET PRODUCTION

                     Volume distribution of raw materials, % of the total raw materials used


                                                              Wood waste

                                                      0.02
                                                              Straw
                             87                   3

                                                10             Sunflower husk


                                                              Pine and fruit trees


                   Types of raw materials, % of the total number of pellet producers surveyed

      Wood waste                                                                                    95

      Sunflower husk               7

      Other                        7

      Pine and fruit trees        5

      Straw                        2


Respondents were allowed to select multiple answers from the list of choices.
22     Pellet producers




     EU pellet market development snapshot

     Europe is the biggest producer of wood pellets in the world (50%), with over 12.2 mln tons of
     them delivered in 2013.

     Europe is the biggest consumer of wood pellets in the world (70%), with 18.3 mln tons of pellets
     utilized in 2013.

     0.28 mln tons of pellets were imported from Ukraine and Belarus in 2013, which accounted for
     4.6% of overall EU imports.

     The share of extra-EU biomass is projected to increase to 6-7% in 2020 and 12-13% in 2030. The
     role of traded biomass and especially extra-EU trade is increasingly important.

     EU wood pellet production (tons)
          13,000,000


          11,000,000


          9,000,000
                                                               Other EU countries

          7,000,000
                                                                          France
                                                                          Poland
          5,000,000
                                                                          Austria
                                                                           Latvia
          3,000,000                                                      Sweden

          1,000,000                                                     Germany


                     2009               2010               2011                 2012        2020
                                                                                           outlook
     Share of EU wood pellet consumption in 2012 (tons)
        2,200,000
                                                                                         Heat
                                                                                         Power
        1,800,000

        1,400,000

        1,000,000

         600,000

         200,000


                       SE   IT     BE          DE   DK    UK      NL       AT       PL    FR
      Source: AEBIOM.
                                                                                                   Pellet producers   23




Pellet sales

One third of the surveyed producers sell products exclusively on the domestic market, while two
thirds combine exports and domestic sales. The export share averages 40% (according to the
survey). The key domestic customers for pellet producers are the following:
   industrial enterprises that buy pellets for in-house energy production needs,
   private heat suppliers,
   pellet wholesalers.

More than 60% of the total pellet sales go to the three groups of customers: industry, private heat
suppliers, and wholesale buyers. Pellets are also sold to retail customers such as individual house-
holds, office centers, hospitals, and schools.

The geography of pellet sales on the domestic market is relatively wide:
   61% of the surveyed pellet producers sell their pellets within the region (home and
       neighboring region)
   29% sell pellets all over Ukraine.



                                CUSTOMERS OF PELLET PRODUCERS

                                                           Pellet sales distribution by customer groups,
     Wholsale buyers, pellet distributors                  % of the total pellet sales volume

                                                 21
                                                                12            Individual households

        Private heat supplies                                                         Other
                                                                         7
                                    23                                                Office centers,
                                                                         5            administration buildings
                                                                     4
                                                                                   Municipal heat suppliers
                                                                3
          Industrial enterprises                      24        1            Hospitals
          (for their own needs)
                                                                         Schools



          Customer location,
              % of the responses
                                                                                All over Ukraine
                                                           29


                                            62
                                                                7                    Within home or several
                                                                                     neighboring districts
       Within home or several
         neighboring regions
                                                                     2
                                                                             Other
24    Pellet producers




 Plans of pellet producers

 The pellet producers are optimistic about their future
 prospects and plan expansion of their business:                Pellet producers are optimistic
      63% plan to increase production capacity;                about their future prospects
                                                                          and plans.
      20% plan to produce pellets from new types
         of raw materials (spiked cereals straw and
         sunflower husk are of the greatest interest);
      61% plan additional investments in the logistics system (trucks and storages).




                              FUTURE PLANS OF PELLET PRODUCERS


                                                                             Plan additional
            Plan to increase                 Plan to use
                                                                          investments in the
          production capacity            a new raw material
                                                                            logistics system

                   63%                           20%                            61%




         As for the drop in pellet exports, currently the EU, a major market for Ukrainian pellets,
     has very strict requirements for certification of solid biofuel. Ukrainian companies (with the
     exception of 3) do not comply with the rules. This is why their products are delivered via
     intermediaries (Poland, Czech Republic, Slovakia, etc.) that present the Ukrainian pellets as
     their own produce.
         As for the increase in pellet consumption on the domestic market, due to the government’s
     program to promote projects to replace natural gas in heating, there has been a hike in domes-
     tic consumption of pellets in 2014-2015. The trade mark-up is the same for both exports and
     the national market. As of today, the ratio between national consumption and exports is 70 to
     30, respectively. It is projected to reach 75 to 25 by year-end 2015.

                                                                         Mykola Kolomyichenko,
                                                                  President, Ukrainian Pellet Union
      3              Agricultural
                     companies

Although agricultural companies have direct access to biomass, they are not its leading users
in energy production. In total, 11% of all the surveyed big arable crop and animal farms utilize
their own agricultural waste in thier boilers. The key impediments to the implementation of
biomass-to-energy projects by farms are the large initial investment requirements and the lack
of government support.

About 14% of those surveyed are considering using crop residue boilers to reduce energy cost;
13% of the big farms are considering a biogas plant, but only 2% have designed a project to do so.

Given the growing profile of Ukrainian arable crops, the most common agricultural waste from
crop growing includes cereal straw, corn stalks, corn silage, sunflower stalks, heads, and husk.
Most of this waste is utilized as a fertilizer for forage or bedding for animals.

Meanwhile, when it comes to producing energy for their own needs, agricultural companies
use raw wood more intensively than agricultural waste. According to the survey, 30% of all the
surveyed farms use raw wood as a fuel for their boilers. Raw wood is the second most common
fuel after natural gas.

       Further
     processing

                                      54%



                               Ukraine produces
                          110-120 mln tons                         1%
                             of biomass feedstock
                           (straw of cereals and other
                               crops waste, animal
                                  agro-industrial                              Used for electricity
                                     waste)                                     generation/heat
                                                                                  production


                                          45%

                                                                 Wasted
26      Agricultural companies




 Use of biomass by agricultural companies

 According to the surveyed agricultural companies,
 there are a small number of farms involved in activities              There are a small number of
 related to the biomass-to-energy market.                               agro-companies involved
        14% of the surveyed farms sell agricultural                   in activities related to the
              waste to pellet producers (in most cases, cereal         biomass-to-energy market.
              straw and/or substandard yield are sold to pellet
              producers),
        11% of the farms use agricultural waste in their own boilers to produce energy for in-house
              needs (agricultural waste burnt includes cereals straw, sunflower stalks, and substandard
              yield), and
        One farm uses substandard yield to produce biogas.




         SHARE OF AGRICULTURAL COMPANIES IN THE TOTAL NUMBER OF THOSE USING
                AGRICULTURAL WASTE FOR BIOMASS-TO-ENERGY PROJECTS


              Sell agricultural waste        Burn agricultural waste
                                                                                 Produce biogas
               to pellet producers             in their own boilers
                                                                                         1%
                      14%                             11%




     Baling

     Baling is important for appropriate storage of waste and makes its transportation easier. It increases
     the quality of biomass. 80% of the surveyed agricultural companies use balers for cereal straw, and
     48% of the total straw is baled on average.

     Corn is an important crop for Ukraine, and agricultural companies have started using balers for corn
     stalks. According to the survey, 8% of the surveyed agricultural companies bale corn stalks, and on
     average these farms bale 50% of the corn stalks they collect. It is applied on 50% of the collected
     corn stalks by these farms on average.

     Out of 23 agricultural companies that sell their waste to pellet producers, only 4 do so in bales.
     Other focus on chopped waste.
                                                                                   Agricultural companies       27




Awareness of and attitudes towards energy crops

The surveyed agricultural companies are not interested
in growing energy crops: 15% report that they have                   Surveyed agricultural
studied the possibility of growing energy crops, but             companies are not interested in
most of them do not plan to enter this business. They               growing energy crops.
cited the following reasons for not entering the energy
crop business:
   A lack of government support and subsidies,
   No need for the company to grow energy crops,
   A lack of excess land,
   The complex cultivation technology,
   A lack of market for sales,
   A long wait before the first harvest,
   Low profitability.




           ATTITUDE OF AGRICULTURAL COMPANIES TOWARDS ENERGY CROPS

      15% are aware of energy crops                       Barriers to cultivating energy crops,
          and studied this issue                                    number of respondents


                                                                               There is no government
                                 Never heard of them,      6                   support, subsidies, privileges
                                 do not know
                                                           5                There is no need in energy crops

                        12%
                                                           4              A lack of excess land

        73%                  15%                           3            Difficult cultivation technology


                                                           2         There is no sales market
                                    Know well enough,
                                    studied the issue      2        A long wait until the first harvest

 Heard or read something                                   1      It is not profitable



            Sample: 101 respondents                     Sample:14 respondents that are aware energy crops


Respondents were allowed to select multiple answers from the list of choices.
28      Agricultural companies




     Cooperation with pellet producers

     Currently, 14% of the big agricultural companies co-
     operate with pellet producers producers to supply ag-           Big agricultural companies are
     ricultural waste for pellet production; another 16% of           more inclined to implement
     agricultural companies have been contacted by pellet            their  own biomass-to-energy
     producers and entered into negotiations on waste               projects than to sell biomass on
     supply. The talks have been successful and turned into                    the market.
     contracts only in one of four cases (4 farms reached an
     agreement with pellet producers out of 16 negotiators).
     In almost half of the cases (7 farms out of 16 negotiators), they failed.

     The agricultural companies are very reluctant to cooperate with pellet producers. According to the
     survey, 14% of them already cooperate with pellet producers and only 8% plan to establish such
     cooperation.

     That said, reasons for the reluctance cited by the surveyed agricultural companies are as follows:
        All the waste is used at the company, no excess waste is left,
        Pellet producers offer low prices,
        Agricultural companies are not able to meet logistics and quality requirements.

     On the other hand, those 8% who plan to initiate cooperation with pellet producers are motivated
     by earning additional revenue and more efficiently utilizing of their waste (including cleaning of
     fields).



                 CURRENT AND PLANNED COOPERATION WITH PELLET PRODUCERS


           Sell agricultural waste          Have been contacted              Plan to cooperate
            to pellet producers              by pellet producers            with pellet producers

                    14%                             16%                               8%
                                                                           Agricultural companies    29




    NEFCO supports the report’s statement that Ukraine provides a significant undeveloped
potential for investments in biomass-to-energy solutions. NEFCO is committed to municipal
and private sector investments to develop a bioenergy market. An urgent and growing
priority for NEFCO is to address open-field burning in the agricultural sector. Open burning
contributes to lower air quality and elevates a regional health risk. The most environmentally
friendly alternative to open burning is to collect residual straw and utilize it as a biomass fuel
for local heat and electricity demands. NEFCO applies a multi-pronged approach incorporating
education, policy support, and financing solutions in order to raise awareness, introduce Nordic
technologies for controlled burning, and successfully abate short-lived climate pollutants. An
extension of the Ukrainian biomass-to-energy sector would not only have a prominent positive
impact on the climate globally and locally, but also strengthen Ukraine’s energy security, food
security, and exports.

                                                                              Bo Eske Nyhus,
                                                            Senior Investment Manager, NEFCO
                               4                 Electricity
                                                 generators


   The share of renewable energy                                     Biomass continues to
   in the power sector                                               dominate the mix, with its
                                                                     share (among renewables)
                                                                     projected to remain
                                                 11.4%               between 67% and 84%
            6.9%                                                     in the period 2010-2030.


            2010                                 2030

                                                                           67% – 84%

    The Government expects that electricity generation
    from biomass, often combined with district heating,
                       will grow by
                     10% annually

Source: IRENA, REmap 2030: Renewable Energy Prospects for Ukraine.
                                                                                                Electricity generators     31




Biomass could be used to produce electricity, typically in one of the three following ways:
      Biogas produced through a digester and converted to electricity in a gas engine;
      Landfill gas collected in a waste landfill area and converted to electricity in a gas engine;5
      Biomass burned or gasified in a power or combined heat-power plant. The plant could be
           designed to handle only biomass or burn it in combination with some other fuel (e.g. gas,
           oil, or coal).

Biogas (digester-based) tends to involve smaller systems and be more expensive than the other two
options in terms of both initial capital and the cost of the energy produced.

In Ukraine, companies with access to biomass tend to choose the option of electricity, not heat for
a number of number of reasons:
      First, selling electricity at the green tariff is more profitable compared to selling heat.
      Second, places where biogas is collected (such as animal farms or solid waste landfills)
           are located far from residential areas and the transportation of heat is usually inefficient
           and expensive. In some cases, co-generation is considered, when electricity is sold to the
           national grid, with heat being used internally.

      For example, an animal farming company was required to invest in a 10 km transmission
      line to connect a biogas power plant to the grid. Moreover, investment was required to
      modernize transformers and other equipment owned by the operator. The cost of mod-
      ernizing the grid was estimated at 10% of the total project investment.

The capacity of projects varies from 1 megawatt (landfill gas collection and processing at solid
waste landfills) to 3 megawatts (biogas collection and processing at animal farms). The size of the
investment is evaluated at EUR 1.5-2 million. The expected payback period is 5-7 years.

Implementation of biogas projects can be time-consuming. For instance, for one animal farm it
took two years from the beginning of project design to commercial start-up. Another animal farm
representative mentioned that it had taken one year just to choose the supplier of equipment. In
the case of a landfill gas project at a solid waste landfill, it took three year to sign an agreement
on the project between municipal authorities and the project developer. It took 3-4 more years to
implement the project and start operations.

The necessity to comply with bureaucratic requirements and procedures contributes to longer
time periods for project implementation. Project developers have faced difficulties with burden-
some procedures in the following areas:
      Customs clearance of imported equipment,
      Negotiations with the local power grid company on connection to the grid,
      Negotiations with the energy market regulator on green tariffs and permits to sell
           electricity,
      Getting an approval from the occupational safety inspectorate.


5
    Landfill gas collection projects at solid waste landfills are being implemented in areas around the city of Kyiv, in
    Bila Tserkva, Mykolayiv, Vinnytsia, Kremenchuk, and Zaporizhzhia.
32      Electricity generators




 Biogas-to-energy projects are technically sophisticated, and their implementation is associated
 with the following technical risks:
        In the case of animal farming, the characteristics of waste for biogas production should
            be carefully analyzed and monitored, including chemical content (content of nitrogen),
            humidity levels, and temperature. The features of biomass affect the amount of
            power generated. Seasonal fluctuations in the quality of biomass lead to seasonality of
            generation.
        There is a lack of qualified staff who can work with the equipment.
        For solid waste landfill gas projects, the quality of solid waste landfill management is
            important.

     In the past, private investors and/or bank loans were sources of financing for project implementation.
     One animal farm raised funding from a foreign bank under an export support program for
     equipment producers. Another animal farm received a loan from Oschadbank. Together with
     funds from private investors, the bank loan was taken for a greenfield dairy farm project.

     For future projects, the lack of external financing is an important impediment, given the significant
     size of the initial investment. There are the following obstacles to bank financing for electricity
     generation projects:
        High interest rates offered by Ukrainian banks.
        Reluctance of foreign banks to lend in Ukraine due to the current political and economic
            environment.
        Refusal of banks to credit electricity generation projects due to the uncertainty in the
            green tariff legislation (particularly, in terms of local content regulation).

     The key motivation for investors to implement biogas projects is to earn revenue from selling elec-
     tricity to the national grid at the green tariff. Additional motives are related to benefits for the com-
     munity such as reducing the environmental burden of animal farms or waste landfills, creating new
     jobs, and covering the company’s own energy needs.

     The uncertainty with green tariff regulation leads to to changes in the expected payback period and
     profitability of projects for investors. For instance, one of the surveyed animal farm representatives
     mentioned that when the investment was planned its payback period was expected to be 3 years,
     assuming that the company would sell electricity at the green tariff. However, it was refused because
     manure was not legally considered to be waste. As a result, the company is selling electricity at the
     normal tariff, and the payback period has been revised to 7 years.6

 Investors demand greater certainty on green tariff legislation and a clear definition of the terms
 under which the green tariff may be applied.




 6
      At the time when the survey was conducted, selected types of biomass, such as manure, were not eligible for
      the green tariff. Following new changes introduced to Law No. 2010-d of May 19, 2015 the term “biomass” is
      aligned with EU Directive 2009/28/EC that both products and waste are considered as biomass for the purpose
      of qualifying for the feed-in tariff.
                                                                                              Electricity generators     33




                               GREEN TARIFF RATES FOR BIOMASS/BIOGAS7


                                                                              Type of alternative energy source

                                                                               electricity              electricity
                                                                             generated from           generated from
                                                                                biomass                   biogas

    Retail price*, ЕUR/kWh                                                                  0.05385

    Factor in effect from July 01, 2015 till December 31, 2015                                 2.30

    Tariff rate in effect from January 01, 2015 till December 31, 2015                       0.1239

    Factor in effect from January 01, 2016 till December 31, 2016                              2.30

    Tariff rate in effect from January 01, 2016 till December 31, 2016                       0.1239

    Factor in effect from January 01, 2017 till December 31, 2017                              2.30

    Tariff rate in effect from January 01, 2017 till December 31, 2017                       0.1239

    Factor in effect from January 01, 2020 till December 31, 2024                              2.07

    Tariff rate in effect from January 01, 2020 till December 31, 2024             0.1115                 0.115

    Coefficient from January 01, 2025 till December 31, 2029                                   1.84

    Rate of the tariff from January 01, 2025 till December 31, 2029                          0.0991

*
    The retail electricity price for 2nd class consumers as of January 2009, established in accordance with Resolution
    of National Energy Regulation Commission No. 1440 of December 23, 2008 converted at the applicable NBU
    exchange rate in EUR.




         With regard to biomass-to-electricity projects, there are two sub-options: (i) combustion
     (in grate or circulating fluidized bed boilers) and (ii) gasification. Combustion is a conventional
     option, with equipment being provided by both domestic and foreign suppliers. In addition,
     its investment needs are moderate, certainly of the order of magnitude to make biomass
     projects financially viable under the feed-in tariff offered in Ukraine. Usually, the issue is
     the risk associated with biomass supply (quantity, quality, and price). Biomass gasification
     is a relatively new option (depending on the supplier, the specific equipment may be well-
     established or may be new and entail technology-related risks), and it is more expensive (per
     energy output).

                                                                                         Stratos Tavoulareas,
                                                                                      Senior Energy Advisor, IFC



7
    Law on Introduction of Changes to Certain Laws of Ukraine with respect to Securing Competitive Conditions for
    Generation of Electricity from Alternative Energy Sources, No. 2010-d of May 19, 2015.
                              5                Finance


Financial constraints are the key impediment to future market development. They are the greatest
concern for market players in considering biomass-to-energy projects.

The list of the most frequently mentioned financial constraints include:
   A high bank loan interest rate,
   Large initial investment required for equipment,
   Additional investment required for logistics and biomass storage capacity,
   A lack of government support for implementation of biomass-to-energy projects.

Parties that plan to implement biomass-to-energy projects in the future rely more on either gov-
ernment funds (in case of municipally-owned enterprises) or their own company funds. The sector
players do not expect to raise a significant amount from bank loans or private investor funding.
In the meantime, they anticipate more funding coming from international financial institutions.



Sources of investment
For already implemented biomass-to-energy projects, investment came either from the local or
central budget (33% from the local budget and 5% from the central one in the total investment
volume) or from companies’ own funds (26% of the total investment volume). Three companies
used bank loans and three more received private investor funding. As a result, the share of bank
loans in all the investment sources was 18% and the share of private investor funds was 16%.

In the future, from the perspective of the implementation of planned biomass-to-energy projects,
government budget funds and companies’ own funds will remain the most important sources for
investment. The companies do not expect to raise a significant amount from bank loans or private
investor funding. The share of bank loans is predicted to decline to 3% of total investment sources,
and the share of private investor funding is estimated at around 7%. This can be explained by the
economic and banking crisis in Ukraine in 2014, which resulted in high interest rates and a lack of
lending. The companies expect to compensate for the lack of bank loans and private investor funds
by attracting grants from international organizations.
                                                                                            Finance   35




   SOURCES OF INVESTMENT FOR ALREADY IMPLEMENTED AND PLANNED PROJECTS


                                 Investment for implemented projects
                                       % of the surveyed companies

                  State budget                                          Local budget
                                             7%
                                                          33%

                                       16%
             Private investors



                                            18%          26%           Enterprise’s own funds
                   Bank loans


                                   Investment for planned projects
                                       % of the surveyed companies

  Other (including the state budget)                                   Local budget
                                            17%            30%
                 Bank loans
                                       3%
                                       7%
             Private investors
                                            19%           24%
                                                                       Enterprise’s own funds
  International organization grants




Perception of financial institutions that are ready to give loans to biomass-to-energy
projects

One third of the surveyed heat suppliers (34%) perceive international financial institutions as the key
lenders to support biomass-to-energy projects. Next to these are government-owned banks and
banks with foreign capital, which are deemed to be ready to finance biomass-to-energy projects.
36    Finance




       TYPES OF BANKS THAT ARE READY TO FINANCE BIOMASS-TO-ENERGY PROJECTS

                           Perceived types of lenders ready to finance projects
                                           % of the surveyed companies


           International financial organizations                                 34

           Government banks                                      16

           Banks with foreign capital                       11

           Banks with Ukrainian capital               5

           Hard to say                                                                         48


 Respondents were allowed to select multiple answers from the list of choices.



 Attitude towards attracting private investors for biomass-to-energy projects

 The majority of municipal heat suppliers in Ukraine are owned by local governments. Generally,
 those surveyed are positive about attracting private investor funds. However, one third of the
 polled companies reported that it was difficult to establish and maintain cooperation with a private
 investor.

 One of the key reasons for such difficulties is a lack of distinct legislation, according to those
 surveyed. The companies mentioned the lack of a mechanism to attract private investor funding
 and the lack of their own knowledge on how to negotiate with private investors. About one fourth
 of the surveyed companies say that investors set excessive requirements that lead to the failure of
 negotiations. The representatives also mentioned that private investors are reluctant to cooperate
 with municipal companies.




         The polled companies noted high interest rates on loans as one of the key financial barriers
     to the implementation of projects. Notably, the current market situation suggests that the
     rate of recovery on biomass projects is pretty high even with the current interest rates. The
     first thing to look into is a project feasibility study. It is quite possible that a soundly prepared
     project would be viable and approaching banks would make sense even under the current
     circumstances.

                                                                                   Roman Novikov,
                                                                                  Program Manager,
                                            Sustainable Energy Finance in Europe and Central Asia, IFC
                   Ukrainian
   6               biomass-to-energy
                   legislation

The recently adopted Law of Ukraine No. 2010 resolves all major problems faced by power
generating facilities that work on alternative energy sources and attract investments (for both
commercial enterprises and private households). This includes (i) aligning the term “biomass”
with EU Directive 2009/28/EC so that both products and waste are considered as biomass for the
purpose of qualifying for the feed-in tariff; (ii) new green tariff rates, introducing home-unit levels,
abolishing peak load factors for solar and hydro generation, tiering solar tariffs based on capacity,
and setting a degression schedule; and (iii) no mandatory local content requirement.

In regards to CMU Decrees No. 293 and 453, the proposed amendments have a number of ad-
vantages as compared to the current situation, though these regulatory acts might be further im-
proved in the following aspects:
   Removing from CMU Decree No. 293 the clause about the need to calculate the working
       cost while taking into account a threshold rate of return not higher than 21%.
   Establishing in CMU Decree No. 293 a tariff for heat energy generated for households with
       use of alternative fuels at the level of 100% of the weighted average tariff for heat energy
       generated with use of natural gas.
                                                          Annexes


Annex 1. Participants in the survey

                          Total number of companies in the database and in the sample

                                    Total number in the       Number of companies
    Sector                                                                                % of the total number
                                        database*                 surveyed

    Big agricultural companies            2,301                        101                        4.4%

    Municipal heat suppliers
                                           605                         44                         7.3%
    (teplokomunenergo)

    Pellet producers                       476                          41                        8.6%




Annex 2. Biomass facts and figures

Biomass is a non-fossil biologically renewable matter of organic origin that is capable of biological
decomposition, in the form of products, waste and residues of forestry and agriculture (crops
and livestock), waste of fisheries and technologically related industries, as well as a component of
industrial or municipal waste.8 This definition of biomass in Ukrainian legislation was harmonized
with that of Europe, i.e. EU Directive 2009/28/EC.

Bioenergy is energy derived from the conversion of biomass where biomass may be used directly
as fuel or processed into liquids and gases.

Energy crops are grown specifically to produce some form of energy. Energy may be generated
through direct combustion or gasification of the crops to create electricity and heat, or by converting
them to liquid fuels such as ethanol for use in vehicles.




8
    Law on Introduction of Changes to Certain Laws of Ukraine with respect to Securing Competitive Conditions for
    Generation of Electricity from Alternative Energy Sources, No. 2010-d of May 19, 2015.
                                                                                                        Annexes     39




RES

The National Renewable Energy Action Plan (NREAP)9 sets out the general target for renewable
energy sources (RES) by 2020, namely 11% of the gross final energy consumption. Biomass is
an important part of this, and, according to the NREAP, its main contribution is planned in the
heating/cooling sector: 5,000 ktoe/year in 2020, equal to 85% of the contribution of all the
RES. In addition, by 2020 it is planned to install 950 MWe of biomass power equipment and to
use 390 ktoe/year of biofuels (bio ethanol and biodiesel) for transport.




                        NATIONAL INDICATIVE TARGETS FOR RES IN GFEC**
                   UNTIL 2020 AND THE CALCULATED PATH FOR REACHING THEM


    Indexes                          2009     2014     2015     2016     2017      2018     2019         2020

    RES: heat generation, %,         3.4      5.7       6.7      7.7      8.9      10.0      11.2         12.4

        - including biomass, ktoe    1,433   2,280    2,700    3,100    3,580     4,050     4,525    5,000 (85%)*

    RES: power generation, %,         7.1      7.6     8.3      8.8       9.7      10.4     10.9          11.0

       including biomass, MWe:        0        40      250      380      520       650       780          950

                    solid biomass              28      175      260      360       455       540      660 (12%)*

                           biogas              12       75      120       160      195       240       290 (5%)*

    RES: transport, %,                1.5      4.1     5.0      6.5       7.5      8.2       9.0          10.0

              - including biofuels
                                      0       110      150      220      265       300       340      390 (77%)*
    (bioethanol, biodiesel), ktoe

    Total RES share in GFEC, %       3.8      5.9      6.7      7.4       8.3      9.1       10.1         11.0

* The biomass share as estimated by the UABio.
** GFEC – gross final energy consumption.




9
    Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine’s Regulation No. 902-r (dated October 1, 2014) “National Action Plan on
    Renewable Energy until 2020.”
40   Annexes




                                          AGRO-HOLDINGS


                                    Landbank of agro-holdings

               Landbank of agro-holdings (million ha)                   27.4
               % of agricultural land                            25.3
               used by agro-enterprises                   23.1          6.04
                                                                 5.60
                                                          5.10
                                               18.1

                                  13.8        4.00
                     12.1
                                  3.09
                     2.73
      8.1

      1.70



     2007           2008         2009         2010        2011   2012   2013
                                                                                               Annexes      41




                      KEY CHARACTERISTICS OF SOLID BIOMASS AND BIOFUELS


 Types of biomass/          Moisture        Density,         Bulk density,   Ash content,   Lower heating
 biofuels                  content, %        kg/m3              kg/m3             %          value, MJ/kg
                                                  Straw:
 - loose (not baled)
 yellow (fresh)                                                 40-55             4
 grey (not fresh)                                              (chaff)            3
                             10-20                                                              13-16
                                            100-140
 - baled                                                         ~100            3-4
                                         (bale density)
 - pellets                     10          1000-1400           550-650           4-5            15-16
 Maize stalks                30-35                              80-90             5             12-14
 Maize cobs                  15-20                             150-190            5             14-16
                                                  Wood:
 - chips                                                       250-350
 - firewood                               600-800              300-330
                             40-50                                             0.6-1.5          8-10
 - felling residues                     (wood density)           150
 - sawdust                                                     120-300
 - pellets                     10          1000-1400           550-650          0.5-1           17-19
                                             Sunflower husk
 - loose                       15                               90-100           4-5             16
 - pellets                     10         1,000-1,400          550-650           4-7            15-17
                                                   Peat:
                                             ~1,000
 - milled                     50                               200-300          3-20            8-10
                                        (particle density)
 - pellets                     12          1000-1400           650-700           3-15           16-20
 - briquettes                  12          1000-1200           650-700           3-12            17


Source: UABio.
NEFCO
The Nordic Environment Finance Corporation (NEFCO) is an international financial institution
established in 1990 by five Nordic countries. NEFCO provides loans and makes capital investments
in order to generate positive environmental effects of interest to the Nordic region.

To date, NEFCO has financed a wide range of environmental projects in Central and Eastern
European countries, including Ukraine. Its activities are focused on initiatives that achieve cost-
effective environmental benefits across the region. NEFCO prioritizes efforts that reduce releases
of climate gases, improve the ecological status of the Baltic Sea, or mitigate emissions of toxic
pollutants. NEFCO’s portfolio comprises over 600 small and medium-sized projects spread across
different sectors, and it currently administers funds valued at EUR 501 million.

NEFCO has been financing environmental projects in Ukraine since 2003. In 2009, NEFCO signed
a framework agreement with the Ukrainian government, which enabled NEFCO to also finance
municipal energy projects in the country. Currently, NEFCO has 156 active projects in Ukraine.

NEFCO is engaging in both direct and indirect investments to strengthen advancement in the
bioenergy sector by financing the installation of new boilers, supporting fuel-supply chains in
Ukraine, and making modern equipment available to the market. For example, it has provided
loan-backed investments in biogas burners at agricultural farms that use the manure from their
livestock to produce heat and energy. Moreover, NEFCO has co-financed projects to burn pellets
made from the farm’s residual straw to heat the facilities and neighboring infrastructure. Given
Ukraine’s improving green electricity feed-in tariffs and an increasing demand for biofuels,
progressive farms are in a position to make additional profits by selling energy and fuels. NEFCO
investments in fuel-switch solutions allow the agro-businesses to make large savings and,
simultaneously, to contribute to significant reductions of greenhouse gases.

                                                                                 Bo Eske Nyhus,
                                                              Senior Investment Manager, NEFCO
UNIDO
The United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) is the specialized agency of the
United Nations that promotes industrial development for poverty reduction, inclusive globalization,
and environmental sustainability. The mandate of UNIDO is to promote and accelerate inclusive and
sustainable industrial development (ISID) in developing countries and economies in transition. The
concept of ISID is included in the Sustainable Development Goals, namely Goal 9: Build resilient
infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization, and foster innovation.

UNIDO and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) have been collaborating under the
joint flagship Resource Efficient and Cleaner Production Programme (RECP) since the 1990s, aiming
to facilitate the delivery of RECP services to industries by assisting organizations — especially small
and medium enterprises, governments, civil society, research institutions, and related stakeholders.
In order to respond to the growing demand for RECP at a global level, UNIDO and UNEP established
the RECPnet in 2010, which has brought together more than 70 members.

Ukraine has been a member country of UNIDO since 1985. In 1995, UNIDO signed a cooperation
agreement with the Ukrainian Government to foster sustainable industrial development in the
country. This agreement set the basis for UNIDO’s large project portfolio in Ukraine, which covers
the promotion of RECP, energy efficiency, renewable energy, and the implementation of energy
management standards at the company level.

Developing partnerships and strengthening cooperation with international financial institutions
are the core elements of UNIDO’s global efforts to increase the up-take of ISID. In 2013, UNIDO
finalized its agreement with IFC to jointly promote RECP in Ukraine. Since then, experts from the
National RECP Centre, established by UNIDO in 2012, have worked hand in hand with IFC teams
to help local industries improve their production efficiency and environmental performance by
applying RECP technologies.

                                                                                   Petra Schwager,
                                                                          Program Manager, UNIDO
In partnership with the Finnish Ministry of International Affairs, the Free State of
Saxony (Germany), and the Agency for International Business Cooperation within
the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs.




IFC
1 Dniprovsky Uzviz, 3rd floor
Kyiv 01010, Ukraine
Tel.: +380 44 4906400
Fax.: +380 44 4906400
www.ifc.org/ukraine




                                                                                       2015
