                                    This publication is
                                    co-funded by the
                                     European Union




Banking Supervisors and External Auditors:
Building a Constructive Relationship

Supervisors’ Insights
Centre for Financial Reporting Reform
Governance Global Practice
The World Bank
Praterstrasse 31
1020 Vienna – Austria
T: +43 (0)1 2170-700
F: +43 (0)1 2170-701
cfrr@worldbank.org
www.worldbank.org/cfrr

                                        2
This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World
Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views
of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not
guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning
the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Copyright © 2015 by Centre for Financial Reporting Reform, Governance Global Practice, The World Bank

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/
The World Bank encourage dissemination of their work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions
of the work promptly. For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with
complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA,
telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the
Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@
worldbank.org.




                                                                                                                    3
i
                                    Acknowledgments
This publication records key findings from the World Bank Centre for Financial Reporting Reform (CFRR)
survey – Financial supervisors and external auditors: building a constructive relationship.

The survey was developed by a World Bank team of experts based on several workshop discussions
among senior supervisors from the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region, and to a greater extent, on
recent literature, including the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) paper on the external
audit of banks and the recent European Commission (EC) Directive and Regulation on statutory audit.

The survey was conceived, realized and analyzed by a CFRR team led by Pascal Frerejacque, Senior
Operations Officer, including Johanna Lincoln and Carla Loum with input from Shamim Diouman, all
World Bank Consultants and with the editorial assistance of Denise Brettschneider, Susan Schroeder
and Ecaterina Gusarova, under the supervision of Henri Fortin, Head, CFRR, World Bank and Global
Lead for Corporate Governance and Financial Reporting, Governance Global Practice.

Members of the European Banking Authority (EBA) Standing Committee on Accounting, Reporting
and Auditing (SCARA) subgroup and participants in the World Bank-led REPARIS (The Road to Europe:
Program of Accounting Reform and Institutional Strengthening) and STAREP (Strengthening Auditing
and Reporting in Countries of the Eastern Partnership) programs, were invited to complete the survey
questionnaire. The CFRR is very grateful to all survey respondents for their time and the quality of the
information they provided.

The team would also like to thank those who provided comments on the survey questionnaire and report:

►►   Mike Edwards, Lead Financial Sector Specialist, Finance & Markets Global Practice, World Bank;

►►   David Gruenberger, Head, Accounting & Regulatory Monitoring, Austrian Financial Market Authority;

►►   Svetlana Klimenko, Lead Financial Management Specialist, Governance Global Practice, World Bank;

►►   Gabriella Kusz, Consultant, Governance Global Practice, World Bank;

►►   Juan Ortiz, Senior Financial Sector Specialist, Financial Sector Advisory Center, World Bank;

►►   Marc Pickeur, retired Senior Advisor at the Prudential Policy and Financial Stability Department,
     National Bank of Belgium and Board Member of the International Auditing and Assurance Standards
     Board (IAASB);

►►   Patricia Sucher, Technical Specialist in External Audit and Assurance, Prudential Policy Directorate,
     Bank of England;

►►   Nic van der Ende, Accountancy Coordinator, Supervisory Policy Division, National Bank of the
     Netherlands; and

►►   Erik van der Plaats, Senior Expert - Policy and Regulatory Advice,— Directorate-General for Financial
     Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union (DG FISMA), European Commission


A special thanks also to the Regulation Department of the EBA for their extended support.

We are grateful for the generous support provided by the European Union, the Austrian Development
Cooperation, the Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance, the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs,
and the Finance Ministry of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
                                                                                                             ii
iii
                                      Content


 1   Index of acronyms

 2   Preface

 3   Executive summary

 5   About the Report

 7   Insight 1 - External audit in banks:
     Auditors’ work does contribute
     to the effective supervision of banks

25   Insight 2 - Channels of communication:
     Supervisors could engage more
     effectively with external auditors

37   Insight 3 - Topics of mutual interest:
     External auditors could contribute more
     on specific areas of interest to supervisors

49   Insight 4 - Supervisors’ input to audits:
     Supervisors do contribute
     to enhanced audit quality

65   Insight 5 - Other communications:
     Effective communication between
     audit and banking supervisors and audit
     committees does improve audit quality

75   Summary of the proposed policy actions

83   About the CFRR




                                                    iv
                Index of acronyms
A&A      Accounting & Auditing

AOB      Audit Oversight Body

AQR      Audit Quality Review

BCBS     Basel Committee on Banking Supervision

BCP      Basel Core Principles

CFRR     Centre For Financial Reporting Reform

SIBs     Systemically Important Banks

ECA      Europe and Central Asia

FYROM    Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

IASB     International Accounting Standards Board

ICAAP    Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process

IESBA    International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants

IFAC     International Federation of Accountants

IFRS     International Financial Reporting Standards

ISA      International Standards on Auditing

ISQC     International Standard on Quality Control

LFAR     Long Form Audit Report

MoF      Ministry of Finance

MoU      Memorandum of Understanding

NOCLAR   Non-Compliance with Laws And Regulations

PIE      Public Interest Entities

SIFI     Systemically Important Financial Institutions




                                                                1
                                                                             Preface
The 2008 financial crisis highlighted weaknesses in the risk management, control and governance
processes of banks as well as in their statutory audit and financial supervision. This led to increased
scrutiny of the respective roles and interactions of banking supervisors and external auditors who
are key contributors to market discipline. Auditors ensure that financial information is transparent and
reliable while supervisors provide confidence in the financial systems. Both supervisors and auditors
allow market players to make informed decisions and contribute to financial stability.

Since 2008, regulators and lawmakers have strived to address the shortcomings identified during
the crisis by taking various initiatives to reform the international financial architecture In particular, a
2014 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision paper explored the interaction between supervisors
and external auditors and linked their enhanced relationships with improved audit quality of banks’
financial statements and effective banking supervision.

This report presents the findings of the survey conducted by the World Bank Centre for Financial
Reporting Reform (CFRR) – Financial supervisors and external auditors: building a constructive
relationship. The survey was sent to supervisors from the European Union and other countries in
Eastern Europe, South Eastern Europe and the South Caucasus to explore practices that make better
use of information provided by external auditors and influence the audit quality of banks’ financial
statements. The report was developed after several workshop discussions amongst senior staff
from central banks and banking regulatory agencies, who recognized the importance of an effective
relationship to assist both supervisors and auditors in discharging their duties.

Responses from 35 supervisory authorities suggest that stronger two-way interaction can improve
the quality of external audits and enhance banking supervision. The report draws together some
actionable insights which were highlighted by the survey for improving the relationship between
supervisors and external auditors. These insights will be helpful to banking supervisors in developing
their policies and will also provide guidance to assist them in managing their relationships with banks’
auditors. They can also serve as guidelines for defining the processes necessary to build enhanced
auditing and supervision practices.




                                                                                                               2
                              Executive summary
The survey confirms that enhancing the relationship between
supervisors and external auditors is a strategic imperative for
both audit quality and the effective supervision of banks in the              Insight 1:
ECA region.

The report offers a range of actionable insights to enhance both
                                                                          Auditors’ work does
                                                                           contribute to the
audit quality and supervision regardless of the jurisdictional
                                                                        effective supervision of
circumstances, the characteristics of the bank under supervision,
                                                                                 banks
or the supervisory model adopted.

Supervisors and auditors possess complementary skills and
knowledge. External auditors may participate in the supervisory process by performing additional work
at the request of the supervisors, providing reasonable or limited assurance on a range of areas, such
as: internal controls, IT systems, risk management, or prudential returns. For instance, supervisors have
greater confidence in prudential returns when they are reconciled with audited financial statements. By
reporting to supervisors, external auditors contribute to strengthening the supervisory process. Audit
information is, however, not always reviewed during the regular inspection of banks and supervisors do
                                      not always have a good understanding of what an external audit
                                      comprises and how they can rely on auditors’ work. Practices vary
                                      across ECA in terms of the scope of auditors’ work, the extent of
        Insight 2:                    auditors’ contributions to the supervisory process, and the type
                                      of assurance they provide.
 Supervisors could engage
                                      Regular exchanges of information between external auditors and
   more effectively with
                                      banking supervisors enable both parties to perform their duties
    external auditors
                                      effectively. A strong and fruitful two-way relationship depends
                                      on the quality of interaction between auditors and supervisors.
                                      The objective is to have “the right discussions at the right level
and at the right time”, using the most appropriate channels of communication so that supervisors can
engage more effectively with external auditors. All supervisors surveyed meet with external auditors
but meetings typically occur at a late stage, mainly after the audit work has been completed and the
audit report has been issued. For most European supervisors, direct meetings with external auditors,
without the bank’s management, are the preferred option. Confidentiality remains an issue in other
jurisdictions. Few jurisdictions provide “safe haven” rules for auditors when reporting matters to
supervisors. Finally, very few jurisdictions have a feedback system in place to assess and monitor the
quality of the relationship between supervisors and auditors.

Sharing information on a range of important accounting and
auditing themes due to their complexity, materiality and/or
                                                                              Insight 3:
judgment involved is crucial. At a crossroads between accounting
and finance, topics covered under accounting standards for
                                                                         External auditors could
financial instruments, such as loan valuation and provisioning
                                                                           contribute more on
as well as the bank’s asset valuation, are key for both external        specific areas of interest
auditors and supervisors. Compliance with prudential regulations             to supervisors
and the consistency of disclosures in financial statements with
published prudential information are also important. Finally, the                                           3
effectiveness of banks’ internal control, risk management and IT systems are essential inputs for
assessing the bank’s risk profile and going concern assumption. External auditors may identify additional
areas of interest to supervisors during the course of the audit.

Supervisors can help improve the quality of financial information.
They can provide an environment which supports the independence,
objectivity and integrity of audit work. Supervisors can also
enhance audit quality by sharing relevant information with external
                                                                                Insight 4:
auditors.
                                                                                Supervisors do
Responses show that most supervisors are empowered to                       contribute to enhanced
regulate certain conditions of the appointment and rotation of                   audit quality
external auditors, and the audit retendering process. In a few
jurisdictions, supervisory authorities are also involved in monitoring
and sanctioning auditors and their work. Often confidentiality rules
prevent supervisors from communicating bank or industry specific information to external auditors.

                                        Audit committees and Audit Oversight Bodies (AOBs) contribute

         Insight 5:                     to enhanced audit quality through the effective oversight of
                                        external auditors’ work and their ability to form an opinion on
                                        banks’ financial statements. These institutions play a critical role
  Effective communication
                                        in building an appropriate framework for corporate governance
       between audit
  and banking supervisors               and high-quality external audits.
   and audit committees
                                        Most banks are required to have an audit committee but
     does improve audit
                                        supervisors rarely meet the committee’s chair. The audit oversight
           quality
                                        systems are not always effective or even established. Overall,
                                        when they exists supervisors have connections with the AOB,
whose role is to identify failures and weaknesses in banks’ external audits, and to examine the work
of external auditors, imposing sanctions and/or remedial measures as necessary.




                                                                                                               4
                                        About the Report
This report is based on a survey of banking supervisors conducted in Europe and the South Caucasus.



Key facts
The CFRR conducted a survey during the second half of 2014: Financial supervisors and external
auditors: building a constructive relationship. Thirty-five countries in Europe responded to 44 questions.




                 44
              questions to
                                              85%
                                                response
                                                                                  35
                                                                                countries
              supervisors                         rate                           in ECA


The 44 questions were organized around four themes:




          Practice of external                                            Exchange of information
          audit in banks                                                between supervisors and
                                                                                 external auditors




                                      10 22
                                       4 8
          Perception of the                                                      Involvement with
          quality of external audit                                      committees/institutions
          by supervisors                                          that oversee the audit function




Results have been aggregated across three regional groups:

►►   European supervisors (EU + Norway): Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
     Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
     Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Romania, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom (UK)

►►   REPARIS supervisors: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, FYR of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia

►►   STAREP supervisors: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Moldova, Georgia                                               5
Guidance on how to read and use the report
On a thematic basis, the report includes a list of survey findings and possible actions for supervisors
to consider. These actions are only suggestions and/or reported good practices which supervisors
may implement in their jurisdiction when interacting with external auditors.

The list is by no means exhaustive and is only provided as a guide or example for potential implementation
by supervisors.

When implementing these actions, supervisors and external auditors should also take into account
the following key points:

1.	 The actions do not change the respective roles and responsibilities of the supervisor, the external
   auditor or the bank’s management. The supervised bank should remain the main source of information.

2.	 The actions do not supersede international standards on auditing, international financial reporting
   standards, international best practices on corporate governance or Basel Core Principles especially
   in the areas of independence and accountability of external auditors and the bank’s management.

3.	 The key objectives of the actions are:

   ►►   Building or strengthening a communication and interaction process between supervisors and
        auditors;

   ►►   Ensuring that the interaction between supervisors and external auditors are ongoing and
        conducted in a systematic and structured manner;

   ►►   Maintaining a communication between supervisors and auditors that is both critical and
        constructive;

   ►►   Providing a basis for a better and more detailed mutual understanding of the underlying issues
        and risks in the banks and the banking sector; and

   ►►   Informing the work of supervisors and auditors to contribute to enhanced financial stability.




                                                                                                             6
                              Insight 1
               External audit in banks




                             Auditors’ work does contribute
                       to the effective supervision of banks
Supervisors and auditors possess complementary skills and knowledge. External auditors
may participate in the supervisory process by performing additional work at the request
of the supervisors, providing reasonable or limited assurance on a range of areas such as:
internal controls, IT systems, risk management, or prudential returns. The reporting of external
auditors to supervisors contributes to strengthening the supervisory process. For instance,
supervisors have greater confidence in prudential returns when they are reconciled with
audited financial statements.

Audit information is, however, not always reviewed during the regular inspection of banks and
supervisors do not always have a good understanding of what an external audit comprises
and how they can rely on auditors’ work. Practices vary across ECA in terms of the scope
of auditors’ work, the extent of auditors’ contributions to the supervisory process, and the
type of assurance they provide.                                                                    7
What is an external audit?

     “One element that seems difficult is informing supervisors (mostly without
      accounting background) about the roles and responsibilities of auditors.”
                      - National Bank of the Netherlands


Responses to the survey show that in many countries, if not most, supervisors are not fully aware
of where the responsibilities of external auditors start and where they end. This confusion among
supervisors creates many direct and indirect issues which prevent effective communication and fruitful
cooperation and collaboration between supervisors and external auditors. In some cases, it generates
suspicion and a lack of trust between all parties.

This can be partly explained by the fact that there is no widely accepted definition of what an external
audit is. The definition below has been formulated based on the objective of ISA 200, Overall Objectives
of the Independent Auditor and the Conduct of an Audit in Accordance with International Standards
on Auditing.




                                     What is an external audit?

    An external audit is a process by which an independent external auditor will obtain sufficient
    appropriate audit evidence to give reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements
    as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, thereby
    enabling the auditor to express an opinion on whether the financial statements are prepared,
    in all material respects, in accordance with an applicable financial reporting framework, and
    to report on the financial statements in accordance with the auditor’s findings. Reasonable
    assurance is a high, but not absolute level of assurance. The independent opinion enhances
    the degree of confidence of intended users in the financial statements.




Role of external auditors vis-a-vis the supervisory
function
In order to support the supervisory process, banking supervisors often ask external auditors to perform
tasks in addition to the audit of financial statements, and to provide a limited or reasonable assurance
on additional areas, such as internal controls, prudential returns, etc.



Extent of use of external auditors
Sixty-eight percent of supervisors may ask external auditors to perform additional tasks outside the
scope of the audit, with 56% of them stating that this is a legal requirement. Some supervisors are
only allowed to request additional work via the bank under supervision.

Other supervisors are not allowed to delegate any tasks to external auditors.                              8
    “For institutions under the Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier
      prudential supervision, we may set rules regarding the scope of the audit
       mandate and the content of the reports and written comments of the
                    approved external auditor, without prejudice to
    the legal provisions governing the content of the statutory auditors’ report.”
       - Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier of Luxembourg


Type of tasks outside the scope of external audit
Some supervisory authorities are empowered to ask external auditors to perform any type of tasks
outside the scope of the audit. However, the scope of the audit differs depending on the jurisdiction.

Below is a list of additional tasks that have been cited, in order of recurrence and indicating whether
it is a legal requirement (LR) or just common practice (CP):



                                     NEVER in the scope of the audit

    ►►   Conducting special audits (i.e. those conducted to detect potential or suspected irregularities,
         errors or frauds); (LR)

    ►►   Verifying that items with a particular supervisory interest are registered correctly in
         the financial statements and/or in the corresponding supervisory returns (i.e. correct
         breakdown of credit risk items, impaired assets, expected losses in the context of a
         business combination...); (CP)

    ►►   Conducting risk assessment, asset quality review and stress tests directed by the ECB
         during the asset quality review process; (LR)

    ►►   Complying with own funds requirements; (LR)

    ►►   Examining account balances and whether they are pledged or encumbered; (CP)

    ►►   Reviewing the Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP); (LR)

    ►►   Monitoring the orderly unwinding of the bank. (LR)




                                   SOMETIMES in the scope of the audit

    ►►   Preparing a Long-Form Audit Report or special appendix to financial statements; (LR)

    ►►   Reporting on any topic related to the organization of the bank, its activities and financial
         structure, including the adequacy and efficiency of its internal control system, the security
         of its information system, risk management and governance systems. (LR and CP)




                                    ALWAYS in the scope of the audit

    ►►   Auditing of financial statements. (LR)

                                                                                                            9
            Example 1: Tasks outside the scope of audit that can be requested by the Central
                                             Bank of Ireland

           The Central Bank (Supervision & Enforcement) Act 2013 introduced a provision for the Central
           Bank requesting external auditors to provide assurance over areas concerning:

           ►►   Administrative or accounting procedures;

           ►►   Internal control mechanisms;

           ►►   Risk management;

           ►►   Organizational structure; and

           ►►   Governance of regulated financial service providers.


           Prior to 2013, Section 27E of the Central Bank Act 1997 provided the Central Bank with the
           ability to commission a report from the external auditor of any regulated financial service
           provider on any of the following:

           ►►   The service provider’s accounting records;

           ►►   The systems (if any) that the service provider has in place to ensure that the service provider
                acts prudently in the interests of its members (if a company or firm) and the interests of
                those to whom the service provider provides financial services;

           ►►   Any other matter in respect of which the Bank requires information about the service
                provider, or the service provider’s activities, to enable the Central Bank to perform its
                function.




About 60% of supervisors, mainly European, have asked external auditors to perform additional tasks
outside the given scope of the audit in the last five years.1 In about 80% of these cases, the bank
under supervision pays for work outside the scope of the audit requested by supervisors.2 For another
10% it the supervisory authority pays. For the remaining 10%, the cost can be split between the bank
and the supervisory authority, depending on the task requested.



Type of assurance provided by external auditors: reasonable
assurance, and limited assurance
Supervisors were asked in an open-ended question to describe the areas/topics beyond the audit of
financial statements on which the external auditors are required to provide a reasonable assurance
and those on which auditors would provide a limited assurance. The statistics below are calculated
based on the recurrence of responses received to this open-ended question and percentages may
not accurately represent current auditing obligations for banks:3




1
    Calculated based on recurrence
2
    Ibid
3
    Answers to this qualitative question are ranked based on their recurrence.                                    10
                                       A reasonable assurance is required on:
                                               Topics                                      Recurrence
                  Internal controls                                                             31%
                  Risk management                                                              20%
                  IT systems                                                                    17%
                  Annual regulatory/prudential report                                           17%
                  Valuation                                                                     11%
                  Organizational structure and/or governance                                    9%


In addition, some jurisdictions require reasonable assurance on: asset quality, reserve, provision, and
adequacy and accuracy of information passed from the branch to headquarters.


                                         A limited assurance is required on:
                                               Topics                                      Recurrence
                  Interim financial statements                                                  9%
                  Internal controls                                                             9%
                  Interim profit, when included in the bank’s own funds                         6%
                  Valuation                                                                     6%


Additional areas with limited assurance include: semi-annual regulatory/prudential reports, remuneration
and benefits received by management, special reports on related party agreements and commitments,
environmental and social information, administrative or accounting procedures, loan loss provisioning,
and on the bank’s deposit function for the client’s assets. One respondent mentioned that there should
be limited assurance on the internal audit and compliance function of the bank.

For some supervisors the issuance of a reasonable or limited assurance is related to the size of
the financial institution. Furthermore, the topics and frequency of reasonable or limited assurance
engagements may vary depending on the situation, the audit firm’s agreement with the bank, and/
or specific requirements from the supervisor.




             Example 2: The Austrian additional Annex to the Auditor’s Report “AP-VO”4

       According to the Austrian Banking Act, effective as of 2014, external auditors of banks are
       obliged to audit an additional appendix (prudential report) together with the external audit
       of financial statements.

       Depending on the size of the credit institution, external auditors will have to issue a reasonable
       or limited assurance on the effectiveness of internal controls in various areas (i.e. funds,
       liquidity, special risks, money laundering law and compliance rules, etc.).

       This appendix is not published, but submitted to the supervisor with the auditor’s report within
       six months of the date of the financial statements. The Financial Market Authority issued a
       regulation defining the form and layout of this appendix.




4
    Based on responses collected and the Austrian Federal Banking Act (Bankwesengesetz – BWG), Art. 63 para. 4 and 5.
https://www.fma.gv.at/typo3conf/ext/dam_download/secure.php?u=0&file=2660&t=1421844110&hash=a22f73f54f555cc78e849187dcfff798   11
External auditors’ reporting to banking supervisors
Long-Form Audit report
Supervisors may ask auditors to submit a Long-Form Audit Report elaborating on the external audit
of financial statements and on special prudential supervisory requirements. This report can be an
effective tool in the supervision of financial institutions, helping to support reliable financial reporting
and underpinning market confidence. If presented in a consistent format, the Long-Form Audit report
can facilitate comparison across banks.

Survey results show that only a few jurisdictions legally require external auditors to submit a Long-
Form Audit Report. This report is not public and is sometimes perceived as part of the scope of the
statutory audit.




                         Example 3: The Long-Form Audit Report in Germany5

     In Germany, external auditors are required to submit a Long-Form Audit Report to the
     supervisory board. This report is not available to the public and is a useful tool to monitor
     management. This report must include:


     General Findings

     ►►   Comments on the general situation of the bank and going concern assessment (based on
          the audited records and management report);

     ►►   Facts and significant risks that affect the future development and existence of the bank;

     ►►   Any irregularities or violations of statutory provisions or the articles of incorporation by
          representatives or employees of the bank.


     Basis of the External Audit

     ►►   Subject, nature and scope of the external audit;

     ►►   Applied Accounting and Auditing Standards;

     ►►   Confirmation of the external auditor’s independence.


     Accounting Policy Decisions
     ►►   Accounting methods, substantial bases of valuation and changes thereof;

     ►►   Exercise of accounting and measurement options;

     ►►   Use of discretion, estimation and judgment;

     ►►   Structuring measures (“window dressing” transactions);

     ►►   Any material disclosures not already in the notes.




5
  Bundesministerium der Justiz, Audit Regulatory Committee, Long-Form Audit Report in Germany, March 2011.
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/auditing/docs/committees/pres1-03-03-11_en.pdf                             12
     Risk Management and Internal Control
     ►►   In the case of listed banks: whether the executive management has implemented sufficient
          risk management and internal control systems.




          Distinguishing between the New Audit Report and the Long-Form Audit Report

     The New Audit Report6

     The new and revised Auditor Reporting standards are responsive to calls from investors
     and other users of audited financial statements for more informative and relevant auditors’
     reports based on the external audit that was performed. These standards include new ISA
     701, Communicating Key Audit Matters in the Independent Auditor’s Report, and a number
     of revised ISAs, including ISA 700 (Revised), Forming an Opinion and Reporting on Financial
     Statements, and ISA 570 (Revised), Going Concern. Examples of reports illustrating various
     circumstances are included in the new and revised Auditor Reporting standards. These will be
     effective for external audits of financial statements for periods ending on or after December
     15, 2016.

     The New Audit Report is in the public domain and is currently a legal requirement for listed
     entities only.

     Intended benefits of the New Audit Report:

     ►►   Enhanced communication between auditors and investors, as well as those charged with
          corporate governance;

     ►►   Increased user confidence in auditors’ reports and financial statements;

     ►►   Increased transparency, audit quality, and enhanced information value;

     ►►   Increased attention by management and financial statement preparers to disclosures
          referencing the auditor’s report;

     ►►   Renewed auditor focus on matters to be reported that could result in an increase in
          professional skepticism;

     ►►   Enhanced financial reporting in the public interest.


     The Long-Form Audit Report

     The Long-Form Audit Report (LFAR) is a separate document prepared by auditors for banks’




6
 The International Federation of Accountants, Reporting on Audited Financial Statements – New and Revised Auditor Reporting
Standards and Related Conforming Amendments, January 2015.
http://www.ifac.org/publications-resources/reporting-audited-financial-statements-new-and-revised-auditor-reporting-stan      13
      supervisors only and is not in the public domain. The LFAR is prepared in some countries only
      and is a requirement of the banking regulators, not the IAASB. The LFAR contains:

      ►►   Audit assignment and the basis of the external audit;

      ►►   General findings;

      ►►   Financial statement based on reporting (including regulatory requirements);

      ►►   Risk (including risk management and risk tolerance);

      ►►   Business organization and comprehensive bank management.


      The LFAR is not published in the public domain and is only intended for the use of the client
      and the banking regulators.




Right to report and duty to report
The auditors’ right to report general findings and results and their duty to report significant findings
(error, weakness of internal control), and/or any material fraud discovered during the external audit
are important factors that, if used effectively, could strengthen the supervisory process. The duty
to report usually applies at the level of the bank’s headquarters, branches, and to legal entities with
which the bank has close links.

Importantly, external auditors should be able to use their right to report freely, without their professional
responsibility being at risk. However, at this juncture, only a few jurisdictions provide for limitation of
the external auditors’ liability when these matters are reported in good faith and are believed to be
relevant to the functions of the supervisor.



          “The Central Bank (Supervision & Enforcement) Act 2013 provides for
       limitation of liability in reporting of certain matters by external auditors to
                        the Central Bank.” - Central Bank of Ireland



General findings and results
►►   A discussion of general audit findings prior to signature of the audit opinion is common practice
     for only 11% of supervisors;

►►   No jurisdictions report a legal requirement for such a discussion;

►►   Fifty-four percent of supervisors never discuss general findings and results of the external audit
     prior to signature of the audit opinion;

►►   In total, 34% mentioned that such discussions occur when deemed necessary, mainly when findings
     and results fall within the scope of the external auditors’ right to report or when external auditors
     are facing a ‘complicated’ case. Others mentioned that such discussions take place occasionally if
     requested by the external auditors and/or depending on the timing of the meeting with external
     auditors.                                                                                                  14
       “Bank external auditors do not generally discuss their findings but there is a
      special reporting duty in some cases (i.e. the credit institution will not be able
       to fulfill its obligations or continue as a going concern, material violations of
                     the law, etc.).” - Austrian Financial Market Authority


Significant findings
In almost all jurisdictions, external auditors are required to disclose significant findings (error, weakness
of internal control) discovered during their audit: when this is not a legal requirement (83%), it is a
common practice (14%).


 Do the external auditors in your jurisdiction inform the banking supervisors immediately in case of
          other significant findings (error, weakness of internal control) during the audit?




Jurisdictions that require a Long-Form Audit report usually have provisions for the disclosure of
significant findings as well. Some supervisors mentioned that significant findings are usually disclosed
in the management letter, which is forwarded to the supervisory authority together with comments
from the bank’s management.




       “The external auditor has a duty to report in writing to the Czech National
      Bank any facts which may indicate any breaches of the legislation governing
        banks’ activities, have a material negative impact on its economy, etc.”
                                 - Czech National Bank



In general, external auditors have a duty to report the following matters to supervisory authorities in
writing and as soon as possible:

►►   The occurrence, or suspected occurrence, of non-compliance with laws and regulations;

►►   Any finding which has a significant impact on the bank’s financial position, administrative organization,
     internal controls, or ability to continue as a going concern;                                               15
►►   If the external auditor is planning to qualify the bank’s financial statements, issues a modified/
     qualified opinion or a negative opinion; and

►►   When management and/or those charged with governance fail to take corrective actions.




                               The Importance of the Management Letter7

      Key features
      A modern audit follows a risk-based approach, which focuses on the risks of material
      misstatements and how the audited entity mitigates these risks through its internal control
      system.

      The management letter is a key output of the audit addressed to management in which the
      deficiencies and weaknesses in a bank’s organizational structure are identified and eventual
      recommendations from external auditors on how to improve these internal control issues
      are presented. The bank’s management usually provides a written response to the external
      auditor’s remarks which is integrated into the management letter. The follow-up audit work
      should assess the progress made by the bank to implement the recommendations of the
      initial audit or fix the problems highlighted in the management letter. The management letter
      is often shared with supervisors and is also a key topic for discussions between external
      auditors and audit committees.


      Importance for supervisors
      The management letter details weaknesses in internal controls that could cause a material
      misstatement in the financial statement. Thus this document raises important points and
      summarizes the key areas for the attention of banking supervisors.




Material Fraud
Overall, external auditors are required by law to disclose any material fraud detected during their audit
to banking regulators (94%). However, a limited number of jurisdictions specifically mention fraud and
criminal offence as a triggering event in their legislation.




         “The auditing company shall immediately notify the Governor in writing
           if, during the audit, it finds out that a bank’s solvency or liquidity is
       compromised and the bank operates, and/or has operated, contrary to the
        regulations. This requirement applies also to legal entities with which the
            bank has close links.” - National Bank of the FYR of Macedonia




7
 Based on the Office of the Auditor General of Canada, 8020 - Recommandations et réponses de l’entité, November 2014.
http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/methodologie/audit-de-performance/manuel/8020.shtm                                    16
     If material fraud is detected in a bank’s financial statement during the external audit, are the
         external auditors required by law to disclose this information to banking supervisors?




Supervisors’ access to audit information
Most supervisors have access to auditors’ reports, external auditors’ management letters, and reports
to the audit committees. Most of them have no access to auditors’ working papers:

►►   Access to audit information is a legal entitlement for 43% of supervisors. Twenty-nine percent have
     no access to these documents since they are the legal property of external auditors and covered
     by confidentiality rules.

►►   Among the supervisors who have access to audit information, 96% have access to the auditors’
     report, 81% to the management letter and 54% to other documents that may be relevant for the
     conduct of supervisory activities.

►►   The survey finds that 58% of supervisors have access to the report to the audit committee and a
     limited number of them have access to the minutes of audit committee meetings.

►►   A review of audit information is a legal requirement for only 19% of the supervisors. Fifty percent
     of the supervisors do not review audit information as part of their regular inspection of banks.




                         Do banking supervisors have access to audit information?




                                                                                                           17
                          Type of audit information banking supervisors have access to:




     Is the supervisory authority involved in the inspection of audit information as part of the regular
                                            inspection of banks?




Perceptions of external auditors
How supervisors perceive external auditors in their jurisdiction is important in order to gauge the
quality of external audits and therefore the quality of banks’ financial statements used by different
stakeholders.



External auditors’ capacity vs. supervisors’ capacity
Thirty-three percent of supervisors believe that the capacity of external auditors (knowledge, number
of staff, etc.) is comparable with theirs.8


8
    Answers to this open-ended question are ranked based on their recurrence and are not always mutually exclusive.   18
Thirteen percent cannot compare, mainly because they are not involved in oversight activities and
are unable to judge the capacity of external auditors objectively. The remaining 54% believe that the
capacity of supervisors and external auditors differs.




           “There is a trend whereby the number of staff with an accountancy
       background diminishes rather than increases. The need for accountancy
     knowledge, however, is increasing, so a tension has been identified. It appears
     difficult to find staff who are capable of developing skills on the borderline of
                   accountancy and prudential supervisory knowledge.”
                           - National Bank of the Netherlands



Skill set
Almost all supervisors agree that external auditors have the appropriate skill sets to audit banks in
their jurisdictions. External auditors are usually perceived to be IFRS/ISA experts.

To support their answers, supervisors note that:

►►   It is usually Big 4 companies that are involved in the audit of banks in their jurisdictions. Supervisors
     assume that these audit firms have the appropriate skill set and can ask their international network
     of experts for help when necessary; and

►►   There is a strict appointment process of external auditors in which supervisors are involved.


Other supervisors state that their response is subjective because appraisal or other types of quality
control of external auditors is the prerogative of another entity in charge of audit oversight in which
they are not involved.




        “There is a limited number of audit companies who audit banks. All these
        companies belong to international networks which can use experts when
                necessary.” - Estonian Financial Supervision Authority




Use of professional judgment
Sixty-nine percent of supervisors are satisfied with the professional judgment of external auditors of
banks. Another 29% are sometimes satisfied because there are cases in which:

►►   Supervisors disagree with the external auditors’ judgment: the recognition and valuation of financial
     assets was cited as a reason for disagreement, especially loans and receivables as well as the
     auditors’ opinion on the bank’s going concern;

►►   The judgment of external auditors is influenced too much by the management of the bank;

►►   There is room for improvement, especially in areas such as IT audit and valuation.                          19
One supervisor expressed dissatisfaction with external auditors using their professional judgment
because they do not practice enough professional skepticism when interpreting IFRS requirements,
and they sometimes prefer to accommodate their clients’ views.




     “We appreciate the support of external auditors in the process of banking
            regulation and supervision.” - National Bank of Moldova




     “In the past, there were a few occasions when the National Bank of Serbia
      was not satisfied with both external auditors’ professional judgment and
        communication with supervisors regarding the going concern issue.”
                              - National Bank of Serbia




                                                                                                    20
Survey findings and possible actions

            Survey findings                                    Possible actions



 Capacity of supervisors                       ►►   Providing on-going training on ISA and IFRS to
                                                    staff at the supervisory authority.
 Supervisors face capacity constraints
 in terms of staffing and accounting and
 auditing training.

 Supervisors do not always have a good
 understanding of what an external audit
 consists of and how they can rely on
 auditors’ work.




 Duty and right to report                      ►►   Updating regulations to include examples of
                                                    instances and events when external auditors
 External auditors do not always have
                                                    must report bank-specific information directly
 the statutory duty to disclose significant
                                                    to supervisors (statutory duty to report).
 findings and fraud encountered during the
                                                    Examples may include when external auditors
 course of their audit (statutory duty to
                                                    detect significant findings, fraud or going
 report).
                                                    concern issues during the course of the audit or
 Furthermore, not all the jurisdictions             when management uses significant accounting
 provide safe haven rules for auditors when         judgment which materially affects the bank’s
 reporting matters to supervisors that do           results and position;
 not give rise to a statutory duty to report
                                               ►►   Creating safe haven rules to allow auditors
 but may, nevertheless, be relevant to the
                                                    to share bank-specific information with the
 supervisor’s exercise of his/her functions
                                                    supervisors on matters that fall outside the
 (right to report).
                                                    scope of the duty to report if communicated
                                                    in good faith, and if reasonably believed to be
                                                    relevant to the supervisor in order to conduct
                                                    his/her functions (right to report);

                                               ►►   For matters that give rise to the right to report,
                                                    it is normally appropriate for the auditor to
                                                    request in writing that those charged with
                                                    governance in the bank bring these matters to
                                                    the attention of the supervisor. If those charged
                                                    with governance fail to inform the supervisor
                                                    of the matters in a timely manner, the auditor
                                                    shall report them directly to the supervisor;



                                                                                                         21
             Survey findings                                              Possible actions




                                                         ►►   Requesting access to documents supporting the
                                                              audit findings regarding identified or suspected
                                                              non-compliance with laws and regulations,
                                                              going concern issues, key risks faced by the
                                                              bank in the short-term and medium-term, and
                                                              areas when judgment and assumptions are used
                                                              by management. In general, supervisors should
                                                              be able to access any type of audit information
                                                              that they judge relevant to the supervision of
                                                              the bank. Documents could include minutes of
                                                              discussions held with management and those in
                                                              charge of governance, audit committee minutes,
                                                              audit working papers, etc.;

                                                         ►►   Referring to the guidelines proposed by
                                                              the International Ethics Standards Board for
                                                              Accountants’ (IESBA) in its recent exposure
                                                              draft. These guidelines specify how external
                                                              auditors should respond to some proven or
                                                              alleged cases of non-compliance with laws and
                                                              regulations (NOCLAR).9




    Extent of use of external auditors                   ►►   Exchanging information with the external
                                                              auditors on a continuous basis and before
    About 70% of supervisors can ask external
                                                              planning the statutory audit. This would help
    auditors to perform additional tasks outside
                                                              supervisors and external auditors to establish
    the scope of the audit.
                                                              jointly which additional work the external
                                                              auditors would be required to perform outside
                                                              the scope of the statutory audit.




9
 International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants, Responding to Non-Compliance with Laws and Regulations, May 2015.
http://www.ifac.org/system/files/publications/files/IESBA-Non-Compliance-with-Laws-Regulations-Exposure-Draft.pdf          22
            Survey findings                                Possible actions



Long-Form Audit Report                    ►►   Requesting external auditors to prepare an
                                               annual LFAR for Domestic Systemically Important
Currently, very few supervisors request
                                               Banks (SIBs). This would include details of the
a Long-Form Audit Report from external
                                               audit methodology and its limitations and key
auditors.
                                               findings on the going concern or key risks
                                               faced by the bank, and additional appropriate
                                               information (e.g. recommended remedial
                                               actions);

                                          ►►   The LFAR should be submitted on a timely
                                               basis to the supervisors to enable them to
                                               take appropriate action in due time;

                                          ►►   The scope and content of the LFAR should be
                                               flexible to reflect changes within the banking
                                               sector and within the bank and should be
                                               discussed between the auditors and the
                                               supervisors;

                                          ►►   Establishing together with auditors a list of
                                               specific financial reporting issues to be covered
                                               in the LFAR, based on the risk profile of the
                                               bank and its business model;

                                          ►►   Conducting face-to-face discussions with the
                                               external auditors, the bank’s management,
                                               the chair of both the audit committee and
                                               the risk committee in order to gain a detailed
                                               understanding of the key findings and issues
                                               highlighted in the LFAR with a view to finding
                                               timely and appropriate remedial actions.




                                                                                                   23
24
                 Insight 2
Channels of communication




                                            Supervisors could engage more
                                            effectively with external auditors
Regular exchanges of information between external auditors and banking supervisors enable
both parties to perform their duties effectively. A strong and fruitful two-way relationship
depends on the quality of interaction between auditors and supervisors. The objective is
to have “the right discussions at the right level and at the right time”10, using the most
appropriate channels of communication so that supervisors can engage more effectively
with external auditors.

All supervisors surveyed meet with external auditors but meetings typically occur at a late
stage, mainly after the audit work has been completed and the audit report has been issued.
For most European supervisors, direct meetings with external auditors without the bank’s
management, are the preferred option. Confidentiality remains an issue in other jurisdictions.
Few jurisdictions provide “safe haven” rules for auditors when reporting matters to supervisors.
Finally, very few jurisdictions have a feedback system in place to assess and monitor the
quality of the relationship between supervisors and auditors.


10
     Financial Services Authority & Financial Reporting Council, Enhancing the auditor’s contribution to prudential regulation, 2010.
https://www.frc.org.uk/getattachment/5cadee47-6422-46f0-b692-b3f377544769/FSA-FRC-Discussion-Paper-Enhancing-the-auditor-s-c.aspx       25
Intensity and frequency of communication
The survey finds that all supervisors meet with external auditors:

►►   Sixty-six percent meet auditors on an ad-hoc basis, or using a proportionate approach when
     communicating with external auditors. Some supervisors stated that ad-hoc contact should always
     be possible to discuss issues that require urgent attention.

►►   Thirty-one percent of supervisors meet the external auditor only once per year.




       “We have introduced trilateral meetings twice a year for large banks and
       once a year for other banks (with exceptions for small banks). Besides, we
       meet three times a year with the financial sector committees of the Dutch
      Association of Accountants (NBA), and we meet with senior management of
      audit firms (big 4) on a subsector basis (banks, insurers and pension funds).
       We also meet with the board of the NBA once a year to discuss matters of
                                    strategic nature.”
                           - National Bank of the Netherlands


In a proportionate risk-based approach towards the relationship between supervisors and external
auditors, a greater supervisory effort is directed to banks that are classified as Systemically Important
Banks (SIBs). For example, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) specifies that the
implementation of their principles, including those concerning the relationship between supervisors and
external auditors, should be “proportionate to the size, complexity, structure, economic significance and
risk profile of the bank and the group (if any) to which it belongs” and “should be applied in accordance
with the national legislation and corporate governance structures applicable in each country”.11

The survey shows that 49% of supervisors exchange information with external auditors more than
once a year. Very often this means that the exchange of information takes place on an ad-hoc basis,
determined by the specific circumstances of a bank.

Thirty-seven percent of supervisors report that they exchange information only once a year. This is
the case, for example, with the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority (FSA) which receives a Long-
Form Audit Report from external auditors every year, while external auditors receive a copy of most
of the communication between the bank and the Danish FSA.

Fourteen percent of supervisors never exchange information with external auditors.




      “Since we started communicating with external auditors on a more regular
     basis, we found more use for the information obtained from external auditors
         in our supervisory tasks.” - National Bank of the FYR of Macedonia




11
  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, External audits of banks, 2014.
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs280.htm                                                                         26
      Example 1: The use of a proportionate approach when communicating with external
                         auditors: the National Bank of Belgium (NBB)

      The NBB uses a proportionate approach when interacting with external auditors based on the
      risk profile of the bank, its size, and whether it is headquartered in Belgium. A set of criteria
      determines Systemically Important Financial Institutions (SIFI). SIFI meetings are conducted every
      quarter, whereas non-SIFI meetings are only conducted once per year. The NBB delegation
      includes more senior staff for meetings with SIFI. The NBB sends a copy of most of the
      communication between the NBB and the bank to the external auditor.




Formal vs. informal channels of communication
Dialogue between external auditors and supervisors can be established through both formal (e.g. official
written communication, official meetings, etc.) and informal (e.g. telephone conversations, informal
meetings, emails, etc.) channels of communication. Supervisors and external auditors should generally
use the most appropriate communication channel applicable to the circumstances and sensitivity of
the issues discussed.

The survey shows that 54% of European supervisors only use formal channels for communicating with
external auditors. Another 42% of European supervisors report using an equal mix of both formal and
informal channels. The majority of REPARIS (60%) and STAREP (75%) supervisors use formal and informal
channels in equal measures.

According to the survey, choosing one channel over another depends on:

►►   The relative importance of the communication exchanged: informal channels such as emails and
     telephone calls can be used for minor issues to be discussed with external auditors. More senior
     supervisors are generally involved in discussing more critical issues;

►►   The seniority level of the users: at the highest level, i.e. for top management, communication is
     generally more formal whereas more junior staff tend to use more informal channels of communication,
     irrespective of the content of the communication.




     “We currently benefit from a long lasting investment in the relation between
         supervisors and auditors. Without this investment both parties suffer
       from mistrust and miscommunication resulting in formal approaches or
      even defensive / non collaborative approaches. We started to engage with
     auditors on a sector or subsector level, with topics of common interest. Then
      we entered into a phase in which we had to define roles and responsibilities,
      and had to set up protocols for proper communications. After a number of
      years, the next phase of ‘trust’ and ‘mutual understanding’ started to grow.
      In this phase it is possible to be critical to each other without affecting the
      relationship. We have invested heavily in this communication structure for
            over 10 years, and we are sure that we have to keep ‘investing’.”
                           - National Bank of the Netherlands
                                                                                                            27
The most common channels of communication that banking supervisors and external auditors use to
                                       communicate:




Despite a certain level of formality, most supervisors stressed that they enjoyed good cooperation
with external auditors in their jurisdiction.



Timing of communication within the audit process
Supervisors were asked at which stages of the audit process they exchanged information with
external auditors. The majority believe that the best timing for meetings with external auditors is at
the planning stage of the audit (72%) and before the issuance of the audit opinion (69%). This contrasts
with the current practices in which most of the communication takes place after the issuance of the
audit opinion (62%).

There are many reasons for promoting discussions as early as possible in the planning stage of the
audit. The Financial Supervisory Authority of Finland reports that it shares information with external
auditors at the planning stage because it affects the audit’s planning and, in some cases, the scope
of the external audit of a bank. The Financial Supervisory Authority of Sweden finds that holding
discussions about risks at an early stage of the audit process improves its own risk assessment of
the bank, and contributes to closer cooperation between external auditors and supervisors.

Scheduling discussions just before the audit opinion is issued also has advantages; it allows both
supervisors and auditors to share findings and evaluate their impacts. The Bank of Italy and the
National Bank of the FYR of Macedonia report that this helps auditors take supervisory findings into
account when forming their audit opinion, and, in some cases, can trigger corrections. Conclusions
on areas that require substantial accounting judgment have already been reached when the external
audit process is almost complete; it is then too late to start discussing or challenging auditors’ key
accounting treatments, assumptions and methodologies.




                                                                                                           28
 During which phases of the audit process do the external auditor and banking regulator currently
                                     exchange information?




  In your view, during which phases of the audit process SHOULD the external auditor and banking
                                 regulator exchange information?




Meeting in the presence of bank management or not
Supervisors still often meet with auditors in the presence of the bank’s management, but for more open
conversations some supervisors prefer to meet directly with the auditors. Confidentiality, however,
remains an issue in certain jurisdictions:

►►   Sixty-three percent of supervisors conduct both direct meetings with external auditors, and meetings
     with external auditors and the bank under supervision;

►►   European supervisors tend to favor direct meetings with external auditors over meetings in the
     presence of the bank. Direct meetings between supervisors and auditors give both parties the           29
     opportunity to discuss certain matters without the presence of the bank (for example issues related
     to the corporate governance of the bank);

►►   Direct meetings with external auditors are not very common in STAREP jurisdictions. Half of STAREP
     supervisors meet external auditors only in the presence of the bank, compared with 20% of REPARIS
     supervisors. This is mainly due to legal provisions on confidentiality and banking secrecy in some
     jurisdictions, which allow meetings to take place only in the presence of the bank;

►►   In most of the jurisdictions, these meetings are conducted using a proportionate risk-based
     approach. In a few jurisdictions, the frequency and timing of these meetings are regulated, with
     specific requirements including more frequent meetings for SIBs.



                            Type of meetings that banking supervisors conduct:




                   Circumstances under which trilateral meetings are necessary

      European supervisors prefer discussing some matters directly with external auditors, without
      the presence of the bank under supervision. The presence of the bank in meetings can,
      however, be necessary in specific circumstances. The majority of banking supervisors prefer
      the bank to be present when there are disagreements between the bank and the other
      parties, especially if the disagreements have an impact on the bank’s risk profile. The bank
      can provide clarifications and a better understanding of the specific situation under discussion.
      Examples given include the going concern (Financial Supervisory Authority of Finland); and internal
      controls and measures undertaken by the bank in order to meet supervisory requirements
      (National Bank of the Netherlands and National Bank of the FYR of Macedonia). In addition,
      the National Bank of Georgia reports that trilateral meetings can be helpful for supervisors



                                                                                                            30
     to better understand the relationship and information sharing processes between the bank
     and its external auditors.

     Some supervisors find it important for these meetings to take place at the conclusion of the
     external audit to discuss major audit findings (UK Prudential Regulatory Authority and Polish
     Financial Supervision Authority). Others stress the importance of the bank’s presence during
     the planning stage in order to provide both auditors and supervisors with a comprehensive
     update of the bank’s business activities and material changes since the previous external
     audit (Central Bank of Ireland).




Communication with audit committees
Meetings between the banking supervisors, external auditors, and chairs of the audit committees are
not common for European supervisors (19%) and are non-existent in REPARIS and STAREP jurisdictions.
(See page 65 for more information.)



Assessing the quality of interaction through a
feedback process
Globally, very few supervisors have a feedback system to assess the quality of their relationship with
external auditors. Regional comparisons show that 15% of European jurisdictions have implemented a
feedback process whereas no such system has been initiated yet in REPARIS or STAREP jurisdictions.

When a feedback process exists, it tends to be informal except in the case of the United Kingdom,
which recently formalized the manner in which it obtains feedback on the quality of the relationship
between auditors and supervisors. The Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority, the National Bank of
the Netherlands and the UK Prudential Regulatory Authority are the only institutions that regularly
request feedback from both supervisors and external auditors, at the level of the professional body
and individual audit firms.




      Example 2: The feedback system on the quality of the auditor-supervisor dialogue
                                        in the UK12

     The first report on the quality of the external auditor-supervisor relationship was provided
     to the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) Board in July 2014. It was based on a survey for
     the year to 31 March 2014 of supervisors of the largest firms, as well as feedback obtained
     from the auditors.




12
  Bank of England, Prudential Regulation Authority, extract from the Engagement between external auditors and supervisors
and commencing the PRA’ s disciplinary powers over external auditors and actuaries – Consultation Paper CP8/15., February
2015. http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Pages/publications/cp/2015/cp815.aspx                                              31
To gather feedback from supervisors, the PRA used an electronic survey and follow up
meetings. The survey questions sought to obtain feedback on:

►►    The frequency and timing of scheduled or formal auditor-supervisor meetings;

►►    The quality of those meetings; and

►►    Whether the broader relationship was such that supervisors believe that auditors would
      contact them proactively, informally, outside scheduled meetings, to disclose emerging
      concerns.


To obtain the auditors’ perspectives, each auditor was asked to provide the PRA with its
overall assessment of the quality of the external auditor-supervisor relationship as input to
the report. To help ensure that the auditors’ findings were comparable with the results of the
supervisors’ survey, the PRA shared the list of firms covered in the survey as well as the full
suite of survey questions to the supervisors with the auditors.

...

Following the survey and report on the quality of auditor-supervisor dialogue in summer 2014,
the following actions were undertaken:

►►    Discussions took place with each external auditor to emphasize the overall messages
      from the report;

►►    Presentations were provided to partners and managers of the large external audit firms
      on the results of the survey and feedback from supervisors and involved discussions
      about what the PRA expects from external auditors under the PRA Code. This will apply
      to all future survey results.
►►    More regular training is being provided for supervisors on auditor- supervisor
      engagement, with a focus on how they might better understand the work of auditors
      as well as encouraging a more open and in-depth dialogue.
...

The PRA uses biannual bilaterals with the senior financial services partners of the largest
external audit firms ... to give and receive feedback on the external auditor-supervisor
engagement compared to the PRA Code and hence the level of co-operation is kept under
constant review.




                                                                                                  32
Survey findings and possible actions

          Survey findings                                    Possible actions



 Proportionate risk-based approach          ►►   Developing formal criteria to define SIBs and
                                                 set up a clear process for systematic and
 About half of the supervisors use a
                                                 regular interactions and communication with
 proportionate risk-based approach when
                                                 their external auditors;
 communicating with external auditors.
                                            ►►   Engaging with external auditors to obtain
                                                 sufficient information about the audit process
                                                 and audit findings in a timely manner to assist
                                                 the supervisory process;

                                            ►►   Conducting systematic one-on-one meetings
                                                 with the chairman of the audit committee of
                                                 each bank in a structured manner with a clear
                                                 and relevant agenda, and clearly identified
                                                 outcomes and follow-up actions.




 Timing and frequency of communication      ►►   Building a constructive and effective relationship
 with external auditors                          with external auditors by setting up a joint
                                                 framework of engagement that will include
 Sixty-two percent of the supervisors
                                                 the terms and scope of communication and
 communicate with external auditors after
                                                 interaction in a systematic, frequent and timely
 the audit opinion has been issued. Most
                                                 manner;
 supervisors meet external auditors on an
 ad-hoc basis when required. Some also      ►►   Meeting and exchanging information with the
 hold regular meetings with auditors.            external auditors formally, informally or on an
                                                 ad-hoc basis to avoid routine meetings and
                                                 focus on current and medium term risks and
                                                 issues that may affect the banking sector and
                                                 the bank;

                                            ►►   The exchange of information should be regular
                                                 and flexible to discuss material and relevant
                                                 risks and events during and after the audit and
                                                 should take place in addition to pre-scheduled
                                                 meetings among the supervisors, the bank and
                                                 the external auditors;

                                            ►►   The exchange of information should be
                                                 part of, and embedded in the supervisory


                                                                                                      33
         Survey findings                                       Possible actions




                                                process rather than just an additional item
                                                on the checklist of the supervisor. It should
                                                be conducted in a structured manner, with a
                                                relevant agenda and clearly identified outcomes
                                                and follow-up actions.




Channels of communication                  ►►   Using as applicable:

Generally, supervisors either use formal        ►►   Formal (meetings with external auditors
channels or an equal mix of both formal              with or without the bank under supervision,
and informal channels when communicating             meetings with external auditors and the
with external auditors.                              chair of the audit committee) and informal
                                                     channels (telephone calls, emails etc.);

                                                ►►   Oral (meetings, calls, etc.) and written
                                                     communication (official letters, exchange
                                                     of a Long-Form Audit Report, etc.);

                                                ►►   Ad-hoc meetings and meetings with
                                                     predefined timing; regular contact will slowly
                                                     help build open cooperation based on trust;

                                                ►►   The primary relationship holders, namely
                                                     the audit firm partner and the supervisor
                                                     team leader. Other colleagues and
                                                     staff from their respective teams and/
                                                     or experts should also be involved in
                                                     the communication and exchange of
                                                     information process at the working
                                                     levels.




                                                                                                      34
            Survey findings                                 Possible actions



Feedback process                            ►►   Setting up a formal feedback process within
                                                 the supervisory authority which may include
Eighty-six percent of supervisors do not
                                                 an anonymous survey sent to supervisors
have a feedback system for assessing the
                                                 who take part in the meetings with external
quality of the relationship with external
                                                 auditors to assess the quality of the meetings
auditors.
                                                 and relationships between the supervisors and
                                                 the external auditors.

                                            ►►   The feedback should assess the limits of the
                                                 relationship and areas of improvements such
                                                 as increasing the frequency of meetings,
                                                 exchanging more pertinent information and
                                                 discussing more specific issues relevant to
                                                 the bank rather than focusing on high level and
                                                 general issues on a routine basis with no added
                                                 value to the supervisory process.




                                                                                                   35
36
                        Insight 3
         Topics of mutual interest




              External auditors could contribute more
            on specific areas of interest to supervisors
Sharing information on a range of important accounting and auditing themes due to their
complexity, materiality and/or judgment involved is crucial. At a crossroads between accounting
and finance, topics covered under accounting standards for financial instruments, such as loan
valuation and provisioning as well as the bank’s asset valuation, are key for both external
auditors and supervisors. Compliance with prudential regulations and the consistency of
disclosures in financial statements with published prudential information are also important.
Finally, the effectiveness of banks’ internal control, risk management and IT systems are
essential inputs for assessing the bank’s risk profile and going concern assumption. External
auditors may identify additional areas of interest to supervisors during the course of the audit.   37
Areas of risk
Most supervisors communicate with external auditors on areas of risk for individual banks, either as a
common practice (46%) or on a case-by-case basis using a proportionate risk-based approach (34%).
Communication on areas of risk is a legal requirement in only one instance.



        “We practice the so-called Three-Way-Dialogues (trilateral) in which risk
        areas are being discussed between the institution (internal audit and/or
                    management), external auditor and supervisor.”
                         - National Bank of the Netherlands


Information on areas of risk is exchanged either through written communication or informally during
meetings when:

►►   Supervisors think a specific area of risk has been neglected by external auditors;

►►   It is appropriate to discuss a specific risk area with external auditors before issuing any sanction
     to a bank; and/or

►►   External auditors need this information to perform their audit.


Nineteen percent of European and 25% of STAREP supervisors reported that supervisors do not
communicate on areas of risk with external auditors. Confidentiality was cited as a reason for not
doing so.




       “National legislation does not provide for the sharing of information by the
             banking supervisors to the external auditors.” - Bank of Italy



 Does your institution communicate with the external auditors on general and specific areas of risk
                                      for individual banks?




                                                                                                            38
Accounting policies
While discussions with external auditors vary according to the jurisdiction, the characteristics and
circumstances of the bank under supervision, and the supervisory model adopted, the survey responses
show that:
►►   Loan valuation and provisioning are at the top of the agenda for European and REPARIS supervisors;

►►   Annual financial statements are the main topic of discussion for STAREP (100%) and rank second in
     REPARIS (80%) jurisdictions.


The role of audit committees is the least discussed topic. Regional trends reveal that:
►►   For European supervisors, the second most discussed issue is the asset valuation of the banks;
     annual financial statements together with the effectiveness of internal controls and risk management
     came third;

►►   For REPARIS supervisors, financial statements rank second (80%), followed by the management letter
     and the effectiveness of internal controls (60%), and banks’ asset valuation and risk management
     rank fourth (40%)

►►   For STAREP supervisors, after annual financial statements all other topics, with the exception of
     audit committees, rank second (75%).


             Issues typically discussed with external auditors during the course of the audit




                                                                                                            39
These topics are discussed in some jurisdictions only on an exceptional basis, mainly when questions
about the accounting treatment of specific transactions are raised, or when negligence or weaknesses
are identified. Often these topics are not discussed specifically during the course of the audit but on
an ad-hoc basis, when necessary for the work of the supervisor.

Other possible topics of discussion mentioned include:

►►   The going concern assumption;

►►   Significant banking transactions;

►►   The bank’s compliance with the legal framework;

►►   The banking license;

►►   The adequacy of information provided by branches to their head office; and

►►   Bancassurance.




Prudential returns
Banks are responsible for ensuring that the data they submit in their regulatory returns are complete
and accurate. Regulatory returns, including data on liquidity, capital, capital requirements and large
exposures, are used by supervisors as an input for their supervisory activities.



Assurance engagement on prudential returns
For almost half of the supervisors, external auditors contribute to supervisory work by either providing
limited or reasonable assurance on prudential returns as part of a legal requirement. For 9% the
provision of limited or reasonable assurance on prudential returns is common practice. For a further
20% it is undertaken as necessary, mainly on an ad-hoc basis at the request of the supervisor.

A closer look at regional trends shows that a limited or reasonable assurance on prudential returns
is a legal requirement in 80% of the REPARIS jurisdictions versus 46% in European jurisdictions, and
25% in STAREP jurisdictions.



                      “The external auditor must audit the solvency ratio.”
                       - Polish Financial Supervision Authority (UKNF)


External auditors do not provide a limited or reasonable assurance on prudential returns in 23% of
the jurisdictions. The Bank of Spain reports that external auditors might only be asked to check the
consistency of accounting figures contained in certain prudential returns with accounting registers
reviewed within the scope of the audit, and in some cases include it in the Long-Form Audit Report.



        “Prudential returns must be reviewed by external auditors, but without
     requirement for formal reporting in accordance with audit or other assurance
      standards. External auditors should report any findings in the Management
                 Letter and submit it to the National Bank of Serbia.”
                              - National Bank of Serbia                                                    40
          Does the external auditor provide assurance engagement on prudential returns?




Reconciliation with prudential returns


        “Using so-called “prudential filters” accounting figures under IFRS are
               reconciled to prudential returns.” - Bank of Lithuania



Only 32% of European supervisors have reconciliation with prudential capital elements audited or
reviewed by external auditors in their financial statements. This number is higher for REPARIS and
STAREP jurisdictions, with 80% and 67% respectively. Depending on the jurisdiction, the reconciliation
between the year-end balance sheet and the prudential returns balance sheet is either a requirement
or a recommendation.



 Do financial statements include reconciliation with prudential capital elements audited by external
                                              auditors?




                                                                                                         41
   “A detailed report on the composition of own funds and risk-weighted assets
     calculated in compliance with the prudential regulation is required. In this
   detailed report, all the lines from the audited balance sheet can be identified.
   Since the external auditor is obliged to verify the completeness, accuracy and
   compliance of the bank’s prudential returns as of year-end, a reconciliation is
         indirectly performed.” - National Bank of the FYR of Macedonia




IT audit
An information technology audit is an audit of a bank’s IT systems, its governance and management
arrangements and its operations and related processes. It informs the bank’s management on existing
and potential IT risks and deficiencies, thus enabling management to take remedial actions.

An IT audit requires specific competence and skills and this work does not fall within the traditional
scope of the auditor’s work. An IT audit can be performed in addition to the audit of financial statements
by audit firms that have the capacity to conduct this exercise. Otherwise the bank may need to call
upon the expertise of an external IT consulting firm.

IT audit remains however a topic of mutual interest for both banking supervisors and external auditors.
Information systems are a key component of a bank’s operational risk profile and are also essential
to achieve high-quality financial reporting.




     “External auditors are obliged to perform IT audits. They have to assess the
      state of the information system and the adequacy of information system
        management. The assessment (grade) is descriptive and ranges from
            completely satisfactory to completely unsatisfactory. In 2010,
         the Croatian National Bank published a document which defines its
        expectations for the information system audit performed by external
      auditors, with details on IT audit process, IT audit report structure and the
                 role of credit institutions.” - Croatian National Bank


The IT audit is regularly shared with supervisors in 37% of the jurisdictions. In 11% of those, it is a legal
requirement as the IT audit is either part of the scope of the audit (for example, it is included in the
annual Long-Form Audit Report) or commissioned by the supervisory authority. For the remaining 26%,
it is just common practice.




       “This assessment of the bank’s IT systems security is an integral part of
      the large package of documents (Long-Form Audit Report) required to be
                        prepared by the auditor of the bank.”
                     - National Bank of the FYR of Macedonia

                                                                                                                42
In another 37% of the jurisdictions, findings are shared only when elements of the IT audit reveal
weaknesses in the control system that could significantly impact the operations and the financial
position of the bank.




         “The external auditor will share the information (i) if the IT-audit was
      performed at the request of the supervisor, (ii) if the IT-audit has revealed a
       decision, fact or development that can significantly influence the financial
        position, administrative organization (including the organization of the
      accounts) or internal control system of the financial institution, or (iii) if the
     results of the IT-audit are part of the report of the external auditor that deals
              with the internal control-system of the financial institution.”
                               - National Bank of Belgium


In the remaining 26% of jurisdictions the IT audit is not shared with supervisors.




  When external auditors perform an IT audit, do they share the results with banking supervisors?




Audit strategy and plan

Discussion of the audit strategy and plan
Sixty-three percent of supervisors do not discuss the audit strategy and plan with external auditors.
Even if it is not a legal requirement, 23% of the supervisors regularly discuss it with auditors, when:

►►   The bank under supervision is a SIB;

►►   The information is used to assess risks posed by banks to financial stability; or

►►   The audit strategy and plan is used as input to the supervisory work plan.                           43
 Do supervisors discuss their audit                               Is the audit strategy and plan
  strategy and plan with external                                  communicated/transmitted
             auditors?                                           to supervisors by the external
                                                                            auditors?




    Yes, it is a legal requirement (0%)                          Yes, it is a legal requirement (6%)
    Yes, it is common practice (23%)                             Yes, it is common practice (6%)
    Sometimes (14%)                                              Sometimes (14%)
    No (63%)                                                     No (74%)




        “The information obtained from the external audit provides input to the
                National Bank of Belgium’s own supervisory work plan.”
                            - National Bank of Belgium



In 14% of the jurisdictions there is occasional discussion, essentially when there are specific concerns
or when an extraordinary audit has been commissioned by the supervisory authority. In some
jurisdictions, supervisors can specify the areas that they expect external auditors to cover during
the audit.




     “We direct the external auditor’s attention to certain areas of concern that
       are expected to be covered or analyzed in depth during the next audit.“
                             - Central Bank of Cyprus




Transmission of the audit strategy and plan
In 74% of the jurisdictions, the audit strategy and plan is not transmitted to supervisors. It is a legal
requirement for only 6%. For the remaining 20%, it is either a common practice for SIBs, or an ad-hoc
arrangement.                                                                                                44
        “An audit firm is required to deliver an annual audit plan for each credit
      institution to the Croatian National Bank, indicating the areas of focus, the
             audit methodology, as well as the envisaged duration of audit.”
                                - Croatian National Bank



Communication on significant changes in the audit strategy and
plan
Overall, external auditors are not required to communicate significant changes to supervisors. Only two
respondents mentioned that external auditors are required to communicate changes in their plan and
strategy, for example when there are changes in the legislation (laws and sub legislation, ISA, IFRS,
etc.) and/or special requirements for the extension/adjustment of the audit plans.




           Discussion topics according to the French prudential regulator L’Autorité de
                          Contrô le Prudentiel et de Résolution (ACPR)13


     Accounting topics
     ►►   Significant aspects of accounting practices:

          ►►   Implementation of new accounting standards;

          ►►   Changes in accounting practices;

          ►►   Adequacy of information in the appendix to the financial statements.


     ►►   Accounting estimates:

          ►►   Review of significant accounting estimates, including those lacking objective data and
               involving a judgment;

          ►►   Adequacy of the valuation process and model used with the generally accepted
               accounting principles;

          ►►   Assessment of the factors likely to influence and/or guide the judgment of management
               and their choice between several options in the valuation process;

          ►►   Assessment of the reasonableness of the assumptions chosen and results obtained;

          ►►   Adequacy of information in the appendix to the financial statements.


     ►►   Assessment of the analysis made by the management and the external auditors with
          regards to the banks’ ability to continue as a going concern;




13
   L’Autorité de Contrô le Prudentiel et de Résolution (ACPR)/ Compagnie Nationale des Commissaires aux Comptes (CNCC),
Guide des relations ACPR – Commissaires aux comptes, ACPR/CNCC, October 2014.
https://acpr.banque-france.fr/fileadmin/user_upload/acp/Agrements_et_autorisations/311014_Guide_ACPR_CNCC.pdf
This implements BCBS Guidelines on the timing and examples of content of meetings between supervisors and external auditors.   45
►►   Summary of audit adjustments used and not disclosed and an estimation of their materiality;

►►   Documentation of internal control weaknesses identified during the financial reporting
     process;

►►   Compliance and reliability of financial information with regard to reporting requirements,
     risks, and exercised judgments discussed at prior meetings.


Specific difficulties or particularities of the year, non-recurring items

►►   Significant difficulties encountered during the audit;

►►   Circumstances that led to a change in the audit mission plan;

►►   Work carried out due to significant non-recurring and complex transactions requiring an
     expert opinion;

►►   Significant topics that were the subject of considerable discussions with the management;

►►   Likelihood of the issuance of a qualified opinion.


Audit committee

►►   Key points that will be communicated to the audit committee;

►►   Involvement of the audit committee in overseeing the preparation of the financial statement
     and its appendix, including the quality of the relationship with the external auditors.


Other possible topics of discussion

►►   Information on other entities of the banking group under supervision that is available to
     the supervisor and communicated by other supervisory authorities;

►►   Evidence that the prudential information might not be consistent with the financial statements;

►►   Evidence that the valuation process of assets and liabilities of the bank under supervision
     might not be in line with the accounting framework and/or regulations;

►►   Evidence of a failure of the control environment or flaws in the internal control process;

►►   Evidence of a failure in internal audit, risk management and compliance.




                                                                                                       46
Survey findings and possible actions

             Survey findings                                     Possible actions



 Audit planning and process                      ►►   Meeting with external auditors during the
                                                      planning stage to discuss specific areas within
 Few supervisors discuss the audit strategy
                                                      the scope or outside the scope of the audit
 and plan with external auditors. Changes
                                                      which regulators would like them to focus on
 in those plans are not systematically
                                                      during the course of the audit;
 communicated to supervisors.
                                                 ►►   Exchanging information and findings identified
                                                      during and after the audit for the current and
                                                      previous financial year and discussing whether
                                                      or not they are in line with the expectations
                                                      of external auditors and supervisors;

                                                 ►►   Using the audit strategy and plan as input to
                                                      the supervisory work plan;

                                                 ►►   Discussing the audit plan and strategy
                                                      specifically with external auditors of SIBs. The
                                                      external auditors should share the audit plan
                                                      and strategy with supervisors upon request.




 Accounting policies                             ►►   Discussing with external auditors the processes
                                                      to obtain a detailed understanding of internal
 Loan valuation and loan loss provisioning,
                                                      controls and assumptions used in the valuation
 and more generally the bank’s asset
                                                      process to ensure that supervisors can critically
 valuation, and the effectiveness of financial
                                                      assess whether they are relevant, reliable and
 controls were topics of particular interest
                                                      are being used consistently by the bank;
 for supervisors to discuss with external
 auditors.                                       ►►   Requesting adequate independent validation
                                                      and verification of the valuation framework
                                                      and controlling procedures by either internal
                                                      or external experts;

                                                 ►►   Holding discussions with external auditors to
                                                      obtain a clear understanding of the impairment
                                                      charges and other credit risk provisions in order
                                                      to assess the charges and the provisions in a
                                                      critical manner.




                                                                                                          47
         Survey findings                                       Possible actions



Prudential returns                             ►►   Requesting external auditors to review the
                                                    reconciliation of prudential own funds with
Reconciliation between prudential capital
                                                    accounting capital;
elements and audited financial statements
is often not subject to an audit. Prudential   ►►   Requesting external auditors to review and
returns are often not reviewed by auditors.         assess banks’ internal controls for preparing
                                                    the prudential returns in the regulatory
                                                    reporting system;

                                               ►►   Requiring external auditors to report to
                                                    supervisors in a timely manner when
                                                    weaknesses or breaches have been identified.




                                                                                                    48
                   Insight 4
Supervisors’ input to audits




                                            Supervisors do contribute
                                           to enhanced audit quality
Supervisors can help improve the quality of financial information. They can provide an
environment which supports the independence, objectivity and integrity of audit work.
Supervisors can also enhance audit quality by sharing relevant information with external
auditors.

Responses show that most supervisors are empowered to regulate certain conditions of the
appointment and rotation of external auditors, and the audit retendering process. In a few
jurisdictions, supervisory authorities are also involved in monitoring and sanctioning auditors
and their work. Often confidentiality rules prevent supervisors from communicating bank or
industry specific information to external auditors.                                               49
Audits are conducted under a framework of professional standards and regulations covering auditing,
ethics and financial reporting. The environment in which audit firms and auditors operate significantly
affects audit quality. National audit laws and regulations provide a framework that supports the
independence, objectivity and integrity of audit work. At a national level, relevant auditing standards and
quality control procedures need to be adopted to ensure that external auditors perform high- quality
external audits which enhance the reliability of banks’ financial statements. Financial supervisors have
an important role to play in ensuring that auditing standards and measures to safeguard auditors’
independence are applied consistently in their jurisdiction.



Adoption of international standards
Carrying out external audits in accordance with ISA and complying with the International Standard on
Quality Control (ISQC 1) for the audit firm’s quality control procedures “provide the foundation for a
disciplined approach to auditing, by performing a risk assessment, planning, audit procedures and
ultimately forming and expressing an opinion.”14



International Standards on Auditing
ISA are adopted in most of the jurisdictions: either in the local language with an approved translation
by the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) or in the English version issued by the IAASB. In
some cases, national auditing standards are applied instead, but they are broadly compliant with ISA.




                                    International Standards on Auditing (ISA)15


UK and Ireland apply                                                                            ISA adopted and
International Standards                                                                         unamended
on Auditing (UK and
Ireland), which are                                                                             ISA adopted with add-
based on ISA and                                                                                ons
are used with the                                                                               ISA not formally
permission of IFAC.                                                                             adopted



French Auditing
Standards are broadly
compliant with ISA




14
  International Federation of Accountants (IFAC), A framework for audit quality: Key Elements that Create an Environment for
Audit Quality, February 2014.
https://www.ifac.org/publications-resources/framework-audit-quality-key-elements-create-environment-audit-quality
15
  Map based on responses collected, and on the FEE survey “Overview of ISA adoption in the European Union”, April 2015.
http://www.fee.be/images/publications/auditing/ISA_in_Europe_overview_Jan_2015.pdf                                             50
International Standard on Quality Control
Globally, 89% of the supervisors reported that ISQC 1 is applied in their jurisdiction. Regionally, 92%
of European jurisdictions apply this international standard. This is also the case for 80% and 75% of
REPARIS and STAREP jurisdictions respectively.



Measures to safeguard auditors’ independence
A country’s institutional framework should establish ethical or legal arrangements to safeguard auditors’
independence from the audited entity. These arrangements typically include audit firm rotation and
audit retendering which address independence issues and limit the threat to auditors’ objectivity that
may arise when they spend extended periods of service with the same entity.



Rotation of external audit firms
The rotation of audit firms is of paramount importance in addressing the overfamiliarity and potential
lack of independence resulting from long audit tenures. Most European jurisdictions do not require
the mandatory rotation of external audit firms but have requirements for rotating key audit partners.
In Italy and Croatia16 audit firm rotation is required with nine and seven year mandates respectively.
Some jurisdictions report a “voluntary rotation” among the Big 4 for the statutory audit of SIBs.


                 Is rotation of external audit firms of banks required in your jurisdiction?




The rotation of audit firms is a more common practice in REPARIS and STAREP jurisdictions than in the
EU, with predominantly short rotation periods:



16
   Republic of Croatia, Ministry of Finance, Audit Act, art. 14, art. 26a.
http://www.javni-nadzor-revizije.hr/english/Act_Amending_Audit_Act.pdf                                      51
►►   Eighty percent of REPARIS and 50% of STAREP jurisdictions have rotation periods of five years or less;

►►   Twenty percent of REPARIS and 25% of STAREP jurisdictions have rotation periods of between five
     and ten years.


REPARIS supervisors who already enforce mandatory rotations of five years or less state that they
do not recommend changing a practice that has worked well. In STAREP, key audit partner rotation
is preferred over audit firm rotation, with decreasing costs cited as a reason. Others recommend
rotation only when there is a threat to the independence of external auditors.



Audit retendering
Tendering is an effective way for companies to assess whether they are using the external auditor
most appropriate to their needs, without precluding the reappointment of the incumbent if that firm
is demonstrably the best qualified to undertake the audit. Retendering can also bring reductions in
audit fees, although sometimes to levels that are not consistent with high-quality external audits. The
survey reveals that 85% of the jurisdictions do not require audit retendering, meaning that the same
external auditor can be reappointed without going through a mandatory tender process. Retendering
is a requirement only in Norway. It is a common practice in a few jurisdictions such as in Finland.

In some jurisdictions there is a regular validation process of external auditors instead through:

►►   A yearly appointment of the external auditor confirmed at the annual general meeting;

►►   An assessment by the supervisory authority, which usually has the power to object to the
     appointment of external auditors.




            EU audit reform legislation – Requirements for rotation and retendering17

      Audit firm rotation and audit retendering

      From June 2016 onwards, Public Interest Entities (PIEs) will be required to change their audit
      firms after a maximum 10-year mandate. The 10-year mandate can be extended up to 10
      additional years if tenders are carried out, and by up to 14 additional years in case of a joint
      audit. In some exceptional circumstances, supervisors are empowered to extend the term
      once for a further two years at the request of the audited entity. There is the possibility to
      adopt a shorter rotation term.


      Rotation of key audit partners

      The EU legislation requires the key audit partners of PIEs to rotate at least every seven years
      with a cooling off period of three years.




Opinions differ on the benefits of retendering. The National Bank of Georgia reports that mandatory
retendering would increase switching rates of external auditors, encourage lower audit fees, and



17
   EU legislation providing a new EU regulatory framework for statutory audit was adopted in 2014 and will apply to the first
financial year starting on or after mid-June 2016.                                                                              52
foster competition in audit markets. It can also be a useful tool for monitoring selection criteria and
the appointment of external auditors. In this respect, the Bank of Slovenia advocates retendering
periods of not less than three years.

The Bulgarian National Bank indicates that it would prefer less retendering unless there is evidence
of improper behavior of external auditors. Furthermore, some supervisors mentioned that the cost of
requiring frequent rotations of the audit firm usually outweighs the benefits.



Supervisors’ influence on the appointment of
external auditors

     Which one of the following applies to your institution in relation to the initial appointment of the
                                             external auditor:




Most supervisors are either directly or indirectly ‘involved’ in the appointment of external auditors of
banks in their jurisdictions. Survey findings show that:

►►   Only four supervisory authorities can pre-select a list of external auditors for banks; thirty-one
     percent of supervisors must approve the external auditor selected by the bank;

►►   Fifty-seven percent of supervisors can object to the appointment of the selected external auditor;
     a closer look at regional trends reveals that this power is granted to 80% of REPARIS and 100% of
     STAREP supervisors;

►►   Seven supervisory authorities, all from the EU, have no involvement in the appointment of external
     auditors.

►►   Twenty-three percent of supervisors state that they have additional powers and can:

     ►►   Appoint another auditor for the bank. This power is usually exercised when external auditors
          show a lack of competence or when they fail to meet the code of ethics obligations. The audit
                                                                                                            53
            is then performed by another external auditor selected by the supervisor and usually at the
            bank’s expense. In some cases supervisors might also set the remuneration of the newly
            selected external auditor; or

       ►►   Require a joint audit. Such audits of banks are only mandatory in France.




         “In the last five years, we objected to the appointment of four auditors (one
        because they breached the internal rotation rule, the others because they did
                           not perform audits with the care required).”
                             - Austrian Financial Market Authority




        Example 1: Mandatory joint audit in France for companies that prepare consolidated
                                       financial statements

        A joint audit is the audit of a company by two or more audit firms. Only one single auditor’s
        report is produced. The responsibility for issuing an audit is shared by all joint auditors, and
        work is allocated between audit firms, with each audit firm reviewing the work performed
        by the other.

        By allowing the selection of two audit firms, it provides further assurance that the audit
        opinion is complete (i.e. increasing the number of crosschecks between audit firms improves
        audit quality). When appointment terms are staggered, it facilitates a smooth rotation of audit
        firms (i.e. knowledge and understanding of the bank’s operations are retained while the risk
        of over familiarity is mitigated). Audit firms should also have more leverage to report jointly
        inappropriate bank management financial reporting practices.




Criteria for appointing banks’ external auditors18
The survey suggests that there are no common selection criteria for the appointment of external
auditors across Europe and Central Asia. When specific criteria are set, they are formulated directly by
the bank’s management, the bank’s audit committee; supervisory board members; or by supervisors
in some jurisdictions (i.e. when a special registration or certification is required).

Also of interest:

►►     Supervisors mentioned that the selection of external auditors should be proportionate to the banks’
       needs, complexity and size;

►►     Only one supervisor stated that external auditors/audit firms should be capable of developing
       good working relationships with the supervisory authority by agreeing for example to take part in
       trilateral meetings with the bank and supervisory authority;

►►     Only one supervisor referred to specific criteria related to the cost of audit work.



18
     Participants were asked in an open-ended question what appointment criteria external auditors of banks must fulfil in
their jurisdictions. Appointment criteria disclosed by respondents are organized according to their recurrence.              54
                                                  Criteria                                                    Recurrence

     Being a registered/certified external auditor19                                                               51%
     Professional experience                                                                                       51%
     i.e. having a minimum number of years and/or chargeable hours performing
     successful audits
     Qualification and competence                                                                                  46%
     Holding professional qualifications and appropriate education is cited by 35%,
     respecting the continuous learning obligation by 15%, having competences and
     skills in IFRS/ISA by 12%
     Reputation and ethics19                                                                                       40%
     i.e. not being convicted of financial crimes or disciplinary measures in a certain
     period prior to the appointment, having qualities such as integrity, honesty, ethics,
     good reputation and keeping confidentiality
     Independence                                                                                                  31%
     With six percent stating that external auditors must submit a written statement
     of their independence
     Bank-specific knowledge                                                                                       29%
     i.e. in-depth knowledge of the specific activities and risks related to the banking
     sector; requirement to have a certain number of years of experience/chargeable
     hours spent providing audit services at usually more than one bank; bank-specific
     training and continuous education requirements
     Quality of the audit process                                                                                  26%
     i.e. being properly organized, having an appropriate audit team composition with
     the relevant capacity and resources, applying an appropriate audit methodology
     and filing system, showing evidence of audit quality
     Knowledge of the law and regulations19                                                                        11%




                                   Example 2: Appointment criteria in Denmark

        In Denmark external auditors of banks are obliged to be certified by the Danish Financial
        Supervisory Authority (FSA). According to certification requirements, external auditors should,
        inter alia:

        1.	 Demonstrate that they have performed at least 1,500 chargeable hours auditing financial
            institutions, financial holding companies, pension funds or alternative investment funds
            within the past five years. Of these chargeable hours, 1,000 must include audit services
            to at least three banks. All of these hours should be realized after being authorized as
            a state public accountant and 50% of them as a signing auditor or audit team manager;

        2.	 Document that they fulfill applicable training requirements for auditors of banks;

        3.	 Not have had a case with the Disciplinary Board on Auditors (DDBA) within the last five years;

        4.	 Not have been subject to criminal liability for violating financial legislation or other relevant
            legislation, including legislation abroad. The Danish FSA considers whether the offense
            involves a risk that the external auditor might be unable to fulfill his/her duties or role in
            a satisfactory manner;




19
     Although these elements were not cited by a majority of supervisors, they are generally part of their legal requirements.   55
    5.	 Not have displayed or engaged in conduct which gives the FSA reason to believe that the
       external auditor will not carry out his/her function or position adequately. In judging the
       appropriateness of the behavior, emphasis is placed on the FSA’s objective to maintain
       confidence in the financial sector.




      “External auditors shall pass qualification exams on general audit at the
    Ministry of Finance and on banks’ specific audit at the National Bank. During
       these exams and interviews, the National Bank has the opportunity to
    assess the main criteria related to knowledge, experience and qualifications.”
                            - National Bank of Moldova



Review and monitoring of the external auditors’ appointment
Ninety-four percent of supervisors do not conduct interviews to review the appointment of the external
auditor. This is either the role of other institutions (e.g. audit committees) or the capabilities of the
auditors are evaluated through written examinations during the external auditor’s initial licensing
process. Some supervisors are reassured because SIBs are usually audited by the Big 4, whom they
believe are sufficiently familiar with the banking sector and related regulatory requirements. With this
in mind, some jurisdictions even apply less stringent banking-specific appointment criteria to the Big
4 compared to small local audit firms.

Some supervisors receive annual confirmation that no measures have been taken against an appointed
external auditor. Ad-hoc meetings with external auditors are also cited as a way of assessing external
auditors.




   “Ad hoc meetings with the auditor could be a part of the assessment process
     whether there are no grounds for the rejection of an auditor selected by a
                          bank.” - Czech National Bank




The monitoring and sanctioning role of supervisors
Over banks’ financial reporting
Market authorities have the power to sanction and monitor only those banks that are listed. Their
powers may precede and exceed those of the supervisors.

Survey results show that 83% of banking supervisors have the power to hold the bank directly
accountable for material weaknesses in its financial statements. The bank’s management is responsible
for the following:                                                                                          56
►►   Accurate and timely disclosure of information to the public;

►►   Preparation of financial statements in accordance with the law and appropriate financial reporting
     requirements; and

►►   Establishment of internal control mechanisms suitable for banks’ range of activities.




           “In general, we trust the external auditor´s opinion. But if material
          weaknesses having an impact on banking regulations and obligations
                   become obvious, banks can be held accountable.”
                         - Austrian Financial Market Authority


In some jurisdictions, the supervisor can impose sanctions directly on the bank under supervision, or
on individuals responsible for the breach, proportionate to the magnitude and severity of violations
(dismissal, fines, cancellation of banking license, etc.).




         “For non-compliance with the Credit Institution Law, the Financial and
        Capital Market Commission may impose sanctions (e.g. warnings, fines,
      removal from the position and cancellation of license). The sanctions can be
       imposed on individuals responsible for the breach, including management.”
                - Financial and Capital Market Commission of Latvia


In other jurisdictions, mainly jurisdictions in which bank sanctions are applied by another institution
(i.e. AOBs, market authorities), banking supervisors can indirectly sanction material weaknesses in
financial statements with requirements related to the application of capital regulations.




        “We may sanction inaccuracies in the financial statements through the
        application of the capital regulation (e.g. an insufficient loan impairment
       amount could be compensated by a required higher amount of regulatory
                         capital).” - National Bank of Belgium




     Can the banking regulator hold the bank accountable for material weaknesses in its financial
                                            statements?




                                                                                                          57
Over the work of external auditors

Investigation of failure/weakness
Fifty-eight percent of European supervisors are not directly involved in the investigation of failures or
weaknesses in the conduct of external audits of banks. However, 31% of European supervisors are
indirectly involved through their engagement with a separate regulatory body responsible for audit
oversight.

By contrast, 40% of REPARIS and 50% of STAREP supervisors are legally empowered to investigate
failures or weaknesses in the conduct of external audit of banks. Supervisors usually evaluate the
auditor’s report during on-site inspections and are empowered to request additional explanations from
the external auditor to investigate whether the audit was performed in line with required standards. In
general, greater involvement of supervisory authorities in the investigation of failures (or weaknesses)
in the external audit of banks can be linked to:

►►   The absence of an AOB in the jurisdiction (6%) or a newly created AOB;

►►   The fact that the supervisor is also the AOB (6%) or a member of the AOB (32%).




        “The Bank Supervision Department of the National Bank of Serbia (NBS)
       has a strong interest in being involved in the continuous monitoring of the
         quality of audit of banking institutions. In that respect the NBS can be
      involved (either by initiating or being consulted on) the investigation of audit
     failures (or weaknesses) of banking institutions conducted by the Chamber of
                      Certified Auditors.”- National Bank of Serbia




 Is the supervisory institution involved in the investigation of failures or weaknesses in the conduct
                          of the external audit of banks’ financial statements?




                                                                                                            58
Imposing sanctions
Fifty-four percent of European supervisors are not involved in imposing sanctions against external
auditors, 31% have the legal ability to impose sanctions directly (mainly the ability to revoke or suspend
the external auditor) and the remaining 15% are indirectly involved in decisions on sanctions since they
are either consulted on this matter or refer the violation to the competent authority.

In Italy, although supervisors are not involved in imposing sanctions against external auditors, they can
impose fines if the legal duty to report is breached.

STAREP supervisors are not involved in imposing sanctions against external auditors, whereas 80% of
REPARIS supervisors are legally entitled to do so. REPARIS supervisors can reject the auditor’s report
and require that another external auditor repeat the audit at the bank’s expense.



             Is your institution involved in imposing sanctions against external auditors?




Taking remedial and corrective actions
Sixty-six percent of supervisors are not legally required to refer violations to the body in charge of
disciplinary action for external auditors, nor are they consulted on remedial and corrective actions.
In some jurisdictions, however, referring violations is common practice because one representative
of the supervisory authority is a member of the AOB (Serbia and Moldova) or there is a general duty
to cooperate among supervisory authorities and to report violations identified in the performance of
each authority’s legal mandate (Spain).



Information that supervisors could provide to
external auditors
Information provided by supervisors to external auditors (at both the firm and sector level) is covered
by professional secrecy. However, in order to promote a “two-way dialogue” and contribute to audit
quality, supervisors could share information relevant to the conduct of the audit with external auditors.




                                                                                                             59
           Example 3: Information that supervisors could provide to external auditors20

     General accounting topics:
     ►►   Assessments of the quality of published financial statements, the appendixes and areas
          identified for improvement;

     ►►   Views on the appropriateness of accounting judgments and materiality thresholds used.


     Risks:
     ►►   Views of existing and/or upcoming macro- and micro-economic risks that banks might
          face. These could include global systemic risks, such as liquidity and refinancing problems.
          Other risks could include those related to the valuation of certain financial instruments or
          technical provisions, credit risk level on certain portfolios or the level of impairment attached
          to some asset classes. Views on the bank’s loan loss provisioning could include, whenever
          possible, a comparison with other institutions on an unnamed basis;

     ►►   Information on issues such as governance, risk management, compliance framework
          and internal control that have a potential impact on the quality of financial reporting and
          regulatory information produced by the bank. For this purpose, the supervisor might share
          findings derived from his/her on-site inspections;

     ►►   Measures implemented by the supervisor to prevent or limit the consequences or
          generalization of an identified risk.


     Regulatory and accounting developments:
     ►►   The prudential treatment of a new type of product or operation and its eventual impact
          on accounting;

     ►►   Views on the interactions of new regulatory requirements with financial reporting practices
          and requirements;

     ►►   Information on potential issues identified and related to the application of new accounting
          standards or reporting practices. For example, the eventual impact of the accounting
          treatment of a new type of financial instrument or financial transaction as well as the
          impact of the new standard on regulatory requirements;

     ►►   Significant disagreements on the application of a new accounting, regulatory or prudential
          standard by the bank under supervision;

     ►►   Information on the progress of prudential regulation projects and the perspective of
          supervisors on accounting regulation projects.




20
  This list is not meant to be exhaustive and presents only suggestions inspired by the following:
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, External audits of banks, March 2014.
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs280.pdf.
L’Autorité de Contrô le Prudentiel et de Résolution (ACPR)/ Compagnie Nationale des Commissaires aux Comptes, Guide des
relations ACPR – Commissaires aux comptes, ACPR/CNCC, October 2014.
https://acpr.banque-france.fr/fileadmin/user_upload/acp/Agrements_et_autorisations/311014_Guide_ACPR_CNCC.pdf             60
    Other:
    ►►   Correspondence between the supervisor and the bank’s management, including certain
         instructions and minutes of meetings;

    ►►   Any intervention from the supervisor;

    ►►   Feedback on publications from the accounting profession;

    ►►   In general, all items that could have a material impact on banks’ financial statements.




Restrictions on exchange of information and “gateway” rules

    Is there any legal restriction regarding information that supervisors can share with the
                                        external auditors?

           EU + Norway                           STAREP                            REPARIS




                                        Yes                  No


Globally, for 54% of the jurisdictions, there is no legal restriction to supervisors sharing information
with external auditors. However, regional trends show that only 25% of STAREP supervisors can share
information with external auditors.

Many jurisdictions have confidentiality rules in place. Sometimes, the bank’s permission is required
prior to sharing information with external auditors.

Some jurisdictions provide exceptions where bank-specific information can be shared with external
auditors when the information-sharing will assist the external auditor in conducting a quality audit
and, in turn, assist the supervisor in his/her supervisory function.


       “Supervisors have, by law, the choice to share information with external
      auditors, but are not required. Sometimes supervisors have knowledge of
     circumstances that can endanger “solutions” when discussed with auditors.
    In such cases supervisors do not share this sensitive information. However, if
    the information has or could have a direct influence on the auditors’ opinion,
          the supervisor will share this information with external auditors.”
                         - National Bank of the Netherlands                                                61
Survey findings and possible actions

           Survey findings                                    Possible actions



 Information sharing from supervisors         ►►   Creating “gateway” rules to allow the sharing
 to external auditors                              of information with external auditors. This
                                                   information can be bank specific, industry
 Confidentiality    rules   can   prevent
                                                   specific and related to current and emerging
 supervisors from sharing information with
                                                   risks. The objective is to help auditors conduct
 external auditors, which can have negative
                                                   a better quality audit and which, in turn, could
 impacts on the supervision of banks.
                                                   contribute to the supervisory process.




 Appointment of external auditors of          ►►   Setting up a principles-based framework
 banks                                             in line with international best practices for
                                                   the selection, appointment and removal of
 Responses show that most supervisors
                                                   external auditors;
 have some form of oversight responsibility
 over the appointment of external auditors    ►►   Ensuring that the process for the selection
 (i.e. the right to pre-select, approve/           and appointment of external auditors is fair,
 remove or to commission an independent            objective, transparent, independent of the
 audit).                                           bank’s management, and well documented;

                                              ►►   Encouraging the appointment of external
                                                   auditors who are able and willing to develop
                                                   good working relationships and dialogue with
                                                   supervisors;

                                              ►►   Reviewing and monitoring regularly the
                                                   conditions of an external auditor’s appointment
                                                   to ensure the two previous conditions are
                                                   adhered to.




                                                                                                      62
         Survey findings                                     Possible actions



Audit firm rotation                          ►►   Setting up a framework for the rotation of
                                                  external auditors in line with international
Results show that mandatory audit firm
                                                  best practices to ensure independence and
rotations are scarce while the majority of
                                                  avoid a conflict of interest. According to the
supervisors currently enforce compulsory
                                                  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision Core
key audit partner rotations.
                                                  Principles for Effective Banking Supervision,
                                                  the supervisor determines whether banks
                                                  rotate their external auditors (either the firm
                                                  or individuals within the firm) from time to
                                                  time;

                                             ►►   Requesting that the appropriate criteria have
                                                  been used to select the key audit partner by
                                                  the relevant parties;

                                             ►►   Continuously monitoring audit quality
                                                  especially during transition periods.




Audit retendering                            ►►   Reviewing the retendering process on a regular
                                                  basis and ensuring that there is a clear policy
In most jurisdictions, the same external
                                                  for retendering and clear, well-documented
auditor can be reappointed without going
                                                  criteria for selection, and transparency
through a mandatory tender process.
                                                  regarding reappointment.




                                                                                                    63
        Extract from the Basel Core Principles (BCP) for Effective Banking Supervision -
                     Principle 27 on financial reporting and external audit21

     A snapshot of some essential criteria:

     ►►   The supervisor holds the bank’s board and management responsible for ensuring that
          financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting policies and practices
          that are widely accepted internationally. Furthermore, the financial statements should be
          supported by recordkeeping systems in order to produce adequate and reliable data.

     ►►   The supervisor holds the bank’s board and management responsible for ensuring that the
          financial statements issued annually to the public bear an independent external auditor’s
          opinion. This will be the result of an audit conducted in accordance with internationally
          accepted auditing practices and standards.

     ►►   The supervisor has the power to reject and rescind the appointment of an external auditor
          who is deemed to have inadequate expertise or independence, or is not subject to, or
          does not adhere to, established professional standards.

     ►►   The supervisor determines whether banks rotate their external auditors (either the firm
          or individuals within the firm) from time to time.




21
  Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision, BCBS, 2012.
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs230.pdf                                                                   64
                           Insight 5
                Other communications




                     Effective communication between
               audit and banking supervisors and audit
                committees does improve audit quality
Audit committees and Audit Oversight Bodies (AOBs) contribute to enhanced audit quality
through the effective oversight of external auditors’ work and their ability to form an opinion
on banks’ financial statements. These institutions play a critical role in building an appropriate
framework for corporate governance and high-quality external audits.

Most banks are required to have an audit committee but supervisors rarely meet the
committee’s chair. The audit oversight systems are not always effective or even established.
Overall, when they exist supervisors have connections with the AOB, whose role is to identify
failures and weaknesses in banks’ external audits, and to examine the work of external
auditors, imposing sanctions and/or remedial measures as necessary.                                  65
Supervisors’ relationship with Audit Oversight Bodies
In general, supervisors meet with AOBs when these bodies exist. Public oversight of external auditors
is of paramount importance for enhancing the quality and reliability of audit work. It also increases the
accountability of external auditors and audit firms.

Ninety-four percent of supervisors confirmed the existence of an AOB in their jurisdiction. In 76% of
the jurisdictions, the authority in charge of audit quality reviews is also the AOB. In accordance with
its mission of the public oversight of auditors, the AOB is involved in the investigation of failures and
weaknesses in the conduct of the external audit of banks’ financial statements and in imposing sanctions
and/or remedial actions against external auditors, as reported by banking supervisors.




                Is there a formal relationship between banking supervisors and the AOB?




High-quality external audits of banks are best achieved with appropriate support from, and adequate
interactions between, auditors and supervisors, and other bodies overseeing the external audit function.
The survey finds a variety of relationships between the supervisor and the AOB:

►►   The supervisor is also the AOB in 6% of the jurisdictions (Luxembourg and Norway);

►►   For half of REPARIS and STAREP jurisdictions and 27% of EU jurisdictions, the supervisor is a member
     of the AOB. In these jurisdictions, the supervisory authority has a representative member in the
     AOB. The National Bank of the FYR of Macedonia reported that this practice allows for timely
     information sharing between the two institutions;

►►   In a third of EU jurisdictions and a quarter of STAREP jurisdictions, consultations take place between
     the supervisor and the AOB. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been agreed between the
     AOB and the supervisor in most of these jurisdictions to exchange relevant information regarding
     their respective tasks and to facilitate the identification of poor quality external audits;

►►   Thirty-one percent, 25% and 50% of EU, STAREP and REPARIS supervisors respectively indicate that
     no formal relationship has been established with the AOB. Such a relationship is, however, being
     implemented in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
                                                                                                              66
Communication with Audit Oversight Bodies
Most of the supervisors have communication lines with the AOB
Supervisors may communicate any significant findings to the AOB to ensure that it is duly informed of
violations or breaches of the laws and regulations applicable to external auditors.

In return, AOBs need to communicate any significant issues related to the bank’s audit to supervisors:

►►   Seventy-six percent of European supervisors meet with the AOB. For most ad-hoc communication,
     meetings are organized with the AOB when significant matters are identified. Communication occurs
     once per year or more, depending on the nature and number of issues identified. Some European
     supervisors, however, meet and communicate with the AOB on a regular basis. These meetings
     can be conducted weekly, monthly or quarterly depending on the size of the supervised entity, its
     risk profile and the jurisdictions. During these meetings, supervisors and members of the AOB can
     share information regarding the planning of the supervision (i.e. audit oversight and enforcement
     of financial reporting standards).

►►   Only one REPARIS supervisory authority meets and communicates regularly with the AOB in his/
     her jurisdiction.

►►   Seventy-five percent of STAREP supervisors meet and communicate regularly with their respective
     AOB. Supervisors from Azerbaijan and Moldova communicate with the AOB once per year, whereas
     their counterparts in Armenia communicate with the AOB on a quarterly basis.



Audit Quality Assurance Systems
Quality assurance systems are designed to prevent or address potential deficiencies in the manner
in which statutory audits are carried out. Quality assurance systems, if properly implemented and
governed, are an essential pillar of effective public oversight of auditors and audit firms.

Quality assurance systems include the verification of internal quality control systems of external auditors
and audit firms, and the related documented procedures to verify the implementation and efficiency of
such internal systems (Bank of Spain). Quality control systems are also designed to guarantee auditors’
compliance with procedures related to the performance of audit activities and with international
standards on auditing (Czech National Bank).


                         Is an audit quality assurance system in place in the jurisdiction?


                                                                               Yes
                                                                               No




                                                                                                              67
A total of 94% of supervisors report that an audit quality assurance system is in place in their jurisdiction.
Regional comparisons demonstrate that all European jurisdictions have implemented an audit quality
assurance system whereas this is not the case for all REPARIS and STAREP jurisdictions. The countries
under these programs are mostly at the early stage of implementing their quality assurance system,
with the notable exception of FYR of Macedonia which has a more advanced system.




                 Example 1: The audit quality assurance system in Czech Republic

      The quality control system shall:

      a.	 be independent of the controlled statutory auditors and audit firms;

      b.	 be subjected to public oversight;

      c.	 have safe financing and shall not be negatively affected by the auditors;

      d.	 be executed by a natural person who is independent of the controlled auditors and who
         has sufficient professional education and experience in the area of statutory audits and
         accounting reporting and who has passed specialized training for such purposes as
         determined by the Chamber; and

      e.	 be performed at least once in three years for the auditors of banks.




In 76% of the jurisdictions, the entity in charge of the quality assurance reviews is the AOB. Depending
on the jurisdiction, the AOB is a special Council/Committee, the Supervisory Authority or the Ministry
of Finance. As is the case in Belgium and Austria, some jurisdictions have a system of oversight in place
rather than a single authority responsible for audit quality controls: an institute of auditors or a special
association performs the quality controls and the supervisor or a special Chamber is entrusted with
the legal supervision of the quality control process. These systems of oversight will be modified as a
result of the new European audit regulation and directive.

Twenty-four percent of supervisors report that a different body to the AOB organizes and manages
quality assurance systems in their jurisdiction. This distinct body is often the Chamber of Auditors.

The entity responsible for the oversight of auditors and audit firms with Public Interest Entities’ mandates
may differ from the entity in charge of the oversight of other external auditors. In France the audit
oversight body High Council of the Order of Statutory Auditors (H3C) assesses external auditors and
audit firms that audit the financial statements of PIEs every three years, while the Compagnie Nationale
des Commissaires aux Comptes (CNCC) assesses other audit firms every six years. H3C is in charge
of the general oversight of quality controls performed and is entitled to make recommendations. The
results are included in an annual report. In Spain and Cyprus recommendations of AOBs stemming from
quality controls are legally binding.

Supervisors indicate that quality assurance systems are beneficial to them because:

►►   Audit quality controls contribute to the robustness of the bank’s financial information on which the
     prudential data are based;
                                                                                                                 68
►►    They enable the supervisor to evaluate external auditors and audit firms, including their internal
      quality review systems, as well as the auditor’s willingness to involve prudential supervisors in
      tailoring their audit plan;

►►    They reassure the public and supervisors that the external auditors are performing their duties in
      accordance with law, regulations and ethical requirements; and

►►    Findings on inspections of banks are shared with the supervisor.



Role of bank audit committees
An audit committee is “a specialized committee established by the board, the mandate, scope and
working procedures for which are set out in a charter or other instrument.”22


Banks are required to have an audit committee in most jurisdictions
A total of 88% of European supervisors report that banks are required to have an audit committee or
body performing an equivalent function. This is also the case for all REPARIS supervisors and 75% of
STAREP supervisors. In most jurisdictions, this is already a legal requirement but in some it is currently
more of a common practice than a statutory obligation. This requirement is sometimes detailed in a
Corporate Governance Code.

The survey reveals that audit committees are required for:

►►    All banks; or

►►    Banks with securities admitted to trading on a regulated market; and/or

►►    Banks exceeding special size criteria (i.e. size of the balance sheet, profit, number of employees)



                    Percentage of jurisdictions requiring banks to have an audit committee:




Audit committees can play a crucial role in promoting and contributing to high-quality bank external
audits through constructive communication with external auditors and effective oversight of the external
audit process. It is their responsibility to create an atmosphere in which the bank’s management
and external auditors communicate openly and transparently, with mutual respect, by fostering open
discussions and relevant exchanges of information between parties.




22
     External audits of banks, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), 2014.
                                                                                                             69
The audit committee must comply with specific criteria regarding the composition and the expertise
of its members. There are two essential features to be taken into account: independence and technical
competence.




         Example 2: Criteria regarding the composition of an audit committee in the FYR of
                                            Macedonia

       According to the Banking Law of the FYR of Macedonia, banks must establish an audit committee
       in line with the following criteria:

       ►►   The number of members must be at least five, but no more than nine;

       ►►   The majority of audit committee members should be members of the Supervisory Board,
            while the rest should be independent from the bank; and

       ►►   At least one member should be a licensed auditor.




The audit committee’s roles and responsibilities may differ depending on the jurisdiction they operate
in. Globally, however, the majority support the appointment of external auditors, review and monitor the
independence of the statutory auditors or audit firm, and evaluate the work of the external auditors.



                                         Audit committees are involved in23:




Audit committees may have additional roles, for example making recommendations to the bank’s
management or board on the scope of auditors’ intervention as well as issues of compensation, terms
of engagement and substitution or rotation. In many jurisdictions, the monitoring of the independence of
external auditors also includes the scrutiny of the provision of non-audit or auxiliary services provided
to the bank.




23
     Answers to this open-ended question have been organized based on their recurrence
                                                                                                            70
In jurisdictions including Austria, Slovenia and Moldova, audit committees monitor the effectiveness of
the risk management process, internal audit and internal control functions, and review the accounting
procedures of the bank.

According to the survey 11% of supervisors indicate that it is not compulsory for banks to have an audit
committee in their jurisdiction. In some cases banks’ administrative or supervisory boards may handle
tasks undertaken elsewhere by audit committees such as ensuring the independence of auditors and
evaluating auditors’ work, instead of establishing a separate body.



Communication with audit committees
A total of 60% of European supervisors meet with audit committees, but often not on a regular
and formal basis. Meetings can take place during on-site inspections. Only a few supervisors have
institutionalized timings for meetings with audit committees. For example, UK supervisors meet with
audit committees on a quarterly basis. Approximately half of European supervisors meet with the chair
of the audit committee when necessary.

Overall, the chair of the audit committee participates in trilateral meetings with the banking supervisor
and the external auditor in only 14% of European jurisdictions.




     “The minutes of the Audit Committee are reviewed during the supervisory
     process. Communication on audit issues is channeled through the internal
                         audit director.” - Bank of Spain


Direct exchange of information with external auditors was cited as a reason for not communicating
with audit committees.

Very few REPARIS supervisors meet with audit committees. Meetings usually occur on an exceptional
basis. However, half of REPARIS supervisors report communication with audit committees each year.
The written correspondence exchanged between audit committees and the off-site Supervision
Department of the FYR of Macedonia illustrates this effort.

All STAREP supervisors meet with audit committees, with the majority having some communication
every year. Meetings are generally held on an ad-hoc basis if the need arises and/ or during on-site
inspections.

Responses to the survey suggest that in most jurisdictions there is no specific agenda for the
communication. Instead, supervisors and audit committees exchange information as a result of
significant breaches in the internal control system or concerns that might lead to operational and
legal risks (for example, internal fraud and money laundering). Audit committees generally report the
actions undertaken by the bank’s management to banking supervisors based on findings and measures
prescribed by the supervisory authority.




                                                                                                            71
     Example 3: The supervisor’s engagement with audit committees and the AOB in the
                                     United Kingdom24



     Current engagement of the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) with audit committees
     Given audit committee responsibilities — which include monitoring of the integrity of financial
     statements and assessment of the independence, objectivity and effectiveness of the auditor
     — the PRA regularly meets the chairs of audit committees of the largest banks in roundtable
     meetings (currently three times a year). The aim of the meetings is to share observations and
     expectations on topical accounting and auditing issues as covered in the biannual bilaterals
     with auditors. In addition, the PRA also meets the individual chairs in trilaterals with auditors
     and as part of ongoing supervision.


     The PRA’s engagement with the AOB
     The PRA does not set or monitor the implementation of auditing standards but instead engages
     closely on auditing matters with the body that has these responsibilities, namely the Financial
     Reporting Council (FRC). The PRA and FRC already have a Memorandum of Understanding
     (MoU), which generally outlines the way the regulators cooperate. Under this MoU, the
     PRA gives input to the FRC’s Audit Quality Review Team (AQRT) in relation to the team’s
     identification of which audits to inspect. The PRA also engages with the AQRT on matters of
     thematic interest. In relation to each audit inspected, the FRC AQRT provides private written
     reports to the auditors, the chair of the audit committee and to the PRA when it relates to
     a PRA authorized firm. If the audit inspection indicates significant deficiencies in the audit
     of the firm, the PRA seeks to ensure that improvements are underway and deficiencies are
     being addressed.




24
  Bank of England, Prudential Regulation Authority, extract from the Engagement between external auditors and supervisors and
commencing the PRA’s disciplinary powers over external auditors and actuaries – Consultation Paper CP8/15 , February 2015.
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Pages/publications/cp/2015/cp815.aspx                                                        72
Survey findings and possible actions

          Survey findings                                        Possible actions



 Relationship between supervisors and            ►►   Signing a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
 AOBs                                                 between the AOB and the supervisory authority.
                                                      This document would detail circumstances
 Most of the supervisors have communication
                                                      in which supervisors would communicate
 lines with AOBs. The frequency of meetings
                                                      directly with the AOB on topics related to
 and communication with AOBs varies
                                                      public oversight, registration, inspections and
 depending on the jurisdictions.
                                                      investigations of external auditors of banks;

                                                 ►►   Setting up provisions for a clear mandate for
                                                      supervisors to meet the AOB on a regular and
                                                      systematic basis to discuss auditing issues in
                                                      a constructive and critical manner. This should
                                                      not prevent ad-hoc meetings.




 Audit Oversight Bodies & Quality                ►►   Requesting the implementation of the
 Assurance                                            appropriate tools, methodologies and skills for
                                                      public oversight and quality assurance agencies
 In many jurisdictions, the professional
                                                      in the respective jurisdiction. This includes on-
 organization for auditors is responsible
                                                      going training and knowledge requirements in
 for quality assurance.
                                                      IFRS and ISA as applicable.
 In the EU, a single competent authority
 will be designated to bear ultimate
 responsibility for the audit public oversight
 system (mandatory from 2016).




                                                                                                          73
         Survey findings                                         Possible actions



Audit committees                                ►►   Requesting banks to have an audit committee,
                                                     and ensuring that most members are
The role and responsibilities, as well as the
                                                     independent of the audited entity and have
capacity, of audit committees vary in the
                                                     the appropriate skills;
ECA region. In 11% of the jurisdictions audit
committees are not mandatory for banks.         ►►   Promoting the creation of a Corporate
                                                     Governance Code which, inter alia, sets out the
                                                     role and responsibilities of audit committees;

                                                ►►   Meeting with chairs of audit committees of
                                                     SIBs;

                                                ►►   Discussing relevant experience with the audit
                                                     committee regarding interaction with external
                                                     auditors in the context of the supervision of
                                                     the bank.




                                                                                                       74
         Summary of the proposed
                  policy actions
                  Insight 1 - External audit in banks:
     Auditors’ work does contribute to the effective
                                 supervision of banks
Capacity of supervisors
Survey findings
Supervisors face capacity constraints in terms of staffing and accounting and auditing training.

Supervisors do not always have a good understanding of what an external audit consists of and how
they can rely on auditors’ work.


Possible actions
►►   Providing on-going training on ISA and IFRS to staff at the supervisory authority.




Duty and right to report
Survey findings
External auditors do not always have the statutory duty to disclose significant findings and fraud
encountered during the course of their audit (statutory duty to report).

Furthermore, not all the jurisdictions provide “safe haven” rules for auditors when reporting matters
to supervisors that do not give rise to a statutory duty to report but may, nevertheless, be relevant
to the supervisor’s exercise of his/her functions (right to report).


Possible actions
►►   Updating regulations to include examples of instances and events when external auditors must
     report bank-specific information directly to supervisors (statutory duty to report). Examples may
     include when external auditors detect significant findings, fraud or going concern issues during the
     course of the audit or when management uses significant accounting judgment which materially
     affects the bank’s results and position;

►►   Creating “safe haven” rules to allow auditors to share bank-specific information with the supervisors
     on matters that fall outside the scope of the duty to report if communicated in good faith, and if
     reasonably believed to be relevant to the supervisor in order to conduct his/her functions (right
     to report).

►►   For matters that give rise to the right to report, it is normally appropriate for the auditor to request
     in writing that those charged with governance in the bank bring these matters to the attention of
     the supervisor. If those charged with governance fail to inform the supervisor of the matters in a         75
     timely manner, the auditor shall report them directly to the supervisor;

►►   Requesting access to documents supporting the audit findings regarding identified or suspected
     non-compliance with laws and regulations, going concern issues, key risks faced by the bank in the
     short-term and medium-term, and areas when judgment and assumptions are used by management.
     In general, supervisors should be able to access any type of audit information that they judge
     relevant to the supervision of the bank. Documents could include minutes of discussions held with
     management and those in charge of governance, audit committee minutes, audit working papers, etc;

►►   Referring to the guidelines proposed by the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants’
     (IESBA) in its recent exposure draft. These guidelines specify how external auditors should respond
     to some proven or alleged cases of non-compliance with laws and regulations (NOCLAR).25




Extent of use of external auditors
Survey findings
About 70% of supervisors can ask external auditors to perform additional tasks outside the scope of
the audit.


Possible actions
►►   Exchanging information with the external auditors on a continuous basis and before planning the
     statutory audit. This would help supervisors and external auditors to establish jointly which additional
     work the external auditors would be required to perform outside the scope of the statutory audit.




Long-Form Audit Report
Survey findings
Currently, very few supervisors request a Long-Form Audit Report (LFAR) from external auditors.


Possible actions
►►   Requesting external auditors to prepare an annual LFAR for Domestic Systemically Important Banks
     (SIBs). This would include details of the audit methodology and its limitations and key findings on
     the going concern or key risks faced by the bank, and additional appropriate information (e.g.
     recommended remedial actions);

►►   The LFAR should be submitted on a timely basis to the supervisors to enable them to take appropriate
     action in due time;

►►   The scope and content of the LFAR should be flexible to reflect changes within the banking sector
     and within the bank and should be discussed between the auditors and the supervisors;

►►   Establishing together with auditors a list of specific financial reporting issues to be covered in the
     LFAR, based on the risk profile of the bank and its business model;

►►   Conducting face-to-face discussions with the external auditors, the bank’s management, the chair



25
  International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants, Responding to Non-Compliance with Laws and Regulations, May 2015.
http://www.ifac.org/system/files/publications/files/IESBA-Non-Compliance-with-Laws-Regulations-Exposure-Draft.pdf           76
     of both the audit committee and the risk committee in order to gain a detailed understanding of
     the key findings and issues highlighted in the LFAR with a view to finding timely and appropriate
     remedial actions.




        Insight 2 - Channels of communication:
Supervisors could engage more effectively with
                               external auditors
Proportionate risk-based approach
Survey findings
About half of the supervisors use a proportionate risk-based approach when communicating with
external auditors.


Possible actions
►►   Developing formal criteria to define SIBs and set up a clear process for systematic and regular
     interactions and communication with their external auditors;

►►   Engaging with external auditors to obtain sufficient information about the audit process and audit
     findings in a timely manner to assist the supervisory process;

►►   Conducting systematic one-on-one meetings with the chairman of the audit committee of each
     bank in a structured manner with a clear and relevant agenda, and clearly identified outcomes
     and follow-up actions.




Timing and frequency of communication with
external auditors
Survey findings
Sixty-two percent of the supervisors communicate with external auditors after the audit opinion has
been issued. Most supervisors meet external auditors on an ad-hoc basis when required. Some also
hold regular meetings with auditors.


Possible actions
►►   Building a constructive and effective relationship with external auditors by setting up a joint
     framework of engagement that will include the terms and scope of communication and interaction
     in a systematic, frequent and timely manner;

►►   Meeting and exchanging information with the external auditors formally, informally or on an ad-hoc
     basis to avoid routine meetings and focus on current and medium term risks and issues that may
     affect the banking sector and the bank;

►►   The exchange of information should be regular and flexible to discuss material and relevant risks
     and events during and after the audit and should take place in addition to pre-scheduled meetings
     among the supervisors, the bank and the external auditors;
                                                                                                          77
►►   The exchange of information should be part of, and embedded in the supervisory process rather
     than just an additional item on the checklist of the supervisor. It should be conducted in a structured
     manner, with a relevant agenda and clearly identified outcomes and follow-up actions.




Channels of communication
Survey findings
Generally, supervisors either use formal channels or an equal mix of both formal and informal channels
when communicating with external auditors.


Possible actions
►►   Using as applicable:

     ►►   Formal (meetings with external auditors with or without the bank under supervision, meetings
          with external auditors and the chair of the audit committee) and informal channels (telephone
          calls, emails etc.);

     ►►   Oral (meetings, calls, etc.) and written communication (official letters, exchange of a Long-Form
          Audit Report, etc.);

     ►►   Ad-hoc meetings and meetings with predefined timing; regular contact will slowly help build
          open cooperation based on trust;

     ►►   The primary relationship holders, namely the audit firm partner and the supervisor team leader.
          Other colleagues and staff of their respective teams and/or experts should also be involved in
          the communication and exchange of information process at the working levels.




Feedback process
Survey findings
Eighty-six percent of supervisors do not have a feedback system for assessing the quality of the
relationship with external auditors.


Possible actions
►►   Setting up a formal feedback process within the supervisory authority which may include an
     anonymous survey sent to supervisors who take part in the meetings with external auditors to assess
     the quality of the meetings and relationships between the supervisors and the external auditors.

►►   The feedback should assess the limits of the relationship and areas of improvements such as
     increasing the frequency of meetings, exchanging more pertinent information and discussing more
     specific issues relevant to the bank rather than focusing on high level and general issues on a
     routine basis with no added value to the supervisory process.




                                                                                                               78
                     Insight 3 - Topics of mutual interest:
             External auditors could contribute more on
                 specific areas of interest to supervisors
Audit planning and process
Survey findings
Few supervisors discuss the audit strategy and plan with external auditors. Changes in those plans
are not systematically communicated to supervisors.


Possible actions
►►   Meeting with external auditors during the planning stage to discuss specific areas within the scope
     or outside the scope of the audit which regulators would like them to focus on during the course
     of the audit;

►►   Exchanging information and findings identified during and after the audit for the current and previous
     financial year and discussing whether or not they are in line with the expectations of external
     auditors and supervisors;

►►   Using the audit strategy and plan as input to the supervisory work plan;

►►   Discussing the audit plan and strategy specifically with external auditors of SIBs. The external
     auditors should share the audit plan and strategy with supervisors upon request.




Accounting policies
Survey findings
Loan valuation and loan loss provisioning, and more generally the bank’s asset valuation, and the
effectiveness of financial controls were topics of particular interest for supervisors to discuss with
external auditors.


Possible actions
►►   Discussing with external auditors the processes to obtain a detailed understanding of internal
     controls and assumptions used in the valuation process to ensure that supervisors can critically
     assess whether they are relevant, reliable and are being used consistently by the bank;

►►   Requesting adequate independent validation and verification of the valuation framework and
     controlling procedures by either internal or external experts;

►►   Holding discussions with external auditors to obtain a clear understanding of the impairment charges
     and other credit risk provisions in order to assess the charges and the provisions in a critical manner.




Prudential returns
Survey findings
Reconciliation between prudential capital elements and audited financial statements is often not subject
to an audit. Prudential returns are often not reviewed by auditors.                                             79
Possible actions
►►   Requesting external auditors to review the reconciliation of prudential own funds with accounting
     capital;

►►   Requesting external auditors to review and assess banks’ internal controls for preparing the
     prudential returns in the regulatory reporting system;

►►   Requiring external auditors to report to supervisors in a timely manner when weaknesses or
     breaches have been identified.




                Insight 4 - Supervisors’ input to audits:
         Supervisors do contribute to enhanced audit
                                                  quality
Information sharing from supervisors to external
auditors
Survey findings
Confidentiality rules can prevent supervisors from sharing information with external auditors, which
can have negative impacts on the supervision of banks.


Possible actions
►►   Creating “gateway” rules to allow the sharing of information with external auditors. This information
     can be bank specific, industry specific and related to current and emerging risks. The objective is to
     help auditors conduct a better quality audit and which, in turn, could contribute to the supervisory
     process.




Appointment of external auditors of banks
Survey findings
Responses show that most supervisors have some form of oversight responsibility over the appointment
of external auditors (i.e. the right to pre-select, approve/remove or to commission an independent audit).


Possible actions
►►   Setting up a principles-based framework in line with international best practices for the selection,
     appointment and removal of external auditors;

►►   Ensuring that the process for the selection and appointment of external auditors is fair, objective,
     transparent, independent of the bank’s management, and well documented;

►►   Encouraging the appointment of external auditors who are able and willing to develop good working
     relationships and dialogue with supervisors;

►►   Reviewing and monitoring regularly the conditions of an external auditor’s appointment to ensure
     the two previous conditions are adhered to.
                                                                                                              80
Audit firm rotation
Survey findings
Results show that mandatory audit firm rotations are scarce while the majority of supervisors currently
enforce compulsory key audit partner rotations.


Possible actions
►►   Setting up a framework for the rotation of external auditors in line with international best practices to
     ensure independence and avoid a conflict of interest. According to the Basel Committee on Banking
     Supervision Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision, the supervisor determines whether
     banks rotate their external auditors (either the firm or individuals within the firm) from time to time;

►►   Requesting that the appropriate criteria have been used to select the key audit partner by the
     relevant parties;

►►   Continuously monitoring audit quality especially during transition periods.




Audit retendering
Survey findings
In most jurisdictions, the same external auditor can be reappointed without going through a mandatory
tender process.


Possible actions
►►   Reviewing the retendering process on a regular basis and ensuring that there is a clear policy
     for retendering and clear, well-documented criteria for selection, and transparency regarding
     reappointment.




                   Insight 5 - Other communications:
        Effective communication between audit and
           banking supervisors and audit committees
                           does improve audit quality
Relationship between supervisors and AOBs
Survey findings
Most of the supervisors have communication lines with AOBs. The frequency of meetings and
communication with AOBs varies depending on the jurisdictions.


Possible actions
►►   Signing a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the AOB and the supervisory authority.
     This document would detail circumstances in which supervisors would communicate directly with
     the AOB on topics related to public oversight, registration, inspections and investigations of external
                                                                                                                 81
     auditors of banks;

►►   Setting up provisions for a clear mandate for supervisors to meet the AOB on a regular and
     systematic basis to discuss auditing issues in a constructive and critical manner. This should not
     prevent ad-hoc meetings.




Audit Oversight Bodies & Quality Assurance
Survey findings
In many jurisdictions, the professional organization for auditors is responsible for quality assurance.

In the EU, a single competent authority will be designated to bear ultimate responsibility for the audit
public oversight system (mandatory from 2016).


Possible actions
►►   Requesting the implementation of the appropriate tools, methodologies and skills for public oversight
     and quality assurance agencies in the respective jurisdiction. This includes on-going training and
     knowledge requirements in IFRS and ISA, as applicable.




Audit committees
Survey findings
The role and responsibilities, as well as the capacity, of audit committees vary in the ECA region. In
11% of the jurisdictions audit committees are not mandatory for banks.


Possible actions
►►   Requesting banks to have an audit committee, and ensuring that most members are independent
     of the audited entity and have the appropriate skills;

►►   Promoting the creation of a Corporate Governance Code which, inter alia, sets out the role and
     responsibilities of audit committees;

►►   Meeting with chairs of audit committees of SIBs;

►►   Discussing relevant experience with the audit committee regarding interaction with external auditors
     in the context of the supervision of the bank.




                                                                                                             82
                                            About the CFRR
The Centre for Financial Reporting Reform (CFRR) located in Vienna, Austria, is part of the World
Bank’s Governance Global Practice and is responsible for the World Bank‘s corporate sector financial
reporting activities in Europe and Central Asia.

The Centre helps client countries build strong accounting, reporting, and auditing practices, which
bring sustainable and equitable private sector-led growth, strengthened governance and accountability.
The CFRR provides knowledge services including analytical and advisory services; learning and skill
development; know-how and knowledge transfer; and technical assistance to strengthen existing
institutions.

Activities of the centre are focused on four areas of expertise: i) raising awareness of the importance
of the corporate financial reporting reform agenda and contributing to legislative reform; ii) building
institutional capacities by addressing knowledge gaps and offering tailored advice in areas such as public
oversight and standards; iii) encouraging strong and engaged professional accountancy organizations;
and iv) promoting the development of internationally compatible accounting education.

The CFRR organizes specific knowledge sharing activities for supervisors such as the Executive IFRS
workshop, distant learning events and other publications.




                                                   Centre for Financial Reporting Reform
                                                   Governance Global Practice
                                                   The World Bank
                                                   Praterstrasse 31
                                                   1020 Vienna – Austria
                                                   T: +43 (0)1 2170-700
                                                   F: +43 (0)1 2170-701
                                                   cfrr@worldbank.org
                                                   www.worldbank.org/cfrr




                                                                                                             83
84
