CASE STUDY

Education Within Reach of All
UNIMINUTO: Bringing Entrepreneurship, Innovation and
Jobs to Marginalized Communities in Colombia through
Tertiary Education

April 2015
ABOUT IFC
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution focused exclusively on leveraging
the power of the private sector to tackle the world’s most pressing development challenges. Working with private
enterprises in more than 100 countries, IFC uses its capital, expertise and influence to help eliminate extreme poverty
and promote shared prosperity.

ABOUT THE CASE STUDY
Expanding access to quality and affordable education is a central element to eliminate poverty and reduce inequality. In
developing countries, private education providers play a critical role in the delivery of education, skills, and training that
is affordable and relevant to the needs of the labor markets. The IFC education practice is developing four case studies
that showcase success stories in the IFC education portfolio around scale, skills, affordability, and innovation. The case
studies highlight how IFC clients have contributed to meeting IFC’s strategic goals in education of: (1) developing skills
and enhancing employability of graduates and trainees and (2) increasing reach and impact at all levels of education. 

WRITTEN BY
This case study was written by Ann M. Casanova with input from Salah-Eddine Kandri, Mohammed Ali Khan and
Carolina Valenzuela. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A special note of appreciation is extended to UNIMINUTO for sharing details of their experience particularly: Leonidas
Lopez Herrán, Rector General, Sonia Durán Martínez, Director of Planning and Development and Andrés Mosquera,
Coordinator of Business Intelligence and Statistics, Astrid González Haddad, Manager of COOP-UNIMINUTO and
José Vicente Bernal, Advisor of the General Administrative and Financial Vice Rectory.  The author is grateful for the
many insights provided by Santiago Descarrega and IFC and World Bank colleagues who participated in the interviews. 
Special thanks to Irina Sarchenko who facilitated the publication process. 

DISCLAIMER
The findings, interpretations, views and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) or of the World Bank or the
governments they represent.  While IFC believes that the information provided is accurate, the information is provided on
a strictly “as-is” basis, without assurance or representation of any kind.  IFC may not require all or any of the described
practices in its own investments, and in its sole discretion may not agree to finance or assist companies or projects that
adhere to those practices.  Any such practices or proposed practices would be evaluated by IFC on a case-by-case basis
with due regard for the particular circumstances of the project.

RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
© International Finance Corporation 2015. All rights reserved.

The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law.




Design: The Word Express, Inc.
Table of Contents

UNIMINUTO: Changing Lives	                                        1

Country Context	                                                  7

Humble Beginnings in the Outskirts of Bogota	                     9

A Flexible Business Model Is Also a Successful Business Model	   13

Impressive Growth: The Business Trajectory and Key Milestones	   19

Focus on Selected Innovations that Laid the Foundations
for Impressive Growth	                                           23

The Role of IFC	                                                 29

The Future for UNIMINUTO	                                        33

Replicability in Other Markets	                                  35

Conclusion	                                                      39

Questions for Discussion	                                        41

Annexes	                                                         45
iv | Education Within Reach of All
UNIMINUTO: Changing Lives


Jairo Alexander was 35 years old with limited prospects for well compensated employment. He found an opportunity
to obtain a quality, low cost, university education at UNIMINUTO that changed his life. Even on his low wages,
he paid his monthly tuition, on occasion with post-dated checks, and he was ultimately able to pay his university
education over 6 years. After graduation, he worked as an auxiliary engineer and went on to successfully create a
construction business that includes a sustainable financial plan, a social development component and high quality
buildings. The first building he constructed on his own was a 400m2 building situated on UNIMINUTO’s campus.
He went on to grow his business to an average construction size of 10,000m2 per year, generating new quality
employment opportunities in his community.1

How did UNIMINUTO help Jairo, and thousands like him facing
adversity, access quality tertiary education and thus transform their
                                                                                              Jairo Alexander supervises
lives? Ana Matilde, a professor at one of the Regional Centers for
Tertiary Education (CERES), explains: “We are preparing students
                                                                                              an employee at a
to have an entrepreneurial mindset so that they can create, innovate                          construction site.
and generate new sources of jobs.”2

UNIMINUTO is a private, non-profit, Catholic university in Colombia
that welcomes students from all walks of life. It is a part of the broader
“Minute of God Organization” which, through its “Comprehensive
Development” philosophy, facilitates increased human dignity by
improving the spiritual and living conditions of people living in vulnerable
situations. The University offers more than 100 academic programs at
different levels, ranging from technical to post-graduate. It has been
successful in its mission to reach students who find it difficult to access
tertiary education because of financial or geographical constraints
and it has achieved its mission in a financially sustainable way.
                                                                                              Main Campus: The San Juan
In only 22 years, UNIMINUTO has expanded to 56 physical campuses
                                                                                              Eudes Building in Bogota
and it provides nationwide coverage through its distance programs.
(See Figure 1). By mid-2014, 85 percent of UNIMINUTO’s students
                                                                                              was financed by IFC.
were outside Bogota. As a result of its bricks and clicks delivery
channels, UNIMINUTO is now the largest University in Colombia.

Between 1992 and 2014, UNIMINUTO experienced record breaking
enrollment growth from 221 to 102,014 students. In the last five
years, UNIMINUTO has grown at an annual growth rate of 24
percent, substantially above the 5 percent average growth rate of
other universities in Colombia. IFC played a catalytic role in the
rapid growth of UNIMINUTO with a loan in 2009 that helped
expand infrastructure, upgrade technology and maintain high quality.

1    UNIMINUTO video. Changing Lives. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kHwnosdoANo&feature=youtu.be
2    Id.

                                                                                                      Education Within Reach of All | 1
FIGURE 1. MAP OF UNIMINUTO’S NATIONAL FOOTPRINT




                                    * Higher Education Institution Partner



2 | Education Within Reach of All
Through an innovative approach that is flexible, high quality, affordable and is partnership driven, UNIMINUTO
has helped low income students access tertiary education by eliminating the barriers that would otherwise have
made it unattainable.

•	 Flexible: UNIMINUTO brings education to where students live, ranging from major cities to rugged, remote
   parts of Colombia, in jungles, mountains and along the coast. They offer a diversified range of academic
   offerings at different levels: technical, technological, undergraduate, postgraduate and continuing education.
   UNIMINUTO offers a “blended learning model,” through its distance program, so that students with busy
   schedules can take virtual courses and can fit in periodic face to face classes in the evenings and on weekends.3

•	 High Quality: The University equips students with an “integral,’’ or a well-rounded education, that combines
   theory and practice and imbues students with a moral compass that is grounded in a strong sense of social
   responsibility. They have designed academic programs that are highly relevant to the needs of the region and
   are geared towards finding rapid employment after graduation. UNIMINUTO has developed a method to
   ensure that a high level of academic and administrative quality
   is deployed consistently across the entire university network,
   while preserving sufficient flexibility to address the specific needs
   of local communities. They bring value to the degrees students         Students receiving
   earn through a high quality brand. The Ministry of Education           financial aid advice at
   has certified eight academic programs as having achieved high
                                                                          COOP-UNIMINUTO.
   quality status (and the University expects to achieve high quality
   institutional accreditation in 2015).

•	 Affordable: The University helps students pay with a wide range
   of options. It provides highly competitive tuition rates that are
   adapted, through different discounts, to the economic capacity
   of each region, taking into consideration the earning capacity of
   students to pay tuition in each location. In addition, tuition for
   specific academic programs are also discounted differently on a
   regional basis. It provides academic and need based scholarships.
   The student loan program consists of short term loans through a
   unique “Co-operative” that is affiliated with the University. The
   Co-operative also offers students a monthly payment option to pay down the loan while students are enrolled.
   Long term loans are offered by the federal government and through private banks. As a result of these financial
   aid options, UNIMINUTO helps solve the problem of how to pay for a university education. Between 2007 and
   2014, 43 percent of students received student loans from the Co-operative with an average loan of US$1,100
   per student per year. The average cost of tuition is US$1,431 per year.

•	 Partnerships: UNIMINUTO leverages regional and national partnerships to achieve its goals. The support of public
   and private sector partners has been invaluable in multiple ways such as: sharing space for classes, developing
   the curriculum to increase employability in the productive sector, financing tuition and even incentivizing
   academic staff.




3 UNIMINUTO Development Plan 2013–2019, pg 86.
4 As of December 31, 2014, there were 88,467 students enrolled in technical professional, technological, undergraduate and postgraduate programs. The
graduation rate refers to this pool of students.
5 Labor Observatory for Education 2001–2013. Ministry of National Education http://redes.colombiaaprende.edu.co/ntg/men/Observatorio/index.htm.




                                                                                                               Education Within Reach of All | 3
These key elements have led UNIMINUTO’s 22,000 alumni4 to enjoy an employment rate of 82 percent within
6 months of graduation, above the 79 percent average for national universities.5 Quite a remarkable feat, when
taking into consideration that 98 percent of the student population comes from the lowest three strata (out of
six) of the Colombian socio-economic classification system.6,7 In many cases, the students are the first in their
families to attend university. As further evidence of their inclusive business model, an impressive 70 percent of
UNIMINUTO students are female.

As of 2013, approximately 2 million students were enrolled in the 286 institutions of higher education in Colombia.8
However, with a population of 4.3 million between the ages of 12–21,9 the demand for tertiary education is
much greater. “Current estimates indicate that 3.2 million secondary-school graduates do not go on to tertiary
education—not for lack of ability, but for lack of opportunity.”10 UNIMINUTO has successfully developed a formula
for the private sector to service pent up demand for increased economic opportunities in neglected communities.
Without UNIMINUTO, 100,000 students11 would not have had the opportunity to pursue a tertiary education
degree, a vocational education certificate or a diploma of extension course.

UNIMINUTO has achieved these outcomes through a financially sustainable model and today manages a healthy
surplus, proving that it is financially feasible to provide tertiary education services to Colombians at the Base of
the Pyramid (BoP).




6  The Colombian government manages an official socio-economic classification for households based on location, the quality of housing characteristics and
its surrounding environment. This stratification is used as a proxy for income and yields certain financial benefits for lower levels or social responsibilities
for higher levels. There are 6 levels: 1) Low–Low, 2) Low, 3) Middle–Low, 4) Middle, 5) Middle–High, 6) High. For additional information see: https://www.
dane.gov.co/index.php/estratificacion-socioeconomica/generalidades
7 UNIMINUTO Report to IFC. July 2014.

8 SNIES. Ministry of Education. Higher Education Statistics, Sector Development Office. December 31, 2013.

9 Id. Quoting SNIES and DANE. (based on the 2005 Census).

10 Wharton. “Education in Colombia: Is There a Role for the Private Sector?” January 2, 2013. http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/education-in-

colombia-is-there-a-role-for-the-private-sector/.
11 This figure includes technical, technological, undergraduate, postgraduate, continuing education and “articulation”—technical preparatory courses

for high school students.

4 | Education Within Reach of All
6 | Education Within Reach of All
Country Context


Colombia is an upper middle income country in South America and is the third largest economy in Latin America,
following Mexico and Brazil. It has a population of 49 million (2014) and a GDP of US$378 billion (2013).12
Modern day Colombian history has been marked by four decades of armed conflict, fueled largely by political
violence and drug cartels controlling remote parts of Colombia. The
government has made substantial progress in reclaiming territory and
peace talks are yielding increased security and hope for Colombia,
allowing for greater economic productivity.                             UNIMINUTO serves
                                                                                                  students from densely
In 2013, the labor force was 24 million, of which 42 percent were                                 populated cities to remote
represented by women. 66 percent of the population was in the
                                                                                                  villages on the edge of the
economically active range between ages 15 and 64. The unemployment
                                                                                                  Amazon.
rate reached a low of 7.7 percent in November 2014, down from a
peak of 17.9 percent in January 2002. Notwithstanding the downward
trend in the unemployment rate, the National Development Plan
for 2011–2014 estimated that in 2009, 60 percent of workers were
in the informal sector, where income rates are lower and taxes are
rarely paid.13 Although poverty has been reduced, Colombia has a
Gini coefficient of 0.578, placing the country’s inequality gap on par
with Haiti, Angola and South Africa, even though the Colombian
GDP per capita is substantially higher.14

As of 2011, total education expenditure in Colombia was 7.6
percent of GDP of which 2 percent was allocated to financing public
tertiary education.15 Comparatively, Colombia has invested more in
total education and tertiary education in 2008 (7 percent and 1.9
percent, respectively) than the OECD average (5.9 percent and 1.5
percent) and in most Latin American (5.6 percent and 1.3 percent)
countries.16 75 percent of the population lives in urban centers and
this dynamic contributes to the high national literacy rate which
was at 94 percent in 2011. Literacy rates are higher in urban areas
where quality education is better but in rural Colombia, illiteracy
rates can be as high as 20 percent.

UNIMINUTO goes beyond the major cities and provides services to rural populations, where public tertiary
education is sometimes non-existent. Thus, the government sees UNIMINUTO as a strategic partner for achieving
national coverage goals with quality.



12 World Bank country data. http://data.worldbank.org/country/colombia#cp_wdi.
13 OECD/International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank (2012), Reviews of National Policies for Education: Tertiary Education in
Colombia 2012, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1787/9789264180697-en pg 23.
14 Id at pg 23.

15 Id at pg 262.

16 Id at pg 262.




                                                                                                                Education Within Reach of All | 7
“We want to offer the country a university where the next generation of youth in Colombia are formed, who are
prepared to guide the country through the causes of honesty, progress and work that it needs”
                                                                                     — Rafael García Herreros




      8 | Education Within Reach of All
Humble Beginnings in the Outskirts of Bogota


Father Rafael García-Herreros, a Catholic priest of the Eudist
religious order, began a radio program in 1946 called “La Hora de
                                                                                                    Father Rafael García
Dios” (“The Hour of God”). By 1955, television was becoming an
                                                                                                    Herreros promoted
important communication medium and he invented a one minute
national broadcast where he spoke about God, humankind and                                         “comprehensive
country. The TV program, titled “Minute of God,” has been running                                   development” in the Minute
continuously for 60 years. As a result of the broadcasts, “Minute                                   of God neighborhood.
of God” became a nationally recognized brand that is well known
by the majority of Colombians.

Father Rafael García-Herreros was committed to the teachings of Pope
Paul VI that promoted the “Comprehensive Development” of human
beings and thus he sought to transform the lives of people living in
less dignified human conditions, to help them rise from poverty and
transition to more dignified human conditions.17 This vocation led
him to found the Minute of God Organization in 1958.18 Today, the
organization encompasses 9 different entities, including UNIMINUTO,
all of which seek the “Comprehensive Development” of people living
in vulnerable conditions. Today, Father Diego Jaramillo is the President and also the Chairman of the Council of
Founders of UNIMINUTO.

In the mid 1950’s, Father Rafael García-Herreros began his works of charity by building low income housing in
the impoverished neighborhoods of Bogota. He wanted to bring dignity to people’s lives and founded the “Barrio
Minuto de Dios” (“Minute of God Neighborhood”), which over time incorporated a church, day care, schools
from primary through high school, health services, microenterprise development support and job training for
entrepreneurs in the productive sector. The neighborhood concept was so successful that it was considered a model
for the eradication of poverty by the Inter-American Development Bank.19

When the first students in the neighborhood finished primary school in 1962, there was talk about the need to
establish a University in the neighborhood. It took 30 years to realize that dream.

In 1989, Father Rafael García-Herreros shared his vision of the future University on his national television program:
“El Minuto de Dios” when he told the Colombian nation: “It will be a different University with great purposes,
with philosophical and scientific methods, that is the synthesis of modern thinking about the future city ... We
are going to mold the young dreamers of Colombia, who will be capable of bringing an entirely new direction to



17 “Encyclical of Pope Paul VI on the Development of Peoples,” Populorum Progressio, March 26, 1967. Note that comprehensive development is related
to economic conditions but involves additional variables such as: changing mentality, tradition, environment and socio-economic conditions.
18 Today, the Minute of God Organization, through its various entities provides a wide range of social services such as: housing opportunities, preschool,

primary, secondary and tertiary education and education for work and human development, promoting and spreading the Gospel through the charismatic
renewal, research, development and technology transfer for sustainable agriculture, comprehensive training and technological development to enhance
the industrial capacity of the country, financing services, fundraising, television services to spread the Christian message and comprehensive care to
people affected by HIV/AIDS.
19 Padre Rafael García Herreros Biography. http://www.minutodedios.org/index.php/quienes-somos pg. 4.




                                                                                                                  Education Within Reach of All | 9
the country, to guide the Republic on the new roads she craves and
needs ... We want to offer the country a university where the next
                                                                                                   UNIMINUTO’s inclusive
generation of youth in Colombia are formed, who are prepared to
                                                                                                   model welcomes everyone.
guide the country through the causes of honesty, progress and work
that it needs.”20

In 1989, Corporación Universitaria Minuto de Dios (“Minute of
God University Corporation”) (“UNIMINUTO”) was founded as a
non-profit corporation21 with a mission that is inspired by the social
beliefs of the Church and the charisma of the “Minute of God”
brand. Its mission statement establishes the following objectives:
“Provide tertiary education of an excellent quality that is relevant,
with a preferential option for those who do not have opportunities to
access it, through an innovative, comprehensive and flexible model;
Form excellent human beings, competent professionals, ethically
oriented and committed to social transformation and sustainable
development; Contribute, with our commitment and our testimony,
to building a society that is fraternal, just, has reconciled the past
and is at peace.”




  “Words to Colombia” from Father Rafael Garcia Herreros “El Minuto de Dios” television segment September 2, 1989.
20 

  On August 31, 1989, the Corporation El Minuto de Dios, the charismatic Minuto de Dios Center and the Congregation of Jesus and Mary, CJM, incorporated
21 

the Minuto de Dios University Corporation.

10 | Education Within Reach of All
12 | Education Within Reach of All
A Flexible Business Model Is Also a
Successful Business Model


In the late 1990’s, Colombia was facing a financial crisis and hundreds
of people lost their homes including parents of students and partners
                                                                                                   A student living in a remote
of UNIMINUTO. This crisis led to a grave situation with students
withdrawing from the institution and staff facing financial problems.                              mountainous region of
1999 was the only year in the university’s history that there was a drop                           Colombia leverages the
in student enrollment. During these difficult times, UNIMINUTO’s                                   distance program to access
challenge was to broaden coverage, at low prices and with guaranteed                               tertiary education.
quality. UNIMINUTO was operating at a breakeven level and the
model was not sustainable over the long term. The crisis was a major
turning point for the University and a new financial model was
adopted that emphasized austerity and that controlled fixed costs
and investment expenses related to student enrollment.

Today, UNIMINUTO’s financial position is strong with cumulative
revenues increasing annually. Growth is attributed to the enrollment
of 24,014 new students between June 2013 and June 2014. As
of June 2014, UNIMINUTO had liquid assets valued at US$53
million. It has no outstanding debt other than roughly US$4 million
due to IFC. As a non-profit, it is constantly reinvesting proceeds.
EBITDA22 and profit margins are at the top end of IFC’s portfolio,
above its comparables in developed countries and above its peers
in emerging markets.

UNIMINUTO’s income arises primarily from student tuition.
UNIMINUTO’s price structure is reverse engineered for each campus.
A study is conducted that assesses the local community’s ability to
pay and is balanced against operating cost requirements to establish a
tuition rate that is unique to that community. As a result, tuition rates
vary between academic programs and campuses, with higher rates
at the principal campus in Bogota where student earning potential is
higher. The higher tuition in the larger cities cross-subsidizes lower
tuition rates in rural areas, thus facilitating access.

Tuition for the distance and virtual program is lower than the face
to face program at the regional campuses. Thanks to technology
and public-private partnerships that facilitate the use of low cost




  EBITDA is an acronym for Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization. It is a measure of a company’s cash flow and allows investors
22 

to see how much money a company is making before its deductions.

                                                                                                                Education Within Reach of All | 13
infrastructure, operating costs for the distance program are lower. The distance program has allowed UNIMINUTO
to operate a low cost, high volume business which has driven its rapid growth. (See Figure 2.)




FIGURE 2. 
          GROWTH OF STUDENT POPULATION – FACE TO FACE AND DISTANCE PROGRAMS
          (1992–Q2 2014)

        120,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               100%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    102,014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              90%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           85,462
        100,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  72,079
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70%
         80,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         52,433
         60,000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               50%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                42,014
                                                                                                                                                                                                       36,558
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40%




                                                                                                                                                                                              31,116
         40,000




                                                                                                                                                                                     24,287
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30%




                                                                                                                                                                            15,978
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20%




                                                                                                                                                                   11,573
         20,000


                                                                                                                                                           7,477
                                                                                                                                                   5,580
                                                                                                                                           3,529
                                                                                                                                   2,453


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10%
                                                                               1997 1,444


                                                                                                         1999 1,507
                                                                                                                      2000 1,747
                                                                                            1998 1,537
                                                                  1996 1,314
                                                     1995 1,215
                                          1994 969
                               1993 684
                    1992 221




                0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0%
                                                                                                                                   2001
                                                                                                                                           2002
                                                                                                                                                   2003
                                                                                                                                                           2004
                                                                                                                                                                   2005
                                                                                                                                                                            2006
                                                                                                                                                                                     2007
                                                                                                                                                                                              2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2014
                                                                                                                  Estudiantes                                          % Distancia

Source: UNIMINUTO Plan de Desarrollo 2013–2019.
In Q2 2014, 59,168 of enrolled students were distance students. The figures include technical education courses open to high school
students and continuing education.




In 2014, the average cost of tuition at UNIMINUTO was US$1,431 per year, significantly lower when compared
to other Colombian universities which cost an average of US$5,000 per year.23,24 Table 1 provides average tuition
rates for 2014 broken down by academic program and by campus for 2014.



TABLE 1. AVERAGE ANNUAL TUITION RATES FOR 2014

                                                                                     Tuition                                                                                                                                   Tuition
                                                                                Principal Campus                                                                Tuition                                                  Distance and Virtual
 Academic Program                                                                   (Bogota)                                                               Regional Campuses                                                   Campus
 Technical                                                                                               n/a                                                                US$610                                                         US$636

 Technological                                                                                     US$1,638                                                                 US$722                                                         US$628

 Undergraduate                                                                                     US$1,858                                                                 US$816                                                         US$882

 Post-Graduate                                                                                     US$3,144                                                             US$2,238                                                       US$2,570
Source: UNIMINUTO Report to IFC. July 2014.




23    http://www.dinero.com/empresas/articulo/la-educacion-costos/179896.
24    The exchange rate was 2,240 on December 3, 2014. www.oanda.com.

14 | Education Within Reach of All
UNIMINUTO has carefully managed labor costs, which by year end 2013 represented 43.5 percent of gross
revenues and 57.6 percent of net revenues. The difference between gross and net revenues is made up by subsidies,
discounts and scholarships granted to students.25 Focusing on fundamentals, 73 percent of staff was academic
while 27 percent was administrative. UNIMINUTO relied on a cadre of 3,924 professors system-wide to teach
technical, technological, undergraduate, postgraduate and continuing education programs. Of the total number of
instructors 22 percent were full time, 29 percent were half time and 49 percent were part time.26 While faculty and
administrative compensation has increased to improve the quality
of their services, it has been controlled to generate efficiencies.

Leveraging partnerships has also proven cost effective to improve the
                                                                                              UNIMINUTO co-shares
quality of the cadre of professors, a key factor in obtaining high quality                    space at existing school
institutional accreditation. UNIMINUTO wanted to have a larger                                facilities in remote locations
number of professors with postgraduate degrees and partnered with                             to manage costs.
leading private universities to provide full scholarships to UNIMINUTO
professors pursuing a Master’s degree. Partnerships began initially
with Universidad de los Andes and Universidad del Rosario in Bogota.
The program has been expanded to include several international
universities, such as Instituto Tecnológico de Monterrey in Mexico and
Nova Southeastern University in the United States that have offered
support through discounts or partial scholarships. This arrangement
has proved to be a popular incentive for retaining professors. As of
August 2014, 31 percent of full time professors hold a Master’s degree
and 333 professors were participating in the program.

UNIMINUTO is very cost conscious and is skilled at leveraging
additional resources from other sources. To quickly roll out its national
expansion economically, UNIMINUTO reached agreements with
local partners to lease or borrow space at existing school facilities
for use during off peak hours such as evenings and weekends. This
innovative model has facilitated rapid expansion and avoids incurring
high infrastructure costs in remote communities, particularly where
the revenue model is untested.

UNIMINUTO has developed a series of measures aimed at preventing
drop outs, thus providing academic success for students and greater
financial stability to the University’s revenue stream. It has been
successful in reducing the dropout rate from 34 percent at its peak
in 2004 to 15 percent by the end of 2013, marginally lower than the
national dropout rate.27 It offers remedial support to address academic
deficiencies, particularly for students in regions where the quality
of secondary programs may not robustly prepare students for the
rigors of tertiary education. Support covers basic competencies such
as mathematics, reading comprehension, effective study techniques,

25 UNIMINUTO General Administrative and Financial Vice Rectory.
26 UNIMINUTO Development Plan, pg 100.
27 UNIMINUTO Report to IFC – July 2014. The methodology used by the Ministry of Education and UNIMINUTO is based on the percent of students that

dropped out after one semester.

                                                                                                          Education Within Reach of All | 15
career management, planning for life and other aspects that contribute to academic success.28 Further, UNIMINUTO
provides psychological counseling to students who need extra support in balancing their academic pursuits and
managing domestic challenges at home.

UNIMINUTO’s unique business model has given the university a competitive advantage that is essentially unchallenged
in terms of geographic reach, scale, relevant courses, quality and cost. As a result of UNIMINUTO’s pioneering
activities, it has established a first-mover advantage and has captured a significant share of the untapped market.
Although they face strong competition from other institutions in many places, they welcome it and have supported
the expansion activities of other Universities in the region (Cali and Popayán). Nevertheless, the reality is that there
is little significant competition in many regions. While they have successfully cornered the market for providing
education to the base of the pyramid, the hope is that other institutions will see similar potential opportunities in
providing education to marginalized communities.




28    Regionalization in UNIMINUTO. Headquarters, Regional Centers and CERES. 2012.

16 | Education Within Reach of All
18 | Education Within Reach of All
Impressive Growth: The Business Trajectory and Key
Milestones


In the early years, between 1992 and 2000, UNIMINUTO was in an “incubation period” and was focused on establishing
the young university that started with 220 students in the small Minute of God neighborhood in the outskirts of
Bogota. During its first eight years of operations, average annual growth was a moderate 194 new students. During
this period, UNIMINUTO began piloting the technical and technological programs at the regional level and began
to experiment with what would later become the distance program. It went on to launch the regional program with
the opening of three regional campuses.

The last 13 years have marked a period of extraordinarily rapid growth for UNIMINUTO. Between 2001 and 2014,
there were three major growth periods that represented a total growth
of nearly one hundred thousand new students. The three periods can
be separated by key milestones that contributed to the rapid growth:
(1) “the foundational period” occurred between 2001–2004 when student
                                                                          Mercedes, a student attending
enrollment grew by an average of 1,432 students per year; (2) “the        classes at a CERES campus,
expansion and consolidation period” occurred between 2005–2010            is conducting research on
when student enrollment grew by an average of 5,757 students per          medicinal plants used by
year; and (3) “the sustainable maturity period” occurred between          indigenous peoples to reclaim
2011–2014 when growth was exceptional, averaging 15,000 new               lost ancestral knowledge
students per year. (See Annex 1). This exponential growth trajectory
                                                                          and pass it on to future
exceeded IFC’s most optimistic forecasts as well.
                                                                         generations.
During the “foundational period” (2001–2004) two milestones
established a solid basis for future growth: (1) the establishment
of the Co-operative for short term loans and (2) the launch of
regional CERES campuses, which complemented UNIMINUTO’s
regional campuses. CERES are federally sponsored education
centers in the regions that are operated by different universities.
The program was launched by the Ministry of Education for
promoting access to underserved regions, expanding coverage
and improving equality. UNIMINUTO became a partner with
the Government in supporting the implementation of tertiary
education programs in the country.

The “expansion and consolidation period” (2005–2010) was
characterized by: (1) the opening of three regional campuses and
operations centers, (2) the high quality accreditation for several of
its programs, (3) the formal launch of the Virtual and Distance unit,
(4) the approval of the US$ 8 million IFC loan to expand the physical
infrastructure at three campuses, improve technology and quality
and (5) the formal transformation into a multi-campus university
system. A major administrative reorganization took place to manage

                                                                                    Education Within Reach of All | 19
rapid growth, thus ensuring that high quality standards were maintained consistently across the network and
that services would be delivered consistently and efficiently. This was also complemented in March 2008 with the
re-launch of the government long term student loans program (ICETEX).29

The third major growth era, “the sustainable maturity period” (2011–2014) was characterized by the following
milestones: (1) a change of leadership as Mr. Leonidas Lopez Herrán was appointed Rector General, (2) six operations
centers were opened, (3) the virtual and distance program grew rapidly (by the first half of 2014, 58 percent of
the student population was enrolled in distance programs), (4) the pilot for replication of their educational model
in West Africa was launched, (5) the application for high quality institutional accreditation was submitted to the
Ministry of Education, and (6) UNIMINUTO was recognized internationally for its efforts on inclusion. The
University won five awards: IFC Inclusive Business Leader Award (2011, 2012 and 2013), G20 and IFC Winner
G20 Challenge on Inclusive Business Innovation (2012) and Financial Times and IFC Sustainable Finance for
Achievement in Inclusive Business (2013).

The transformation that UNIMINUTO experienced with its record breaking growth during the 22 year trajectory,
allowed it to morph itself from a small neighborhood college to a major, multi-campus university system that has
enabled it to become the largest university in Colombia today and allows it to provide opportunities for those
who never had them before.




  The Colombian Institute for Higher Education and Technical Studies Abroad (“ICETEX”) is the government agency that provides medium to long term
29 

student loans. They received a US$300 million loan from the World Bank.

20 | Education Within Reach of All
22 | Education Within Reach of All
Focus on Selected Innovations
that Laid the Foundations for Impressive Growth


1. THE EDUCATIONAL MODEL: VALUES-BASED TERTIARY EDUCATION

A hallmark of Father García-Herreros’ philosophy, UNIMINUTO adopted a “praxeological” education model
that seeks the integral, comprehensive formation of the person that ensures the harmonious development of all
dimensions of the individual. This is achieved by integrating theory and “praxis,”30 or action, so that each student
can become a well-rounded individual ready to contribute to Colombian society.31

The foundations of this design are threefold: human development, social responsibility and professional competencies.
These three focal points stimulate the process of personal fulfillment, cognitive development and permanent
learning.32 (See Figure 3) Unlike many traditional brick and mortar institutions that focus predominantly on the
development of professional competencies, UNIMINUTO focuses on the student as a whole, leading to a more
profound, lifelong impact.



FIGURE 3. 
          UNIMINUTO EDUCATIONAL MODEL


                                               Professional
                                                                        Main focus of traditional, bricks and mortar institutions
                                              Competencies




                          Cognitive                            Research
                           Process                              Process
                                              Comprehensive
                                             Students Human
                                               Development


               Human                                                   Social                 This is where the spiritual
             Development           Process of Personal Fulﬁllment   Responsibility            footprint of Uniminuto is relevant


Source: UNIMINUTO and IFC MAS Knowledge Forum.




With the aim of carefully molding a new, values based Colombian society, UNIMINUTO established three innovative
programs: (1) “Cátedra Minuto de Dios,” (“Minute of God Professorship”) that trains faculty and employees on
UNIMINUTO values and methods, (2) “Leadership with Values,” and (3) “Life Project” that helps students chart
a course of life goals that are both career and personally oriented, which they prepare during their first year.  It
has a heavy emphasis on social responsibility.

A second element of cultivating a society with strong values emanates from the emphasis on community service.
With a view towards contributing to a lasting and stable peace, UNIMINUTO sought to form active citizens

30 Praxis is the application or use of knowledge and skills.
31 http://www.uniminuto.edu/modelo-educativo1.
32 Id.




                                                                                                  Education Within Reach of All | 23
through service. This concept of service to the community became
a focal point of the UNIMINUTO educational model and students
                                                                                                 Community service also
in all programs, including technical and technological, participate
                                                                                                 provides hands on learning
in a mandatory “learning based on service” program for 16 weeks
of community service.                                                                            opportunities.

Students engage with less fortunate communities in activities related
to their fields of study, which are part of a long term organized
service that is sponsored by the University. For example, under the
guidance of their professors, civil engineering students will provide
on-site electrical and plumbing services to low income households.
Psychology or social work students collaborate with primary schools
to provide support to children encountering domestic violence.

In the spirit of providing flexible access, UNIMINUTO utilizes a
“blended learning model.” The University leverages technology through
the distance program such that students that work part time or have
family obligations can take virtual courses at off-hours. They combine these virtual classes with face to face lessons
scheduled around work commitments—in the evenings and on weekends. This allows students to experience the
collaborative atmosphere of the classroom and receive support from professors, yet take advantage of technology
to maximize their work, study and family time. In contrast, traditional universities prefer to do business in large
cities, where it is easier to reach a greater number of students, establish infrastructure, hire adequate faculty and
establish their brand.

2. INNOVATIVE FINANCIAL SCHEMES

During the foundational period, students had been pressuring the Rector General for some time for help with
financial aid. In response, UNIMINUTO approached Banco Caja
Social, a local commercial bank that donated US$ 44,86033 of bad
debts in their portfolio. UNIMINUTO established a mini call-center
for collecting the bad debts. The University employed the students    Students can access
part time and they were able to recover 50 percent of the outstanding
                                                                      up to the full value of
debt that was used to jump start the endowment of the UNIMINUTO
                                                                      tuition per semester from
Cooperative (COOP-UNIMINUTO). This was a creative approach
to fund raising and created job opportunities.                        COOP-UNIMINUTO

COOP-UNIMINUTO is a separate legal entity from the University. With
funding from its own resources, UNIMINUTO and the Government,
COOP-UNIMINUTO provides student loans as well as personal
finance loans to members. Members can be students, family members
or faculty. Students can access up to the full value of the tuition per
semester with a repayment period of six months for undergraduate
programs and 12 months for post graduate programs at low interest
rates. Students may make monthly payments on their tuition loan
while they are enrolled in school.

33    The donation was COP$100 million. The exchange rate on December 31, 2000 was 2,229.18.
34    UNIMINUTO Cooperative. Annual Report 2013. XIII General Regular Assembly. Bogota. 20 March 2014. Pg 8.

24 | Education Within Reach of All
By year end 2013, COOP-UNIMINUTO had a base of 56,105 associates and a physical presence in 65 locations
across the nation. 2013 was the best year on record during which COOP-UNIMINUTO extended over 11 thousand
loans, valued at US$4.5 million34 per semester, or an average loan of US$500 per semester per member, equivalent
to nearly half the semester tuition fees.

3. INSTITUTIONAL EFFICIENCIES

With a multi-campus model that manages 56 sites across the nation, ensuring the consistent application of the
educational model is of critical importance to maintain high quality and protect the reputation of the brand.
Notwithstanding the location, whether a small village on the Amazon or the main campus, students can be assured
that the consistent quality of the educational program is maintained.

National coverage with a regional emphasis is achieved through a bi-directional hub and spoke model. Inputs
were received from hundreds of stakeholders across the entire university system, through a consultative
process that included local communities and partners. The process culminated in the Development Plan
2013–2019. The “General Rectory” then centralized strategy definition, policy making and curriculum
development and pushed it out to the regions, providing support with implementation. The “Rectories and
Vice Rectories” were responsible for local implementation. Through this model, professors have sufficient
autonomy to respond to local needs, with the backing of the institution. “Integrated services” provides cross
cutting back office support to the entire university system in 3 areas: academics, finance and administration
and the pastoral mission.

At UNIMINUTO “Comprehensive Quality” encompasses: talent management, academic excellence, quality
in administration and, a vocational call for serving others. The focus of the talent management prong is to
consolidate a cadre of highly qualified faculty and employees that are committed to the mission. The second prong,
academic excellence is focused on obtaining program and institutional accreditation, curriculum standardization,
pleasant teaching environment and better integration of technology. The third prong, quality in administration
ensures quality management through implementation of ISO 9001 certified processes and greater efficiencies in
information systems (SAP, Banner).  The fourth prong, responds to the mission driven mandate for service to
the community of UNIMINUTO that inspires and embeds all of the institutional activity (it includes but goes
beyond client service).



FIGURE 4. COMPREHENSIVE QUALITY AT UNIMINUTO


                                                                         Development
                                                                             Plan
       Comprehensive Quality includes:

       i.     Talent Management
       ii.    Academic Excellence                       Client                                      Self regulation
       iii.   Administrative Excellence                Services                                     Self evaluation
       iv.    A vocation of service                                     Comprehensive
                                                                           Quality
       It is implemented through 5 key initatives
       that UNIMINUTO is pursuing.
                                                    Comprehensive
                                                       Human                                           Quality
                                                     Development                                      Processes


Source: UNIMINUTO.

                                                                                       Education Within Reach of All | 25
4. REGIONALIZATION, DIVERSIFICATION OF THE ACADEMIC
OFFER AND RELEVANCE TO EMPLOYERS
                                                                           Andrés, an agricultural
To avoid a massive displacement of human capital from rural areas to       business administrator,
cities and to assure the socio-economic viability of those populations,
                                                                           recounts: “UNIMINUTO
UNIMINUTO wanted to bring superior education to the regions
                                                                           gave us the chance to study
of Colombia. UNIMINUTO began piloting regionalization in 1998
with the opening of the Bello campus with 67 students. The regional
                                                                           during the weekends. The
program began to grow organically responding to requests from              University has been very
community leaders.                                                         open to us helping with the
                                                                           academic program, offering
Through the regional work, it became apparent that it was not feasible
                                                                           specializations, providing
for all students to pursue professional degrees, given limited financial
                                                                           the scientific backing and
means, need for employment and family obligations; however, students
still sought training to become more competitive. UNIMINUTO
                                                                           giving us the ability to
needed to offer courses that were relevant for employers and in            make flexible payment
demand in the labor market. This led to three new programs: (1) the        arrangements.”
diversification of the educational offer to include 2–3 year technical
and technological programs as a first level of competency, (2) the
“Education for Employment,” program in partnership with the coffee,
rice and banana agricultural associations, and (3) the Virtual and
Distance program.

The Education for Employment program, supported by the national
and local government, is a key value proposition that distinguishes
UNIMINUTO from other universities since it designs courses, in
partnership with productive sector associations that are relevant to
the hiring needs of the local community, thereby addressing the skills
gap upfront. The associations were so pleased to be approached
that they continue to contribute enthusiastically to the technical
curriculum development through a joint committee comprised of local
sector specialists, who have expertise in production techniques and
technology and are up to date on future trends and UNIMINUTO
staff, who provide the baseline curriculum that is common across many
sectors and is then tailored to specific industry needs. (See Annex 2).

The result is a win-win solution: employers know that students are
getting training in specific areas that are in demand and students
are employable with higher caliber skill sets that are more directly
relevant to the needs of the market. This approach makes it easier
and faster to place UNIMINUTO graduates in jobs.

The growth of UNIMINUTO’s regional program is notable. By
mid-2014, 85 percent of the student population was located in the
regions. Students were enrolled in a diverse range of 72 programs
out of the 111 programs offered by the University. Regional students
participated in 38 different technical and technological programs of

26 | Education Within Reach of All
which 8 were offered through distance modality. Three of these courses have achieved high quality accreditation.
By 2014, UNIMINUTO operated 32 CERES, 7 of which have been recognized and accredited by the Ministry
of Education for excellence. In 2014, 64 percent of graduating students were from the regions. Table 2 provides
additional information on the breakdown of the academic program by delivery channel.



TABLE 2. ENROLLED STUDENTS BY DELIVERY CHANNEL

                                                     2014–1st Semester
 Program                       Face to Face      Distance Traditional         Distance Virtual            Total
 Technical Professional               251                                                                      251

 Technological                      7,392                      339                       110                7,841

 Undergraduate                    25,860                    52,959                                         78,819

 Specialization                      207                     2,338                        33                2,578

 Masters                               12                                               302                    314

 Continuing Education               2,971                                                                    2,971

 High School/“Articulación”                                                           9,240                 9,240

 Total                            36,693                   55,636                     9,685               102,014
Source: UNIMINUTO. Dec 2014.




5. THE SOCIAL INNOVATION SCIENTIFIC PARK

The ability to conduct cutting edge research often defines a University but this is not the reason why UNIMINUTO
opened the doors to the Social Innovation Scientific Park. Rather, their mission was to find concrete solutions to
global problems that frequently have a disproportionate and devastating impact on the population at the base
of the pyramid. The Social Innovation Scientific Park was launched in 2012 and is focused on three key areas of
research: (1) peace, conflict and the social dynamic, (2) environmental habitat and agro-ecology, and (3) technology,
education and culture.

The Park consolidates the experience of all the entities of the Minute of God Organization, private sector
and government partners, as well as through international alliances to provide 5 services: (1) a platform for
investigation for social innovation, (2) an incubator for social innovation projects directly in communities,
(3) an observatory that monitors and analyzes social needs, (4) a community of practice network, and (5) an
agent of dissemination. The park shares costs with external sources of funding and between 2012 and 2014,
11 projects have been funded that are valued at US$10.2 million.




                                                                                      Education Within Reach of All | 27
28 | Education Within Reach of All
The Role of IFC


By 2005, enrollment had reached 11,573 students. The pace of
growth was unsustainable without additional measures to expand
                                                                         UNIMINUTO complements
infrastructure thus external financing was necessary. At a conference
in Peru where then Rector General Father Camilo Bernal was a
                                                                         classroom lectures with on
speaker, he met Mr. Luis Funcia, a regional representative of IFC.       the job training to bridge
Interest was strong on both sides but the opportunity was not yet        the skills gap and facilitate
financially ripe. Recovering from the financial crisis and growing       rapid employment.
simultaneously had strained UNIMINUTO’s retained earnings that
reached a low of 0.6 percent in 2003. The University adopted a strict
financial regime and retained earnings grew to 6.6 percent in 2007.
They were now ready for the IFC due diligence process and the loan.

By 2008, IFC was keen to do business with UNIMINUTO as it shared
a similar developmental ethos that was consistent with IFC priorities
in education such as: (1) widening access to quality education to
underserved communities in frontier regions, (2) facilitating access
through affordable tuition fees complemented by a robust financial
support system, and (3) preparing students with relevant skills that
were in demand in the local marketplace in order to facilitate rapid
employment upon graduation.

The IFC team saw the many strengths in UNIMINUTO such as: attractive
long term growth potential, a successful and scalable business model,
with stable margins and focused on the BoP, effective and dedicated
professional leadership with vision, planning and proven execution
capacity, highly committed sponsors, buy-in from key partners ranging
from governments at all levels to the business community and close
alignment with public policy and long-term national development
goals. All these factors contributed to the approval of the loan.

The purpose of the loan was to expand the physical infrastructure
to increase student capacity in three key locations: Bogota, Soacha
and Girardot, upgrade technology infrastructure and reinforce
quality and efficiency throughout the system. An US$8 million
loan was approved in May 2009 and disbursed in local currency
on Christmas Eve.

Even before UNIMINUTO became a client, IFC imparted value to the prospective client, providing guidance on how
to reinforce financial discipline and improve its long term financial strategy and sustainability. As UNIMINUTO
became a client, IFC brought additional value to the client by helping to improve the quality and management of
Environmental and Social impacts during the construction of the educational facilities and providing guidance in


                                                                                  Education Within Reach of All | 29
improving insurance coverage. UNIMINUTO went on to adopt these
standards in the construction of additional sites. IFC’s investment
                                                                                              UNIMINUTO is transferring
enabled catalytic growth and soon after the expansion was completed,
                                                                                              its educational model to
student enrollment skyrocketed beyond all expectations.
                                                                                              students in Africa.
UNIMINUTO’s relationship with IFC is strategically important for
them, far beyond the transactional aspects of the loan agreement.
The financial position is sufficiently strong such that it could
completely prepay the loan back to IFC at any time but maintaining
the relationship with IFC is a key seal of approval, a type of “financial
accreditation.”35

UNIMINUTO is currently leveraging IFC advisory services to
implement an “Evaluation to Measure the Impact of Affordable
Higher Education on Graduates from UNIMINUTO—A Pilot”.
The objectives of the evaluation are two-fold: (i) to assess the
impacts on the quality of life and well-being of their graduates,
and (ii) to gather evidence to improve their service delivery.

The international recognition UNIMINUTO gained by being showcased as recipients of several IFC, G20 and
Financial Times awards has positioned UNIMINUTO as a strategic partner for development. 36 In the first effort
to replicate UNIMINUTO’s model internationally, IFC has provided advisory support with a feasibility study for
initial expansion efforts beginning in Côte d’Ivoire and Benin. The first cohort of students is targeted between
late 2015 and early 2016. This opportunity will provide valuable experience on how to continue expanding
and replicating the model internationally.




35    UNIMINUTO: Comprehensive Education within Reach of All. (Commemorative 20 year anniversary book). pg 58.
36    Statistical Memories 2013, pg 14.


30 | Education Within Reach of All
32 | Education Within Reach of All
The Future for UNIMINUTO


To achieve the goals established in the Development Plan 2013–201937 (emphasizing quality, community development,
coverage, sustainability, social innovation and internationalization) and following the guidelines established by
the Ministry of Education, UNIMINUTO formally launched the process of seeking institutional accreditation
in 2011. Building a culture of excellence has required the collective team effort of administrators, professors,
students, families, employers and peer university evaluators. The process of achieving institutional accreditation
involved the entire university community, 5,000 employees strong, to adopt a culture of excellence focused on
providing comprehensive quality.

This process is expected to conclude in 2015 and UNIMINUTO will be accredited by the Ministry of Education
as a “top quality” institution that covers all its locations and program offerings.




  The “MEGA” of the Development Plan is as follows: “By 2019, UNIMINUTO is recognized nationally and internationally, as an institution of tertiary education,
37 

which through its educational model that it’s inspired by Christian humanism, forms robust persons who are competent professionals and entrepreneurs that are open
to finding God and the service of humankind, who contribute to the development of their communities and an equitable society. UNIMINUTO is characterized as an
inclusive and sustainable institution, supported by a culture of high quality, with a broad educational offer and a relevant educational program, wide geographical
coverage, easy access, new technologies, that promotes social innovation and cooperation initiatives for development.”

                                                                                                                        Education Within Reach of All | 33
34 | Education Within Reach of All
Replicability in Other Markets


How can others replicate the successes of UNIMINUTO such that the base of the pyramid can be impacted globally
and exponentially? The UNIMINUTO experience would suggest several tips as highlighted in Table 5 below.




TABLE 5. UNIMINUTO REPLICABILITY TIPS IN A NUTSHELL

Mission           •	 Include in the organizational mission a philosophy that supports comprehensive human
                     development, inclusive of high academic standards, values and social responsibility that pro-
                     vides “educational inclusion” for the base of the pyramid.
                  •	 Seek to transform people’s lives from less to more dignified conditions.
                  •	 Remain committed to the mission.

Leadership        •	 Recruit leaders with entrepreneurial spirits who are driven by the social and academic mis-
                     sion to transform lives of the BoP, who have outstanding capabilities in terms of leadership,
                     vision, ethics and general management skills to implement goals, while inspiring others to
                     buy-into the mission.

Educational       •	   Adopt a comprehensive educational model that molds students for life.
Model             •	   Provide opportunities to put theory into practice (praxeology).
                  •	   Diversify the academic offer for all levels of academic formation.
                  •	   Go to where the students are and leverage distance programs, especially in locations where
                       the student population has not had access.
                  •	   Work closely with communities as co-creators of social solutions.
                  •	   Make the educational offer relevant to the local labor market and address the skills gap so
                       that students are quickly employable and can make a rapid return on their academic invest-
                       ment.
                  •	   Establish an effective retention program that provides academic and psychological support
                       to students to prevent drop outs.
                  •	   Consider research for development as a tool to overcome poverty, addressing sustainable
                       human and social development and social innovation.

Partnerships      •	 View partnerships with government, the business community and academic institutions as
                     an essential component to achieve organizational goals.
                  •	 Build partnerships with all levels of government.
                     •	 Work with the federal government to design strategies and implement policies that
                        improve access to tertiary education for underserved communities in distant locations.
                        Partner with the government to strengthen student loan programs.
                     •	 At the state and local level, partner with governments to leverage space sharing arrange-
                        ments with local schools to use existing classroom and help upgrade technological infra-
                        structure.
                  •	 At the local level, leverage partnerships with the business community and industry asso-
                     ciations to manage the skills gap by identifying employer’s needs and reverse engineer the
                     curriculum content to meet that demand. Ensure alignment of technical and technological
                     programs with the labor market to facilitate rapid insertion into the workforce.
                  •	 Formalize partnerships with organizations to provide students with practical, hands on,
                     experiential learning opportunities that provides real world job experience in the students’
                     specific area of study.
                  •	 Barter with sister universities locally and internationally for post-graduate degrees in order
                     to raise the caliber of faculty credentials at discounted rates. In exchange, offer other incen-
                     tive opportunities.

                                                                                                  (continued on next page)




                                                                                       Education Within Reach of All | 35
TABLE 5. UNIMINUTO REPLICABILITY TIPS IN A NUTSHELL                    (continued)

 Financial Aid        •	 Make tuition costs affordable and tailor made for local communities such that lifting stu-
 “Cooperative”           dents out of poverty can become a reality.
                      •	 Provide a variable mix of financial support schemes to pay for it.
                      •	 Keep to the social inclusion mission and offer student loans in locations where banks don’t.
                      •	 Open membership to the entire university community such as: students, employees, gradu-
                         ates, strategic partners and volunteers. Volume will generate seed capital through minimal
                         membership fees.
                      •	 Provide financing for short term loans with tenures linked to each semester of study. Charge
                         competitive interest rates.
                      •	 Students can opt to pre-pay without penalty based on a monthly payment plan or can pay
                         the loan off at the end of the semester.
                      •	 Consider aligning repayment periods with employer payroll and bonus cycles.
                      •	 Establish efficient processes and leverage technology to facilitate delivery. Consider mobile
                         payment platforms to facilitate student payments.
                      •	 Ensure a local presence at each campus location.
                      •	 Consider that a student loan may be the first step towards financial inclusion and that a
                         Cooperative has a role to play in facilitating financial literacy.
                      •	 Provide financial education and counseling to students and to help them make informed
                         decisions.
                      •	 Help students navigate and evaluate the different types of credit available from cooperative
                         resources, university resources, federally funded and third party sources. Play the role of loan
                         processor that helps students to file loan applications and act as a depository of student
                         information for third parties.
                      •	 Deploy a robust, multi-channel marketing plan.
                      •	 Aim to be the first choice in student loans.

 Enabling             •	 Support the government in establishing an enabling environment conducive to reaching the
 Environment             BoP, such that the obligation to develop equitable access to tertiary education as provided
                         under The United Nations International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
                         can be made a reality.
                      •	 Support the government strategy to implement expansion coverage.
                      •	 Support mechanisms for non-traditional methods of learning.
                      •	 Certify high quality accreditation and make it applicable across campuses.
                      •	 Support government sponsored and private sector student financing schemes.
                      •	 Leverage the Ministry of Education to facilitate private-public partnerships.

 Quality              •	 Build a culture of excellence.
                      •	 Enlist the support of the entire community in achieving high quality academic programs.
                      •	 Work towards institutional accreditation.
                      •	 Implement a Professor Development Plan with clear goals. Identify the type of profiles the
                         institution needs as well as the corresponding financial resources necessary to attend to a
                         diverse range of academic programs with different types, levels, and delivery channels. The
                         Plan should also respond to a wide range of productive sector needs in the different regions.
                      •	 Implement a client service model that facilitates all services to students, professors, collabo-
                         rators, graduates and other stakeholders.
                      •	 Develop a clear road map with a strategic plan that establishes an implementation plan, is
                         measurable and provides for accountability.
                      •	 Work towards maintaining quality certifications, (i.e. ISO) and increasing the number of
                         processes to be certified.

 Financial            •	 Plan for Financial Sustainability.
 Sustainability       •	 For the institution: Address pent up demand, practice financial discipline and leverage inter-
                         national cooperation resources.
                      •	 For faculty and administration. Faculty will buy into the social mission but compensation
                         should be attractive to retain quality.
                      •	 Include other forms of compensation such as skills development.

 Infrastructure       •	 Build some, borrow some.
                      •	 Invest in technology and connectivity.




36 | Education Within Reach of All
38 | Education Within Reach of All
Conclusion


The UNIMINUTO experience proves it is possible to provide high
quality education to the base of the pyramid in a way that is financially
                                                                                 UNIMINUTO graduates
sustainable, has a positive social impact and leads to jobs. For
nearly 102,000 students, UNIMINUTO provides not only a path
                                                                                 are prepared to be ethical,
out of poverty but a strategy for improved wealth generation for                 productive, service-
themselves and their offspring, an enriched career and a sense of                oriented members of
personal pride in giving back to the community.                                  Colombian society.

Father Rafael García Herrero’s dream of establishing a University
that would provide a new direction to the country is becoming
a reality. Throughout its history, UNIMINUTO has reached the
most vulnerable and remote communities, empowering students to
transform their own destiny. Through its social inclusion philosophy
the University has been able to change lives of thousands of students
and contribute to social and economic progress in Colombia.38




38    UNIMINUTO: Cambiando Vidas. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ScPInXGRF1E.

                                                                                        Education Within Reach of All | 39
40 | Education Within Reach of All
Questions for Discussion


1.	Bringing last mile services such as education, utilities or health
   to rural areas has always been a challenge for governments and
                                                                             Students learning
   the private sector. How can the UNIMINUTO model inspire
   other universities to provide greater access to the Base of the
                                                                             photoshop.
   Pyramid? What role can governments and the private sector play
   in facilitating access to tertiary education for the BoP?

2.	The UNIMINUTO educational model is broader than that of a
   traditional university in that it places a heavy emphasis on ethics
   and values. How can traditional, secular institutions that focus
   on professional competencies adopt this model?

3.	By law, all institutions of tertiary education in Colombia may only
   incorporate as non-profit organizations. What different outcomes
   could be expected if UNIMINUTO was a for-profit entity? How
   would for profit status impact the University’s value proposition
   and mission?

4.	Through its affiliation with the Minute of God organizations,
   UNIMINUTO has been able to place students in situations where
   they can gain practical experience, thus bringing additional relevance and a greater depth of skills, knowledge
   and experience to the academic experience. This is done at a low cost to the University with the added advantage
   of having a social impact. How can other institutions that are not a part of such a broad network provide
   opportunities to gain job experience and serve the community at the same time?

5.	UNIMINUTO does not set formal targets on the number of students that it seeks to enroll nor for geographic
   expansion, but rather it sets higher, mission driven goals, as found in the Development Plan 2013–2019 that in
   turn result in higher enrollment. It is a type of “if you build it they will come” model. Is this strategy a useful
   model that can be replicated? What are the risks of such a model?

6.	UNIMINUTO has been very successful at attracting students. Even though the drop-out rate is below the
   national average, what else could UNIMINUTO do to help students graduate and achieve their professional
   aspirations?

7.	As the peace talks lead to a new era in Colombia, former guerrilla members and para militaries will need to be
   economically integrated into Colombian society. What role can UNIMINUTO play in retraining them for new
   employment possibilities and helping them become productive members of society?

8.	Even though enrolling female students is an International Development Goal (IDG), access to education is a
   universal right for males and females alike. Should IDG’s promote access for one gender over the other when
   both are living in marginalized conditions? Would your opinion change if those same women become victims
   of domestic violence because the male spouse is unemployed? The top 10 most popular academic programs at




                                                                                       Education Within Reach of All | 41
        UNIMINUTO, with the breakdown by gender are found in Table 6. How can UNIMINUTO promote access
        for both genders?



         RANKING OF THE TOP 10 PROGRAMS IN GREATEST DEMAND BY COURSE,
TABLE 6. 
         BY GENDER – SECOND SEMESTER 2014

                                  Top 10 – Most popular courses for female students
    No.       Academic Course                                                                                      Female
    1         Occupational Health Administration                                                                       17.7%

    2         Degree in Childhood Education                                                                           14.7%

    3         Psychology – Distance                                                                                    12.1%

    4         Business Administration – Distance                                                                       7.0%

    5         Public Accounting                                                                                        7.0%

    6         Social work                                                                                              4.7%

    7         Psychology                                                                                               4.3%

    8         Technical and Technological Programsa                                                                    4.0%

    9         Financial Management – Distance                                                                          3.9%

    10        Business Administration                                                                                  3.2%

                                                                                                                     78.6%


                                  Top 10 – Most popular courses for male students
    No.       Academic Course                                                                                        Male
    1         Technical and Technological Programs      a
                                                                                                                        13.7%

    2         Occupational Health Administration                                                                        13.1%

    3         Business Administration – Distance                                                                        9.8%

    4         Business Administration                                                                                   5.6%

    5         Civil Engineering                                                                                         5.3%

    6         Public Accounting                                                                                          5.1%

    7         Psychology – Distance                                                                                     4.9%

    8         Bachelor of Physical Education Recreation and Sports                                                       4.1%

    9         Social Communication – Journalism                                                                         4.0%

    10        Technology in Logistics                                                                                   3.9%

                                                                                                                      69.5%
a
 Technical and Technological Programs including: technological programs in marketing management, graphic communication, costs and
audit, logistics, and specific technical programs in Business Process Outsourcing (BPO), construction and agricultural productive sectors
such as coffee, rice and banana comprise the majority of this line item.




42 | Education Within Reach of All
9.	It has been challenging for COOP-UNIMINUTO to keep up with the rapid pace of growth at UNIMINUTO
   and the five institutions of tertiary education it services. In 2003, with a population of 7,000 enrolled students
   it was able to provide student loans to nearly 60 percent of students but by 2013, with a multi-university
   population of 186,87439 students the percentage of students they were able to service decreased to 38 percent.
   (See Figure 5) How can Coop-UNIMINUTO keep up with the pace of growth? Would becoming a savings and
   credit co-operative, a credit union or a deposit taking financial institution help? Could it get financing from
   other sources? What models would preserve the ability to continue to provide low cost loans to the base of
   the pyramid?



FIGURE 5. 
          COOP-UNIMINUTO – COVERAGE OF EDUCATIONAL LOANS FOR ALL SIX PARTNER
          INSTITUTIONS (2003–2013)

      200,000                                                                                                                                                  70%
                      59%
                                                                                                                                                               60%
                                                                  53%
      150,000                                     49%
                                                                               52%                                                                             50%
                                                                                            39%          39%          40%          39%          38%
                                                                                                                                                        38% 40%
      100,000                      37%
                                                                                                                                                               30%

                                                                                                                                                               20%
       50,000
                                                                                                                                                               10%

              0                                                                                                                                                0%
                     2003        2004         2005        2006          2007         2008         2009         2010         2011         2012         2013
                                                    Nro. estudiantes             Nro. Créditos                 % Cobertura


                                                                     Number of loans extended by
    Year          Number of enrolled studentsa                            the cooperative                                       Percent of coverage
    2003                                 6,912                                            4,054                                                 59%

    2004                                 16,211                                             6,032                                               37%

    2005                               20,381                                               9,921                                               49%

    2006                                 27,671                                           14,614                                                53%

    2007                              36,467                                              18,895                                                52%

    2008                               63,378                                            24,836                                                 39%

    2009                              79,946                                             31,008                                                 39%

    2010                             102,386                                            40,603                                                  40%
a
                                                                                                                           UNIMINUTO has a service agreement: UNIMINUTO,
 Data includes all forms of credit for students enrolled in all six institutions of tertiary education with which the COOP-­
Universidad Tecnológica de Bolívar (UTB), Universidad Autónoma de Bucaramanga (UNAB), Fundación Universitaria de Popayan (FUP), Fundación Universitaria Católica Lumen
Gentium, Unicatólica y Corporación Politécnico Regional de Educación Superior Ceres Lérida (CPRES).




  This figure represents the sum total of enrollment for all six institutions of tertiary education with which the COOP-UNIMINUTO has a service
39 

agreement: UNIMINUTO, Universidad Tecnológica de Bolívar (UTB), Universidad Autónoma de Bucaramanga (UNAB), Fundación Universitaria de Popayán
(FUP), Fundación Universitaria Católica Lumen Gentium, Unicatólica y Corporación Politécnico Regional de Educación Superior Ceres Lérida (CPRES).

                                                                                                                             Education Within Reach of All | 43
44 | Education Within Reach of All
Annexes
ANNEX 1. KEY MILESTONES AND IMPACT ON STUDENT ENROLLMENT

                                                                       Raw            Net           Percent of
                                                                     Student         Change          Distance
Year    Milestone                                                   Population        YOY            Students
1992    •	 UM begins classes in Barrio de Dios in Bogota (Feb 22)        221                0
        •	 Father Mario Hormaza, Director General
        •	 Father Rafael García Herreros passes away (Nov 24)

1993                                                                    684              463

1994                                                                    969               285

1995                                                                    1,215            246

1996    •	 First graduation                                             1,314             99

1997    •	 Father Camilo Bernal becomes Rector General                 1,444              130
        •	 1st Strategic Planning meeting charts course

1998    •	 Open Bello Campus (marginalized communities of Me-           1,537              93
           dellin) and Tolima with 67 students

1999    •	 Colombian economic crisis                                   1,507             (30)
        •	 Students withdrawing
        •	 New Financial Model Developed

2000    •	 Open Cundinamarca Campus                                    1,747             240
        •	 Technical and Technological programs launched

MAJOR GROWTH PERIOD #1 (average growth 1,432)

2001    •	 Cooperativa starts (financial aid) (with 39 students)       2,453             706

2002    •	 Bishop of Soacha makes request for campus                   3,529            1,076

2003    •	 Launch CERES Partnership w/ MEN                             5,580            2,051

2004    •	 Open Llanos Operation Center                                7,477            1,897

MAJOR GROWTH PERIOD #2 (average growth 5,756)

2005    •	 Open Valle Campus and Bucaramanga Operations Cen-           11,573          4,096              4%
           ter
        •	 High quality accreditation obtained for journalism and
           business administration

2006    •	 Open S. Bogota Operations Center                           15,978           4,405              5%
        •	 MEN launches program strengthening technical and
           technological (T&T) education to address regional pro-
           ductivity development




                                                                                            (continued on next page)



                                                                                 Education Within Reach of All | 45
ANNEX 1. KEY MILESTONES AND IMPACT ON STUDENT ENROLLMENT                         (continued)

                                                                              Raw           Net         Percent of
                                                                            Student        Change        Distance
 Year        Milestone                                                     Population       YOY          Students
 2007        •	 Reorganization (Establish Rectories and Regional             24,287            8,309        8%
                Centers. Decentralization model ensuring standardiza-
                tion and high quality through integrated services that
                provide support)
             •	 Obtained certification for T&T productive sector (dis-
                tance) programs, including coffee, rice, banana, and
                construction sectors. (2007–2010).

 2008        •	 Create UM Virtual and Distance Unit                           31,116           6,829        17%
             •	 World Bank approves US$300 million to ICETEX (student
                loans) (March 2008)
             •	 Global Financial Crisis (Oct 2008)
             •	 Development Plan: 2008–2012

 2009        •	 Consolidate Integrated Services                              36,558             5,442      32%
             •	 IFC – US$8 million loan approved (Bogota, Soacha, Gi-
                rardot), technology infrastructure upgrades and institu-
                tional strengthening and professional development
             •	 Disbursement Dec 24

 2010                                                                        42,014            5,456       38%

 MAJOR GROWTH PERIOD #3 (average growth 15,000)

 2011        •	 Leonidas López Herrán, Rector General                        52,433            10,419      44%
             •	 Open 4 Operations Centers: Barranquilla, Ibagué, Neiva
                and Cúcuta.
             •	 IFC: Inclusive Business Leader Award (Sept 2011)

 2012        •	 Launch Institutional Accreditation process with Ministry     72,079            19,646       51%
             •	 Open Operations Center: Buga
             •	 G20 and IFC: Winner G20 Challenge on Inclusive Busi-
                ness Innovation (June 2012)
             •	 IFC: Inclusive Business Leader Award (Oct 2012)

 2013        •	 Open Operations Center: Pasto                                85,462            13,383      60%
             •	 Financial Times and IFC: Sustainable Finance Awards.
                Achievement in Inclusive Business (June 2013)
             •	 IFC: Inclusive Business Leader Award (Oct 2013)
             •	 Development Plan: 2013–2019
             •	 Simón Bolívar Medal. Order of the Great Teachers to
                Father Diego Jaramillo

 2014        •	 Replication of the educational model to West Africa is      102,014            16,552      58%
                commenced
             •	 Application for high quality institutional accreditation
                filed with the Ministry of Education




46 | Education Within Reach of All
ANNEX 2. PRODUCTIVE SECTOR PROGRAMS AND LADDERIZATION OF THE CURRICULUM

     SAMPLE TECHNICAL PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATE PROGRAMS CURRICULUM (2 YEARS)
      Technical Certificate:                      Technical Certificate:                Technical Certificate:
       Coffee Production                              Coffee Trade                    Administrative Processes

      Quality Management in                      Development of the                    Administrative Manage-
      Coffee Production                          Logistics Chain of Coffee             ment of the Coffee Farm
      •	 Obtaining the coffee                    Commercialization                     •	 Diagnostic of the coffee
         plant                                   •	 Coffee storage                        farm
      •	 Coffee Plantation                       •	 Trading and marketabil-            •	 Production planning
         establishment                              ity of coffee                      •	 Implementation of
      •	 Harvesting coffee fruit                 •	 Sensory analysis of                   Action Plans
      •	 Ecological benefit of                      coffee                             •	 Monitoring and control
         coffee                                  •	 Sustainable quality of                of coffee production.
      •	 Comprehensive man-                         coffee                             •	 Production evaluation
         agement of coffee                       •	 Evaluation of the physi-           •	 Assessment of develop-
         diseases                                   cal quality of coffee                 ment action plans



  UNIMINUTO’s Baseline curriculum on employment practices, research, entrepreneurship and
                social practices is common across many technical programs
Human Development and Social                 Foundations for Understanding         Productive Enterprise Develop-
Responsibility                               Communications                        ment
•	 Development of citizenship and            •	 Communication in different situ-   •	 Information technology in the
   values                                       ations                                coffee sector
•	 Planning for Life Project                 •	 Mathematics a tool for Manage-     •	 Marketing in the coffee sector
•	 Social Responsibility—a way of               ment                               •	 Innovation and creativity in en-
   life                                      •	 Natural Sciences in the coffee        terprise development
•	 Elective                                     context                            •	 Identification and evaluation of
                                                                                      business ideas
                                                                                   •	 Structure of a business plan




                             3 Year Program in Sustainable Coffee Management
                           (or 1 year following completion of the 2 year program)
Administrative Manage-         Human Development                Foundations for Under-       Productive Enterprise
ment of the Coffee Farm        and Social Responsibility        standing Communica-          Development
•	 Administration of coffee    •	 (in addition to 2 yr pro-     tions                        •	 Macroeconomic analysis
   production                     gram)                         •	 Internal Business com-       in the coffee context
•	 Continuous improve-         •	 Coffee: A Colombian              munications               •	 Information Technology
   ment of the quality of         tradition                     •	 Communication in the         in the coffee sector
   coffee                                                          international context     •	 Marketing in the coffee
•	 Commercialization                                            •	 Environmental manage-        sector
   process of Colombian                                            ment                      •	 Accounting of opera-
   coffee                                                       •	 Statistical management       tions
•	 Business process                                                of the business           •	 Innovation and creativi-
   planning for the coffee                                      •	 Math: A tool for man-        ty in business ventures
   businesses.                                                     agement                   •	 Identification and evalu-
•	 Implementation of                                            •	 Natural sciences in the      ation of business ideas
   management and                                                  coffee context            •	 Structure of a business
   controls for the coffee                                      •	 Resolution of problems       plan
   business                                                        in the coffee context     •	 Promotion and adoption
•	 Sustainable manage-                                                                          of technological ad-
   ment of natural re-                                                                          vances
   sources.                                                                                  •	 Elective
Source: UNIMINUTO and Santiago Descarrega.

                                                                                          Education Within Reach of All | 47
48 | Education Within Reach of All
Education Within Reach of All | 49
For more information about IFC’s investments in education please contact:

Elena Sterlin                                  Salah-Eddine Kandri
Senior Global Manager                          Global Head of Education
Health and Education                           E-mail: skandri@ifc.org
Email: Esterlin@ifc.org                        Dubai, UAE
Washington, D.C., USA                          www.ifc.org/education
www.ifc.org/education




2121 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20433
Tel. 1-202-473-1000


     50 | Education Within Reach of All
