              Uganda Economic Update
                      Seventh Edition, April 2016




    From smart budgets to smart returns:

Unleashing the power of public
     investment management
              Uganda Economic Update
                      Seventh Edition, April 2016




    From smart budgets to smart returns:

Unleashing the power of public
     investment management
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments
they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank Group concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank Group encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this
work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank,
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Cover photos: Great Lakes Film Production Ltd
Cover design : Artfield Graphics Ltd, www.info@artifield.com
Design and Layout: Artfield Graphics Ltd.
Printed in Uganda by Artfield Graphics Ltd


Additional material relating to this report can be found on the World Bank Uganda website (www.worldbank.org/uganda). The
material includes a fact sheet, documentary video and a number of blogs relating to issues in the report.

© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / International Development Association or

The World Bank Group
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
www.worldbankgroup.org
                                                                                                                               Table of Contents

Abbreviations and Acronyms iv | Foreword v | Acknowledgements vi | Key Messages vii


PART 1                                  The State of the Economy

1. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS--------------------------------------------------------2
1.1	 Growth remained modest due to uncertainties---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 3
1.2	 Heightened inflationary pressures induced monetary policy tightening ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 4
1.3 	 Cautious fiscal policy management out performed by election spending pressures---------------------------------------------------------------------- 9
1.4 	 Uganda’s external position weakened further -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------12

2. Economic Outlook------------------------------------------------------------------- 16
2.1 Economic growth prospects improve as Uganda returns to its investment path----------------------------------------------------------------------------16
2.2 	 Risks are mainly downward -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------20



PART 2                                  Moving beyond spending to creating productive assets

3. Can Uganda’s fiscal policy deliver its ambitions? --------------------------------------- 26
3.1 Fiscal strategy almost consistent with national development priorities ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------27
3.2 smart budgetING IS undermined by implementation challenges -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------29
3.3 Fiscal under-execution matched by inefficiencies in investments and the economy-----------------------------------------------------------------------32

4. Why is Uganda not generating good returns on its investments?------------------------ 34
4.1 Inefficiencies in investment result in failed capital accumulation efforts across the world --------------------------------------------------------------34
4.2 Global Experience: How are PIM systems being improved around the world?-------------------------------------------------------------------------------37
4.3 Uganda’s PIM system: Works to some extent, but leaves room for improvement----------------------------------------------------------------------------42
4.3.1 Great ideas and plans undermined by weak appraisals and political considerations -------------------------------------------------------------------42

5. How can Uganda maximize value from its public investments? ---------------------------- 52
ANNEXES------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 59

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Central Government Operations: FY2010/11 – FY2013/14 -11 | Table 2: Summary Assumptions for the Medium Term Outlook, Baseline
Scenario-17 | Table 3: Reforms in public investment management: Addressing key gaps- 54

LIST OF boxes
Box 1: Re-basing Uganda’s CPI: What does it mean? -5 | Box 2: Lower commodity prices is a double edged sword for Uganda -14 | Box 3:
Accounting for the Uganda shilling depreciation during FY 2015/16 -15 | Box 4: Key Decisions are Moving Uganda’s oil Sector -20 | Box 5: Cost-
benefit analysis is not just about the profitability of the project! - 39 | Box 6: Lessons on independent review in PIM systems - 40 | Box 7: Lessons
of project ideas differ and projects enter budget process in variant form - 46 | Box 8: Public Investment Plan: It should do what its name says!
form - 47 | Box 9: Lack of communication and coordination of public investments costly to the economy - 49


LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Construction and Services drive economic recovery 3 | Figure 2: Economic growth in East Africa - 4 | Figure 3: Inflation pressures led
into tighter monetary policy and cost of credit - 7 | Figure 4:Acceleration of credit to private sector cut short as monetary tightening catches up
with financial institutions activities - 8 | Figure 5: Private sector credit: Construction, Trade and Personal Loans get the lion’s share as borrowers
prefer dollars - 8 | Figure 6: Performance of the recurrent budget in three quarters of FY 2015/16 (approved vs. released) -10 | Figure 7:
Performance of the development budget in three quarters of FY 2015/16 (approved vs. released) -10 | Figure 8: Performance of the domestic
revenues in the first half of FY 2015/16 -11 | Figure 9: Uganda’s external current account, direct investment and international reserves worsen
in the face of uncertainties -13 | Figure 10: Proposed sector allocations maintain same priorities into FY 2016/17 -18 | Figure 11: Uganda’s
fiscal policy becomes one of the most expansionary within the region in recent years -26 | Figure 12: Uganda lags regional peers in level of
public expenditure 27 | Figure 13: The shift in infrastructure spending has exploded and will continue to be significant -28 | Figure 14: The
share of budgeted resources that is actually used has declined 29 | Figure 15: Worsening gap between ex post budget allocation and funds
released 30 | Figure 16: Energy and transport sectors have largest execution gaps 30 | Figure 17: GOU own financing of public investments
increasing, as deviation of actual expenditures from budget increases -31 | Figure 18: Uganda’s investment contributing less to economic
growth in recent years -32 | Figure 19: Additional capital generating less output over past decade 33 | Figure 20: The large efficiency gap in
public investments costly to public capital -35 | Figure 21: Uganda fairs poorly in public investment management in relation to peers - 37
| Figure 22: The Eight Stages of the Public Investment Management Cycle - 38 | Figure 23: Uganda’s PIM System closely follows the budget
process -44 | Figure 24: Uganda’s largest challenge lie in appraisal, managing and evaluation of projects -50 | Figure 25. The PIM Reform
Action Plan
Abbreviations and Acronyms


ASYCUDA   Automated System for Customs Data              NCN     Non-Concessional Borrowing
BoU       Bank of Uganda                                 NDP     National Development Plan
BOP       Balance of Payments                            NEER    Nominal Effective Exchange Rate
BPD       Barrels per day                                NPA     National Planning Authority
CBA       Cost-Benefit Analysis                          ODA     Official Development Assistance
CBR       Central Bank Rate                              OECD    Organization of Economic
CEM       Country Economic Memorandum                            Cooperation and Development
CNOOC     China National Offshore Oil Corporation        OPM     Office of the Prime Minister
CPI       Consumer Price Index                           PAPP    Project Analysis and Public–Private Partner-
                                                                 ships
CPIA      Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
                                                         PDU     Procurement and Disposal Unit
COICOP    Classification of Individual Consumption Ac-
          cording to Purpose                             PFMA    Public Finance Management Act
COMESA    Common Market for Eastern and Southern         PFM     Public Financial Management
          Africa
                                                         PIMA    Public Investment Management Analysis
DRC       Democratic Republic of Congo
                                                         PIMAC   Public and Private Infrastructure
DSA       Debt Sustainability Analysis
                                                                 Investment Management Centre
EAC       East African Community
                                                         PIMI    Public Investment Management Index
EU        European Union
                                                         PIMS    Public Investment Management System
FDI       Foreign Direct Investment
                                                         PPDA    Public Procurement and Disposal of Public
FY        Financial Year                                         Assets Authority
GDP       Gross Domestic Product                         PPP     Public-Private Partnerships
HIPC      Highly Indebted Poor Countries                 RAPs    Resettlement Action Plans
IBP       Integrated Bank of Projects                    RDP     Reconstruction and Development Plan
ICOR      Incremental Capital Output Ratio               REER    Real Effective Exchange Rate
ICT       Information and Communications Technol-        SBFP    Sector Budget Framework papers
          ogy
                                                         SMEs    Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
IFC       International Finance Corporation
                                                         SSA     Sub-Saharan Africa
IMF       International Monetary Fund
                                                         SWA     Sector Wide Approach
KIIP      Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure
          Project
                                                         SWG     Sector Working Group
                                                         UEU     Uganda Economic Update
LIBOR     London Interbank Offered Rate
                                                         UBOS    Uganda Bureau of Statistics
MDRI      Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
                                                         UNHS    Uganda National Household Survey
MFPED     Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic
          Development                                    UGX     Uganda Shillings
MoLG      Ministry of Local Government Economic          USA     United States of America
          Development
                                                         URA     Uganda Revenue Authority
MDA       Ministries, Departments and Agencies
                                                         UNRA    Uganda National Roads Authority
MoLG      Ministry of Local Government
                                                         VAT     Value Added Tax
MTEF      Medium Term Expenditure Framework
                                                         WB      World Bank
NBFP      National Budget Framework Paper
                                                         WDI     World Development Indicators




 iv
Foreword


Accelerating Uganda’s structural transformation and transition towards middle income status will require facilitating higher levels
of growth, improving productivity, and creating jobs for the large and growing population. Policymakers in Uganda know this
well, and a key strategy that Government has pursued over the past seven years has been to adjust the fiscal policy to provide
more resources for capital development. In line with the National Development Plans, this strategy is expected to be continued
into the medium term in order to address a binding constraint on growth, the country’s huge infrastructure deficit. The intention
to increase the level of capital investment is further driven by the prospect of revenues from oil exploitation, which in turn, can
generate revenues to finance infrastructure and human capital investments.

This Seventh Edition of the Uganda Economic Update discusses the importance of accompanying this fiscal strategy with
sound public investment management systems. Indeed, a key risk to Uganda’s fiscal strategy relates to the potential for public
investments to fail to yield the expected growth and welfare dividend. Over the past decade, for every dollar invested in Uganda’s
capital infrastructure, only seven-tenth of a dollar has been generated. This is far below countries that have successfully undergone
structural transformation. As an example, every dollar invested in the development of the interstate highway network in the
United States of America between 1954 and 2001, generated six dollars’ worth of economic activity. In other words, Uganda’s
public investments are falling short of generating the desired economic return. The good news is that by improving public
investment management, Uganda can greatly increase her economic growth rate and social impact of her investment strategy.

Our forecasts show that the Ugandan economy will be growing at an average rate of about six percent into the medium term.
Yet, if the country operated at a higher level of efficiency, this growth rate could increase to almost 10 percent per annum,
thereby allowing Ugandans to enjoy middle income status within the next five years. Uganda, needs to invest in her ability to
invest by transforming her public investment management system so that it generates more. This involves carefully scrutinizing
public investments selection so that it actually improves public welfare; ensuring that investments are managed effectively and
completed on schedule; and overseeing that infrastructure assets are operated and maintained efficiently and sustainably.

I am pleased to introduce this Seventh Edition of the Uganda Economic Update series. I hope that it will serve as valuable
input to policy debates, and motivate a comprehensive set of actions to increase the returns on public investments to catalyze
much needed transformation of the economy. This is absolutely essential for boosting inclusive growth and accelerating poverty
reduction in Uganda.




Diarietou Gaye
Country Director
Eritrea, Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda
Africa Region




                                                                                                                               v
Acknowledgements


The Seventh Edition of the Uganda Economic Update was prepared by a team led by Rachel Kaggwa Sebudde. This team included
Jean-Pascal Nganou and staff of the Department of Projects Appraisal and Public Private Partnerships of the Ministry of Finance,
Planning and Economic Development and of the Makerere University School of Economics. The team is grateful to Kevin Carey and
Apurva Sanghi for the guidance provided to the team on the structure and messaging of the Update and to the Uganda country
team for numerous insightful comments and contributions. Asger H. Borg, Damalie Nyanja and Gladys Alupo provided logistical
support, while Sheila Kulubya managed the communications and dissemination strategy. Albert Zeufack (Sector Manager) and
Christina Malmberg Calvo (Country Manager) provided overall guidance on the project.

The report benefitted from insights of peer reviewers including Yoichiro Ishihara (Senior Economist, GMF07); Jens Kromann Kristensen
(Lead Public Sector Specialist, GGO19); and Emmanuel Cuvillier Senior (Public Sector Specialist, MENA).

Close collaboration with external stakeholders was intended to ensure the relevance of the messages to policy makers and
practitioners. These external collaborators included stakeholders within the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.

Irfan Kortschak provided professional editing services.




      vi
Key Messages


Over the past decade, Uganda has planned an investment push intended to accelerate and sustain the high levels of
economic growth and to spur transformation into a middle income country. Mandated by its National Development Plan
(NDP), this move aims at addressing the binding constraints on growth, with the most significant of these being the country’s huge
infrastructure deficit. The intention to increase the level of capital investment has been further driven by the prospect of revenues
from the exploitation of oil, which would create new opportunities to allocate additional resources to finance critical infrastructure
and also invest in human capital. While the resultant expansionary fiscal strategy has squeezed the fiscal space for spending on social
sectors amidst low levels of revenue, it could be justified by the potential accompanying dividends, including higher growth and
higher domestic resources, which in turn can drive faster development, including human capital accumulation.

The fiscal strategy hinges on these investments generating the expected growth dividend. Is this happening? While the
fiscal strategy of the early 2000s was accompanied by high growth rates, the recent increase in the size of deficits has not yet
resulted in a similar acceleration to the economic growth rate. In order for capital investments to contribute to increased growth
and improved productivity, they need to feed into higher public capital stock that facilitates reductions in the cost of production.
This would then support the private sector to engage in higher levels of economic activity and to generate a greater number of
productive jobs. This rate of economic and social return depends to a very significant extent on how effectively and efficiently public
investments are managed.

Following previous editions, the seventh Uganda Economic Update presents an assessment of the current state of the
economy, before addressing a specific theme of significance for the country’s development. This edition focuses on how
the management of public investments could be improved to maximize the economic and social value of these investments. Well-
designed, well-managed, and well-implemented public investments are a sine qua non for Uganda’s economic transformation.
Efficient management of public investments is essential also for ensuring that oil revenues will play a positive role in the country’s
transformation.




Part 1: State of the economy

During FY 2015/16, the Ugandan economy faced a number of developments with anticipated challenges for economic
management. This included the staging of a national election, and a slowing global economy and subsequent declining commodity
prices. The latter developments were associated with policy adjustment in China and structural impediments to growth in big
emerging market economies such as Brazil. During the year, the Ugandan authorities also commenced the implementation of a new
NDP, which necessitated some adjustments in strategy. With such developments, some degree of macro volatility was inevitable, not
least due to the uncertainties surrounding the elections, given the experiences from the 2011 elections, when inflation rose to a two
decade-high. Uganda’s economic policy makers focused on managing these volatilities.

Monetary policy coped well with what was anticipated. By September 2015, the Shilling had depreciated against the dollar by
more than 40 percent, compared to the year before. This change in the Ugandan currency had not been experienced since the forex
market was liberalized in 1994. The rate of inflation also went up to reach 8.5 percent by December 2015, with the expectation at that
time that it would rise further, particularly because of the effect of the depreciating Shilling. To avoid inflation becoming embedded,
the Bank of Uganda raised its policy rate by six percentage points over 12 months to October 2015. Interest rates on government
securities and for lending to the private sector increased rapidly as the financial market re-adjusted to the tighter liquidity conditions.

Despite policy success in containing spill-overs, the combined effect of the resultant volatility on private investments was
quite severe, through the lower access to funding from domestic banks, as well as from external sources. The rate of growth
of credit to the private sector declined from 24 percent per annum during the first quarter of the fiscal year to 8.7 percent by March
2016, reflecting the tightened money conditions. Surprisingly, the volatility in the Shilling did not deter agents from borrowing in
dollars, even though the bulk of them were engaged in activities that provide incomes in Shillings, thus risking increased exposure




                                                                                                                               vii
with the depreciating currency. On the part of external sources, the private sector received lower funding through foreign direct
investments, which is estimated to have declined from US$ 1.1 billion to US$ 0.8 billion between FY 2014/15 and FY 2015/16, and from
remittances that decreased from US$ 1.3 billion to an estimated US$ 1.2 billion over the same period. In addition, Uganda realized
lower than usual receipts from export of goods and services, due to a combined effect of low demand and low commodity prices.
Under these circumstances, private investments are estimated to have reached levels that are far lower than had been anticipated.

Uganda’s external position remained weak, largely due to the impact of the weak global economy; the associated sustained
decline in global commodity prices; and the uncertainties related to an election year. The impact of reduced cost of oil imports
lowered the goods trade deficit, but this was more than offset by the increased volume of imports required to support construction.
Meanwhile, the declining global incomes and commodity prices also reduced the value of total exports receipts, which led to a
widening of the trade deficit, increasing from an estimated value of 8.5 percent of GDP during FY 2014/15 to 9.3 percent. With the
additional negative impact of the decline in services, income and transfers, the external current account is estimated to have reached
a value of 9.6 percent of GDP during FY 2015/16.

The execution of fiscal policy was generally effective, which resulted into spending closer than usual to the budgeted
levels. According to figures released by the Ministry of Finance in May 2016, fiscal revenues and expenditures remained largely on
target throughout the year. The anticipated fiscal expansion materialized, with the deficit remaining at high levels, at an estimated
value of around 6.4 percent of GDP, which is only slightly lower than the originally expected value of 6.6 percent of GDP. Prudent fiscal
management by the authorities was complemented by good performance in the area of revenue collection, for which the value
reached 13.9 percent of GDP, compared to the budgeted level of 13.6 percent. With construction of two large energy projects taking
off, the execution of the development budget was much better than in previous years, recording a small shortfall from the budget
of 0.5 percentage points of GDP. Therefore, even though there was overspending in the recurrent budget, largely due to expenditure
on election and security related measures, total expenditure is expected to have reached 22.1 percent of GDP, the level that was
planned for in the budget.

The stimulus effect of fiscal expansion and the stabilization of expectations was not enough to outweigh tightened private
liquidity, hence GDP growth during FY 2015/16 is estimated at 4.6 percent, more than one percentage point lower than
had been forecast by the authorities. The estimated growth is also more than half a percentage point lower than the forecast in
the previous World Bank Economic Update. This was the result of a stronger than anticipated impact of macroeconomic volatilities
on private sector activities during the year. The main driver of growth was public investments, which however represents a smaller
share of the economy where services account for close to half.

With macro-fiscal uncertainties related to elections now dissipating, the economic outlook is positive, with the rate of
growth projected to reach approximately 5.9 percent in FY 2016/17, and to remain on an upward trajectory into the near
future. The weak global economy will continue to affect economic activity in Uganda, as it has done during FY 2015/16. However,
from this perspective, the economy will also benefit from the low energy prices, particularly if investors take advantage of the
associated low cost of imported inputs. In addition, growth will also be driven by an intensification of investments by the private
sector in the post-election period, particularly in oil-related activities. Yet the predominant driver of growth will be an increase in the
economic activities of the construction sector, with this growth driven by Uganda’s significant investments in public infrastructure
projects. The stimulus effects from this large public investment program will offset those of a weak external sector on the Ugandan
economy, with carry-through to FY 2017/18, when the rate of economic growth is expected to increase to above 6 percent.

Despite the generally favorable outlook, a number of risks could reduce the country’s growth outcome. The risks include
the low revenue base, which is being further threatened by a renewed appetite for tax exemptions; the sequencing, financing and
management of the large infrastructure investment program; an increase in debt beyond the threshold of 50 percent of GDP should
the investments not generate sufficient growth and revenues to service the growing debt; as well as exogenous conditions, such
as bad weather, regional instability, and protracted low growth of the global economy. Policy makers must strive to ensure that the
infrastructure program results in efficiency and productivity improvements and in oil production capacities to exploit oil in a manner
that generates economic opportunities for the maximum possible number of Uganda’s citizens. To achieve this, the appropriate
selection, sequencing and good overall management of the financing and implementation of the Government’s huge infrastructure
development program are vital.




       viii
Part 2: Moving beyond spending to creating productive assets
Uganda’s development plan and budgets clearly signal an investment-driven growth phase to enable structural
transformation and development of oil resources. In line with national development objectives, the fiscal policy has been
expansionary over the past five years. However, on average, up to 36 percent of the planned spending over this period did not
materialize, with the bulk of this under-spending recorded in the priority sectors of energy and transport. Budget execution
challenges are matched by overall inefficiencies in investments and consumption has increasingly become the largest contributor
to increases in economic activity. There are also indicators that there is a decline in efficiency in utilization of public capital. Going
forward, these inefficiencies in investment could limit the rate of accumulation of capital, as it has done in many other countries,
thus curtailing the desired socio-economic transformation.

If such inefficiencies persist, increased investments will not be converted into productive assets to support accelerated
economic growth rates. The budget process suffers from an overhang of incomplete projects, which become perpetual, with
continuing demands on the budget or even requiring additional resources when poorly implemented. When budget execution
struggles, there is a high risk of stop-and-go cycles in investment, which can worsen volatility, especially when oil revenues come
on-stream.

Realizing the gains from the ambitious fiscal strategy will require addressing existing investment inefficiencies. The
efficiency with which the capital stock is used is a powerful lever with which to increase growth. It has been estimated that
if efficiency of infrastructure investments in Uganda was doubled, the economic growth rate would increase by nearly three
percentage points. Therefore, it is vital that the country ‘invests in its ability to invest’.

Converting investments into productive assets requires an effective management of public investments at all stages
of the project cycle, from when a project idea begins to the management of the completed asset. To assess how Uganda
performs in terms of public investment management (PIM), against good practices around the world, the World Bank, working
with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and other stakeholders, assessed Uganda’s existing PIM system.
The overall conclusion: Uganda has made effort to build institutions, often inspired by universal best practice. While chasing best practice
in every area, the focus can be placed on the essential “must have” features for sound functionality. In fact, as a result of previous reform
efforts to improve the overlapping area of public financial management, Uganda’s PIM system has a number of good practice
elements. Nonetheless, there is ample room for improvement, particularly in the preparation of projects, which determines
projects ‘quality at entry’, and their execution. In terms of the overall quality of the institutional environment underpinning PIM,
Uganda ranks in the 46th place out of 71 countries, well behind good performers in the region, such as Ghana (in 27th position)
and Rwanda in (12th place).

Deficiency in quality at entry explains the pervasiveness of problems from implementation delays; such as cost escalations,
time-overruns; contract disputes; abandonment of projects; poor quality of some completed projects; and rapid depreciation
of public capital stock. At present, the public investment practice involves ad hoc identification of projects, with project analysis
only being conducted after the financing has been allocated, combined with inefficient management of the implementation
and maintenance of the public assets that it produces. This Update recommends a systematic approach to building capacities
along three pillars:

A.	 Streamlining and strengthening the institutional arrangements for the management of public investments;

B.	 Ensuring a shared understanding across institutions regarding what needs to be done and how it should be done by
    standardizing the information and documentation needed to guide the identification, formulation, preparation, appraisal,
    investment decision, execution, operation, monitoring and evaluation of projects across all implementing agencies; and

C.	 Determining where gaps in the legal and regulatory environment exist and how they should be closed to strengthen
    mandates and the incentive structures.




                                                                                                                                      ix
Good reforms are underway, but will need to be reinforced while building momentum to follow-through with a more sustained
reform program. The Government should focus on addressing constraints that have the most significant impact on the achievement
of good investments now and in the short term. At the same time, the Government should build momentum for reform actions to
be implemented over a five year period. It is therefore recommended that the reform plan could move as follows:

Immediate actions to progress PIM reform

The six actions that Government can pursue immediately are:

1.	 Formalize and strengthen independent review of new project proposals. The new Project Analysis and Public-Private-
    Partnerships Department within the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, can be nurtured and groomed
    to perform the role of an independent reviewer. This would strengthen the role of the Ministry as the gate-keeper with respect
    to spending of public resources to generate value. (Action A1 in the PIM Reform Action Plan below)

2. 	 Build the capacities of Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and other implementing agencies, particularly in
     the area of project preparation, appraisal, approval and monitoring phases. In the short term, training should be focussed
     on capacitating a core group of technicians across the different MDAs involved in the preparation and appraisal of projects within
     their own agencies. Building and sustaining the range of skills required for effective PIM system can be accelerated through the
     establishment of linkages with higher education centres. Susequently, building capacities at all levels of the Government, would
     require developing training programs targetting officials and staff at the basic, intermediate and advanced levels for all agencies,
     particularly those involved in preparing and implementing projects. (Action A2 in the PIM Reform Action Plan)

3 	 Document and implement good practice operational processes, starting with project preparation and appraisal. These
    will be used by all MDAs to ensure that they implement measures to achieve economic evaluation of projects. A key component
    of this exercise will be to establish a set of standard national parameters, including shadow prices, unit costs, and the discount
    rate, as well as standard criteria for project performance indicators, aimed at ensuring that projects are aligned with national
    strategies priorities. (Action B1 in the PIM Reform Action Plan)

4. 	 Create a technical fund to facilitate feasibility studies during the pre-investment stage. This is a prerequisite for ensuring
     that agencies can actually undertake the required feasibility studies. Similar modalities could be adopted for both GOU and
     externally funded projects to ensure projects are properly prepared by the MDAs before they are submitted for consideration in
     the medium term fiscal framework. (Action B2 in the PIM Reform Action Plan)

5. 	 Establish a standard framework for the monitoring and evaluation of all public capital investment projects under
     implementation. While MDAs currently undertake this function to some extent, and monitoring and evaluation is being done
     both by the MoFPED and Office of the Prime Minister, there needs to be a single entity and standard framework that can
     ease tracking and ensure remedial actions. The immediate step under this action could be to re-assess the existing portfolio
     of projects already under implementation and take action where financial and technical risks are highest. (Action B3 in the PIM
     Reform Action Plan)

6. 	 Formulate a policy framework for PIMS. This will create the background for overall understanding of the PIM system across
     the various institutions of government, including the executive, parliament and the judiciary, and will thereafter be the basis for
     legal and regulatory changes for its implementation. (Action C1 in the PIM Reform Action Plan below)

Medium term actions to progress reform of the PIM processes

In the medium term, Government should consider implementing further improvements in efficiency and effectiveness in PIM. Four
actions to achieve this include:




       x
1. 	 Clarify roles, mandates and responsibilities of various entities within the PIM process. This will require re-evaluating
     the different entities, each of which has specific roles to play within the project cycle to remove redundant, un-coordinated,
     overlapping responsibilities, which leads to wastage and inefficiency. The outcome should be a mapping and re-engineering
     of the PIM processes to support the better implementation of projects. (Action A3 in the PIM Reform Action Plan below)

2. 	 Develop an integrated bank of projects (IBP), to constitute a central database and depository for public projects,
     including pipeline projects, with clear criteria and a systematic approach for their inclusion. Such a data bank directly
     corresponds to the function of improving the quality-at-entry and having ready to go projects for implementation. It should
     contain information related to beneficiaries, sector statistics, technical parameters, demographics, information on poverty,
     social indicators, and other matters relevant to project formulation. In order to manage the IBP effectively, it will be necessary
     to build focussed systems capacity in technical (such as software management, data collection for project formulation at
     sector level) and in non-technical matters (such as the interpretation of information from the IBP to ensure it is used efficiently
     and appreciation of usefulness of the process to PIMS. (Action A4 in the PIM Reform Action Plan below)

3. 	 Enhance the legal and regulatory framework required to support PIM. Implementation of the PIM system may expose
     gaps in the existing legal and regulatory framework that may warrant amendments or the enactment of new laws to
     strengthen the system. (Action C1 in the PIM Reform Action Plan below)

4. 	 Develop a system for monitoring and ex post project evaluation of projects. A system to facilitate the evaluation of
     past project experiences and to formulate lessons learned to serve as input for future project designs and implementation
     is vital. To achieve this, it is equally vital to build capacities for managing the system. (Action B4 in the PIM Reform Action Plan
     below)



                                               The PIM Reform Action Plan




                                                                                                                                  xi
   1
Part   The State of the
       Economy
As was expected in an election year, the Ugandan economy faced volatilities - currency
depreciation, inflation, and high interest rates during FY 2015/16. Real GDP is estimated
to have grown by 4.6 percent, with growth mainly driven by services and construction,
as two key public projects took off.


The growth disappointment was due to a sizable negative impact on private investment,
which declined in face of a high level of uncertainty related to the staging of the national
elections, the subsequent volatilities in domestic variables as well as volatile global
economic conditions.


Monetary tightening achieved the objective of lowering inflation, as the cost of credit
further reduced the rate of growth of credit to the private sector. Surprisingly, dollar-
denominated credit remained buoyant amidst a volatile domestic currency.


The upside surprise was the materialization of the planned spending, especially on the
capital budget, and the deficit remaining at the expected value of around 6.4 percent of
GDP. Budget re-adjustments, amounting to almost five percent of original budget, were
mainly due to election related supplementary spending.


Uganda’s external position remained weak, largely due to the impact of the weak
global economy; the associated sustained decline in global commodity prices; and
the uncertainties related to an election year. The external current account deficit is
estimated to have reached a value of 9.6 percent of GDP during FY 2015/16.


The economy is projected to grow at approximately 5.9 percent in FY 2016/17 and
thereafter to remain on an upward trajectory into the near future. This acceleration
will be driven by Uganda’s significant investments in a number of public infrastructure
projects and an intensification of investments by the private sector in the post-election
period, particularly in oil-related activities.


The main risks relate to the volatility of the global economy, particularly as the Chinese
economy slows down. However, if the Government’s huge infrastructure development
program is not implemented appropriately, it may result into low absorptive capacity;
build-up of debt; and failure to achieve efficiency and productivity improvements in the
economy.


Poor implementation specifically threatens the ability of fiscal policy to facilitate the
achievement of Uganda’s development goals. It is vital that policymakers strive to
achieve a higher level of efficiency in the public investment management regime.




                                                                                         1
               1. Recent Economic
                  Developments



The Ugandan economy is estimated to have grown at a rate of 4.6 percent during FY 2015/16, which was
much slower than the projected rate of 5.8 percent. With the take-off of a number of the energy projects
boosting public investment, the slower than anticipated growth can be attributed to the adverse impact of
both domestic and external volatilities. The tightening of monetary policy was necessary to address inflation
pressures, but raised the cost of credit, which affected private consumption and investment. Fiscal policy
was implemented well, keeping overall expenditure within the budgeted levels, even though there were
reallocations of funds to recurrent expenditures, mainly on account of election-related pressures.




O
              ver the past five years, the Ugandan economy           have reached US$ 740. While this is slightly higher than the
              recorded some positive growth, despite a               average for low-income countries (US$ 629), it is less than
              number of challenges resulting from both               half of the average for Sub-Saharan Africa (developing only)
              domestic and external factors. In FY 2014/15,          countries (US$ 1,638). The number of households living below
the rate of growth was 5.0 percent per annum. This growth            the international poverty line, measured at US$ 1.9 per day
rate sustained the momentum achieved after the economic              in 2011 PPP terms, is expected to have declined further to
growth rate had increased to 5.2 percent in FY 2013/14, from         about 33.2 percent in FY 2014/15, from 41.5 percent five years
3.6 percent recorded in FY 2012/13, according to the Uganda          ago. However, despite this impressive decline in the poverty
Bureau of Statistic (UBOS)’s revised GDP series. This recovery       rate, 43 percent of the population continues to live just above
was mainly driven by a growth in consumption, since there was        the poverty line and therefore remains highly vulnerable and
a deceleration in the rate of growth of gross investments over       at risk of falling back into poverty in the case of economic
this period. To a certain extent, the economy stabilized, with the   shocks. While the structure of the economy is slowly changing,
rate of inflation declining from 23.5 percent in FY 2011/12 to       approximately three-quarters of the population still depend
3.0 percent in FY 2014/15, even though increasing food prices        primarily on low paying jobs in the agricultural sector, with the
and currency depreciation began to exert an influence towards        majority employed in subsistence farming, which contributes
the end of the year. It was also challenging for policymakers to     to approximately 25 percent of the total value of GDP.
manage the impact of the unpredictable global environment,
with Uganda’s external current account deficit increasing from a
value of around 7.8 percent of GDP in FY 2012/13 to 9.6 percent
in FY 2014/15. In addition, Uganda’s economy operated in the                                   Uganda
context of significant regional political challenges, mainly due                             recorded
to the unrest in neighboring South Sudan and the Democratic
                                                                                      a rate of economic
Republic of Congo and to isolated terrorist incidents in Kenya.
All of these factors had an impact on Uganda’s spending needs,                       growth of 4.6 % in FY
exports, and remittances.                                                       2015/16. A rate significantly
                                                                            lower than recorded in recent
At an estimated rate of 4.6 percent during FY 2015/16,
Uganda’s economic growth is far lower than the rate                            history and lower than that
recorded in the decades following reform. With the low                         of regional peers in the East
per capita income and high vulnerability to poverty, the rate
                                                                                  African Community (EAC)
of economic growth is not sufficient to reach the national
target of achieving middle income status by FY 2019/20. In
FY 2014/15, the average per capita income is estimated to




      2
In FY 2015/16, Uganda began the implementation of its                          basis of revised data from the Uganda Bureau of Statistics this
second National Development Plan (NDPII), the same                             rate is lower than 5.0 percent recorded for FY 2014/15.
year that it conducted its national elections. The NDPII,
which covers the period from FY 2015/16 to FY 2019/20, is the                  The services sector remains the main driver of growth,
second of a series of six five-year plans intended to facilitate               accounting for an estimated 52 percent of all economic
the achievement of a vision for Uganda’s economic and social                   activities. However, increased construction activities also
transformation by 2040. The NDPII builds on a number of                        significantly boosted the contribution of the industrial
projects and initiatives implemented under the previous plan,                  sector. During FY 2015/16, the services sector grew by 6.6
with a particular focus on addressing Uganda’s infrastructure                  percent, with the bulk of this growth driven by activity in the
deficit and on preparing for the production of oil. The                        information and technology sub-sectors. The rate of growth of
beginning of the period of the new plan coincided with the                     the construction sector, increased to approximately 5.7 percent,
preparations for presidential, parliamentary, and district-level               more than doubling the rate recorded in FY 2014/15, when the
election period, which took place in February-March 2016. With                 sector grew by a mere 2.5 percent. This development is largely
memories of tensions in the area of economic management                        attributed to the take-off of large public construction works.
during the previous election period, in 2011, there were                       With a deceleration in the rate of growth of all other subsectors,
concerns regarding the possible re-occurrence of similar                       particularly manufacturing, the overall rate of growth of the
events. With additional challenges created by the volatile                     industrial sector during the year was significantly lower than in
external environment, policymakers had to manage these                         the corresponding period in the previous year (see Figure 1).
concerns carefully while remaining focused on an economic
management drive intended to address structural issues to
sustain overall growth and economic development over the                       The agricultural sector grew at a rate of 3.2 percent
longer term.                                                                   during the year, after benefitting from favorable weather
                                                                               conditions, particularly during the first half of the year.
                                                                               This is a higher rate of growth than the rate of 2.3 percent
1.1 Growth slowed down due to                                                  recorded during the corresponding period in FY 2014/15. The
                                                                               impact of low commodity prices at the international market,
uncertainties
                                                                               the sector’s performance during the year was better than might
                                                                               have been expected. This is because the average global prices
During FY 2015/16, Uganda recorded a rate of growth                            for Uganda’s major export commodities, particularly coffee, tea,
of 4.6 percent (preliminary estimate) as a result of both                      maize and fish, were generally lower than in the corresponding
domestic and external uncertainties. This was lower than                       period in the previous year. A positive factor was the weather
5.4 percent, the rate which had been forecast in our previous                  conditions during the first half of the year, before the El Nino
economic update released September 2015, with the largest                      set in with more volatile and unfavorable patterns during the
shortfall in growth coming from private investments. On the                    latter part of the year.




  Figure 1: Construction and Services drive economic recovery


                                                                                       Preliminary estimates of annual GDP growth
                                                                                       by sectors




    Source: Uganda Bureau of Statistics, 2012 and World Bank Staff Estimates




                                                                                                                                        3
The economic growth recorded in FY 2015/16 was                     result that private sector investment did not achieve the same
primarily driven by the accelerated rate of execution              level of momentum as in the previous year. Economic activity
of public investments in energy infrastructure, with               was also constrained by the regional insecurity and the weak
private investment constrained by both domestic and                global economy which resulted into generally low commodity
external factors. The value of public expenditure on energy        prices, with all these factors reducing demand for Uganda’s
infrastructure doubled to reach around 3.0 percent of GDP, up      exports, FDI inflows and remittances. In particular, Uganda’s
from 1.5 percent in the previous year. Earlier in the year, the    merchandise exports were adversely affected by the instability
increased availability of credit, the bulk of which went to the    in South Sudan and the Congo (DRC); the slow recovery in
construction sector, is also expected to have driven an increase   Europe; and the deceleration of economic growth in China.
in the level of private investment. However, as uncertainty        In total, including both public and private investment, the
related to the elections increased, economic volatility,           combined value of public and private investments is estimated
characterized by a sharp depreciation in the value of the          to have increased by 6.3 percent in FY 2015/16, compared to
Shilling and intensified inflationary pressures, increased. This   the increase of 1 percent recorded in the previous year.
prompted policymakers to tighten monetary policy, with the



    Figure 2: Economic growth in East Africa




                                                                                       5.2            5.0
                                                                                                                     4.6
                                                           3.9
                                                                         3.6




      Source: World Bank / IMF




Overall, Uganda’s economic growth in recent years has              1.2 Heightened inflationary pressures
been significantly lower than the rates recorded earlier and
                                                                   induced monetary policy tightening
lower than regional peers (Figure 2). As such, other countries
in the East African Community (EAC) achieved significantly
higher levels of growth performance from the rest of the sub-      Domestic prices tended to increase throughout the first
Saharan (SSA) region, which experienced a general economic         half of FY2015/16, with the rate of inflation increasing to a
slowdown, with the average rate of growth declining from 4.5       peak of 8.4 percent in December 2015. In the previous year,
percent in FY 2013/14 to 3.0 percent during FY 2015/16.            the rate of inflation reached its lowest levels for the past five
                                                                   years, mainly due to low food prices resulting from bumper




      4
harvests and from low international commodity prices. Even                 the second half of the year. By April 2016, the headline inflation
with some pass-through effect from the depreciation in the                 rate had declined to 5.1 percent. Uganda’s regional peers also
value of the Shilling to domestic prices, the average rate of              experienced volatile rates of inflation over recent months. For
inflation for FY 2014/15 still stood at only 3.0 percent. During           example, Kenya recorded an average annual rate of 6.6 percent
FY 2015/16, the annual headline inflation rate more than                   in FY 2014/15, with this increasing to 7.8 percent in January
tripled, from 1.8 percent per annum in December 2014 to a                  2016, before declining to 5.3 percent in April. In Rwanda, the
peak of 8.4 percent in December 2015, according to the new                 rate increased to an average of 6.4 percent in the first half of
rebased Consumer Price Index (CPI) launched in January 2016                the financial year and had declined to 4.7 percent by April 2016.
(see Box 1). The rebasing resulted in an index that generated              Surprisingly, Burundi, which has experienced a civil insurgence
a slightly lower rate of inflation for this period, together with          over the past two years, managed to record a rate 5.6 percent
other moderating factors to the inflationary pressures during              for FY 2014/15, down from 18.2 percent in FY 2011/12.




       Box 1: Re-basing Uganda’s CPI: What does it mean?


The Consumer Price Index (CPI) is designed to measure changes in the prices of a basket of goods and services consumed by an average
household. To facilitate measurement, such prices are based on a basket of consumption goods and services commonly purchased by the
households within an economic territory and in reference to a particular point in time, normally referred to as the ‘base period’. The pattern
of consumption is captured through weights derived from a household survey for the base period. Changes in patterns of consumption
can arise due to changes in the socio-economic characteristics of the population; government policies; technological advancement;
innovations; evolution in consumer products which leads to disappearance of some products and the appearance of new ones; and
changes in tastes and preferences; an increase in the consumption of previously marginal products; previously dominant products slipping
into decline or vanishing off the markets as a result of changes in technological innovation driving productivity and hence patterns of
consumption; or new products changing these patterns. These changes require frequent adjustments in the key parameters used to
measure the CPI to ensure it accurately measures consumer price movements.


What did the 2016 Uganda CPI re-basing involve?
During FY 2015/16, the Uganda Bureau of Statistics rebased the CPI to ensure it correctly measures the price movements, and to comply
with international standards, including under International Labor Organization, International Monetary Fund, East African Community,
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa and the Free Trade Area, among others. The key adjustments included:
i.	    Changing the base period from 2005/06 to 2009/10;
ii.	   Changing CPI classification from “Country Product Classification” to “Classification of Individual Consumption according to Purpose”
       (COICOP), in line with international good practice;
iii.	 Adjusting the weights of the CPI to ensure consistency with the expenditure patterns described by the 2009/10 Household Survey.
       This adjustment required updating the coverage of goods and services in the basket; changing the weights of the goods and services;
       adjusting the geographical coverage of the CPI by extracting another urban center (i.e. Fort Portal) out of western region; and
       stratifying the Kampala index further into low; middle and high income baskets; and changing scaling from 100 to 1000.


What are the implications of the 2016 Uganda CPI re-basing?
The rebased CPI yields an average inflation rate of 7.0 percent during the first half of FY 2015/16. This rate is only slightly lower than 7.4
percent before the rebasing. It is critical to note that the rebasing did not result into a systematic lowering of inflation. In fact the average
inflation over a longer period of 12 months to December 2015 shows a figure of 5.8 percent, which is higher than 5.2 percent without
rebasing. The resultant adjustment was minimal because the CPI has been aptly rebased regularly in the past.
Nonetheless, the rebasing allowed for systematic adjustments, including in the methodology to measure better movements in cost of
living for individual locations and products. Key of these include education, health, transport, food; and the electricity, fuel and utilities sub-
groups while locations are also better measured with Kampala divided into high, middle and low income indices.

Source: Uganda Bureau of Statistics




                                                                                                                                         5
The inflationary pressures in Uganda resulted from                                       June 2015 to 17 percent in October 2015, a level that has been
both weather-induced seasonal factors and external                                       maintained until April 2016. In addition, margins on the bank
developments. As has often been the case in the recent past,                             rate and rediscount rate were widened to make it more difficult
during the first half of FY 2015/16 food crop prices increased,                          for commercial banks to access funds from the BOU. In addition
with prolonged droughts reducing the supply of weather-                                  to these interest rate actions, the BOU reduced the level of
sensitive agricultural food crops. At the same time, the rate of                         currency in circulation through net sales of its short-term
core inflation (a measure that eliminates volatile components)                           instrument, the repurchase agreement security, and through
had remained on an upward trend since September 2014,                                    sales of foreign currency to a value in excess of US$ 400 million
reaching a peak of 7.7 percent in February 2016. In particular,                          within a period of six months, with this latter measure also
the rate for the energy, fuel and utilities sub-category                                 relieving pressure on the Uganda shilling.
accelerated at a higher rate than the average due to inflationary
pressures on components such as charcoal and firewood                                    The tight monetary policy stance increased the cost of
resulting from the prolonged spell of dry weather. Moreover,                             borrowing for both the Government and the private sector.
with the Shilling declining in value against the dollar by 27                            However, this policy stance realized the objective of lowering
percent, this depreciation had a significant inflationary impact,                        inflation. Continuing the trend from the preceding year, the
especially given that tradable goods contribute to up to 60                              yields on government securities increased sharply during
percent of the basket of goods in the CPI. The Bank of Uganda                            the first half of FY2015/16 (see Figure 2), with these increases
has previously estimated that a depreciation in the value of the                         possibly related to increases in market uncertainty in the period
Shilling can be transmitted into domestic inflation by a factor of                       prior to the election. The 91-day monthly Treasury bill rate rose
0.4 to 0.5.1 For the same reason, there was little pass-through of                       to 18.3 percent by November 2015, up from 12.8 percent in July
the effect of low global commodity prices (particularly for oil),                        2014. While this increase may have resulted in a strengthening
to domestic prices.                                                                      of Ugandan currency by attracting inward portfolio flows as a
                                                                                         result of increased investor appetite for government securities,
In an anticipated response by policy makers to these                                     it also increased the cost of borrowing for the Government.
increased inflationary pressures, monetary policy was                                    As a result, the Government reduced its borrowing from the
tightened to curb demand pressures, before being eased                                   financial system by 10 percent over the first half of FY 2015/16.
later in the year. After the experience of 2011, when elections                          Commercial banks also sharply increased their lending rates as
were followed by runaway inflation, the Central Bank adopted                             of April 2015, with the average rate reaching 25.2 percent by
a highly precautionary stance during the 2016 election year.                             February 2016, compared to 20.8 percent in the corresponding
During the first half of FY 2015/16, the Bank of Uganda (BOU)                            period in 2014. However, these tight monetary conditions,
intensified measures to forestall the inflationary pressures                             together with the low commodity prices, reduced inflation
that it had foreseen in its inflation forecasts. In particular, the                      pressure and the rate of inflation had declined to 5.1 percent by
Central Bank raised its key policy rate (CBR) from 13 percent in                         April 2016.




                                                                                                                                                 A Bank Counter at Fina
                                                                                                                                                 Bank a commercial bank in
                                                                                                                                                 Uganda




                                                                                                                                                 margins on the bank
                                                                                                                                                 rate and rediscount
                                                                                                                                                 rate were widened to
                                                                                                                                                 make it more difficult
                                                                                                                                                 for commercial banks
                                                                                                                                                 to access funds from the
                                                                                                                                                 BOU. The central bank
                                                                                                                                                 also reduced the level of
                                                                                                                                                 currency in circulation
                                                                                                                                                 through net sales of its
                                                                                                                                                 short-term instrument




1. Okello , A. J. and Brownbridge , M., 2013; Exchange Rate Pass-through and its implications to Monetary Policy in Uganda. Bank of Uganda Working Paper No. 10/2013,
The impact of the tight monetary policy stance on credit             until it reached 8.7 percent per annum by March 2016. The
eventuated only much later. During the first half of FY              largest proportion of the credit was utilized to finance activities
2015/16, financial institutions had accelerated the supply of        in building, mortgage, construction and retail estate, which
credit to the private sector, with the rate of growth standing at    accounted for 23 percent. This was followed by trade, which
an average of 24 percent, almost double the average rate of 13       accounted for 20 percent; by the personal and household
percent recorded during the same period in FY 2014/15. The           sector (14.8 percent); and by the manufacturing sector (15
impact of the high interest rates began to be felt in October        percent).
2015, when the rate of growth of credit began to decelerate


    Figure 3: Inflation pressures led into tighter monetary policy and cost of credit




      Source: Bank of Uganda




Contrary to expectations, the volatility in the value of the         borrowers whose earnings are shilling-denominated, as would
Shilling did not deter agents from increased borrowing               particularly be the case for entities operating in non-tradable
in foreign currency. The total value of credit denominated in        sectors. In the case of a depreciation in the value of the local
foreign currency grew by 38 percent during the first quarter         currency, it would become increasingly expensive for those
of the year, compared to a growth of 21 percent during the           sectors to service their foreign currency denominated debt.
corresponding period in FY 2014/15. This is a very significant
increase, particularly when the Shilling was witnessing the
highest level of volatility, with a rate of depreciation reaching
40 percent per annum in September 2015. The shilling-                                      financial
denominated credit recorded much lower rates of growth,
increasing from 8 percent to 15 percent over the same period.                            institutions
With this growth, dollar-denominated credit accounted for 45                         accelerated the
percent of the total value of credit by March 2016. Borrowing in                supply of credit to the
foreign currency creates opportunities for borrowers to access
                                                                              private sector IN the first
lower cost credit; to diversify loan portfolios; and to hedge the
risks associated with the volatility of the local currency. On the           half of FY 2015/16, with the
financial institutions side, prudential limits set by BOU forbid             rate of growth standing at
financial institutions from expanding their foreign currency
                                                                                    an average of 24 %
denominated loan portfolios to a value in excess of 20 percent
of the total value of the portfolio. This requirement has been
broadly met by banks over the past two year. However, the
increase in the proportion of loans denominated in foreign
currencies also creates a significant exchange-rate risk for




                                                                                                                               7
    Figure 4:	 Acceleration of credit to private sector cut short as monetary tightening catches up with financial
               institutions activities




      Source: BOU and World Bank staff calculations




In Uganda, the bulk of credit denominated in foreign              increase of five percent in the case of the former and a decrease
currency is provided to businesses in the building,               of seven percent in the case of the latter compared to the
mortgage, construction and real estate sector and in the          corresponding period in FY 2014/15.The manufacturing sector
manufacturing sector, which combined, account for 50              exports some of its produce, and thus generates revenues in
percent of all of this credit. The value of the credit provided   foreign currency, and similarly, some categories of real estate
to these two sectors has grown rapidly over the first half of     collect their rent in foreign currency. However, a significant
the year, at 57 percent in the case of the building, mortgage,    proportion of the borrowers operate domestically and have
construction, and real estate sector and at 53 percent in the     revenues solely denominated in shillings, exposing these
case of the manufacturing sector. This compares to an average     businesses to significant exchange rate risk.



    Figure 5: 	 Private sector credit: Construction, Trade and Personal Loans get the lion’s share as borrowers prefer
                dollars




      Source: BOU and World Bank staff calculations




      8
Overall, the financial health of the banking sector has              of GDP to 1.6 percent. The revenues from external grants
remained sound, despite the significant risks associated             have been declining after Uganda achieved mature reformer
with exchange and interest rate movements. In particular,            status, which it has had only very limited access to grants from
increases in interest rates could increase the risk of default       multilateral institutions. Revenues from external grants declined
on commercial bank loans, given that most loans are based            even further in 2012 following the governance-related scandals,
on variable rates. At the end of December 2015, the banking          which has resulted in a number of donors revising their overall
system maintained an acceptable capital adequacy ratio,              assistance strategy to the Government over the past five years.
although these ratios were a percentage point lower than was         Therefore, the value of the overall fiscal deficit was projected
the case during the corresponding period in 2014. Relative to        to increase, from 4.6 percent of GDP in FY 2014/15 to 6.4
the total value of loans, the proportion of non-performing loans     percent in FY 2015/16. It was expected that this deficit would
momentarily decreased to 3.9 percent, but was back to 5.3            be partially funded by external loans, the value of which would
percent in December 2015, which was the same ratio reached           reach 4.8 percent of GDP, and partially by domestic resources,
in the corresponding period in 2014. The rate of return on           the value of which would reach 1.6 percent of GDP.
assets improved to 2.7 percent, up from 2.2 percent. Liquidity
indicators also improved.                                            During the first half of FY 2015/16, policy makers were
                                                                     assisted in their endeavors to implement prudent fiscal
1.3 Cautious fiscal policy management                                management by good performance in the area of revenue
out performed by election spending                                   collection, which in turn was assisted by the depreciation
                                                                     in the value of the currency. The budget estimates for
pressures                                                            the first half of the year indicated that the Government had
                                                                     been able to collect domestic revenues which exceeded the
In FY 2015/16, fiscal policy managers strived to balance             established targets by UGX 218 billion (or 4 percent above the
the achievement of a high level of prudence in the context           pro rata target for this period). While this is largely attributable
of election-related expenditure pressures with the need              to the high value of non-tax revenues, the total value of
to maintain efforts to boost growth. In line with the                tax revenues collected by the Uganda Revenue Authority
revised budget timetable mandated by the Public Financial            exceeded targets by UGX 59.5 billion, with all major categories
Management Act (2015), the Parliament approved the budget            of taxes delivering at least the targeted level of revenue, except
for FY 2015/16 in June 2015. This represented a significant          in the case of indirect taxes, for which there was a shortfall
improvement in the budget process, with this expedited               of around UGX 86.7 billion in the first half of the FY 2015/16.
approval expected to contribute to a reduction in delays to          Underperformance in the collection of excise duty and VAT on
the absorption of the public investments budget. While the           domestic products during this period was largely attributable
authorities have remained committed to moving forward                to the slow economic activity, while collections on international
with fiscal policies intended to boost growth by addressing          trade-related activities benefited from the depreciation in the
constraints on economic growth, particularly those related to        value of the domestic currency. The value of overall domestic
Uganda’s infrastructure deficit, they have also been determined      revenues is projected to reach 13.9 percent of GDP, which is
to prevent the types of fiscal slippages that occurred around        0.4 percentage point above the original target. Uganda’s level
the 2011 election. Therefore, while the Parliament approved          of performance in this area is still significantly lower than that
an expansionary budget for FY 2015/16, with a projected              of its peers in the EAC. On account of the depreciation in the
increase in the value of public expenditures to 22.1 percent         value of the Shilling, the revenues from external grants are
of GDP (up from 19.4 percent of GDP in FY2014/15), the bulk          expected to reach UGX 1,461 billion during FY 2015/16. This
of this increase was earmarked for investments in public             value is equivalent to 1.7 percent of GDP, which is higher than
development projects intended to address key infrastructure          the originally budgeted level of 1.6 percent of GDP.
constraints and to establish a workable public infrastructure to
facilitate oil production. This is consistent with trends observed   During the first half of the year, the overall government
over the past five years, during which the Government has            expenditure (including net lending to investment projects)
substantially increased its allocations for the development          was more or less on target, with the execution of some
budget, with these allocations increasing from 32 percent of         key projects progressing quickly. However, the level of
total expenditure in FY 2010/11 to 51 percent in FY 2015/16.         expenditure later began to exceed budgeted allocations due to
                                                                     election related pressures and security related operations. The
With significantly increased expenditure and only modest             total value of expenditure was estimated to exceed targets by
improvements in revenue collections, an increase in                  UGX 155 billion during the first six months of the financial year.
the value of the fiscal deficit is inevitable. The value of          The rate of execution of public investments was relatively good,
revenues was projected to increase from 13.0 percent of GDP          with 34 percent of the budget being absorbed during these
in FY 2014/15 to 13.6 percent in FY 2015/16, while the value         months. Some key investments, including the Karuma and
of external grants was projected to increase from 1.1 percent        Isimba hydro power projects, which had been carried over from



                                                                                                                               9
the previous year and had been expected to be frontloaded                                  absorbed, putting these projects significantly behind schedule.
into the first half of the year, performed well. By the end of                             In the case of roads, execution has been affected by setbacks
December 2015, the rate of execution for the Karuma Hydro                                  related to contract management and social safeguards, which
power dam project had reached 54 percent and the rate for the                              meant that the sector was under-executing its budget by the
Isimba hydro power plant project had reached 89 percent, both                              end of the third quarter of the year.  In contrast, most recurrent
well ahead of schedule. Meanwhile, the rate of execution for                               expenditures have reached levels in excess of the established
the Albertine region oil refinery has only reached 31 percent,                             targets.
while only 25 percent of the thermal energy subsidy has been



 Figure 6: Performance of the recurrent budget in                                               Figure 7: Performance of the development budget in
 three quarters of FY 2015/16 (approved vs. released)                                           three quarters of FY 2015/16 (approved vs. released)




    Source: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development                             Source: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development




To a significant degree, overspending has been driven by                                   in February 2016, for instance, the non-wage defense budget
expenditures related to the heightened security measures                                   had been over-executed by 125 percent by the end of the third
during the elections. By the end of the first half of FY 2015/16,                          quarter of the year and required an additional UGX 253 billion
up to 70 percent of the planned budget had been spent. While                               in the form of a supplementary budget. It is forecast that the
the slow execution of the development projects left space in                               defense budget will be over-executed by 152 percent by the
the budget, it also heightened the risk of tilting the balance                             end of FY 2015/16. The restructuring of the Uganda National
of expenditure towards recurrent expenditures, particularly in                             Roads Authority (UNRA) has been another significant cause
the non-wage category. Unfortunately, the spending pressures                               of over-execution in the non-wage budget, with its budget
continued into the second half of the year, during which period                            having over-executed by 154 percent by the third quarter, but
a supplementary budget to a value of at least UGX 1,000 billion                            expected to reach 174 percent beyond the budgeted level by
was approved by the Parliament As a result of the heightened                               the end of the fiscal year.
security measures in the run-up to and during the elections




2. A supplementary budget worth a total of UGX 1,041 billions, equivalent to 4 percent of the budget, was tabled in Parliament in April 2016. The bulk (33 percent) was allocated
to security spending (Defense and Police), followed by wages and pensions (15 percent), Education (11 percent), Presidency (8 percent), Parliament (6 percent) and Electoral
Commission (5 percent). Except for the component for Education, which was financed by additional financing accruing to finalization of external financing project requirements,
the rest of the supplementary was financed through budget reallocations within the original budget. The supplementary was largely due to weak planning as the majority of
expenditures, with exception of exchange rate depreciation pressures, could have been foreseen at the time of budgeting.




         10
 Table 1: Central Government Operations: FY2010/11 – FY2013/14
                                                                                                  FY2015/16     FY2015/16
 In percent of GDP                        FY2012/13            FY2013/14              FY2014/15   App. Budget   Proj.

 Revenues and grants:                         12.9                 13.0                  14.8         15.1         15.7
 Domestic revenues                            11.4                 11.9                 13.5          13.6         13.9
 o/w Tax revenues                             11.0                 11.5                  12.8         12.9         13.4
 External Grants                                1.5                 1.0                   1.2          1.6          1.7
                                                                                                          
 Total expenditure                            16.5                 17.1                 19.4          22.1         22.1
 Recurrent                                      9.1                 9.8                  10.3         10.4         10.8
 Development & investment                       6.6                 7.2                   7.0         11.3          8.3
 External                                       3.4                 2.7                   2.6          4.0          4.1
 Domestic                                       3.2                 4.5                   4.4          7.3          4.2
 Arrears & contingencies                        0.1                  0.0                  0.3          0.2          0.1


 Overall balance                              -3.6                 -4.1                  -4.6         -7.0         -6.4
                                                                                                          
 External Financing                             2.2                  1.3                  1.2          5.0          4.8
 Domestic Financing & residual
                                                1.4                  2.8                  3.4          2.0          1.6
 items
 o/w Petroleum Fund withdrawals                   0                   0                   0.6          0.1          0.2
 o/w Domestic Borrowing                         1.2                   0                   1.2          1.6           ...
 Memorandum items:                                                                                        
 Nominal GDP (Shs billions)                 63,905              68,371                 74,765       83,596       84,984

Source: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, IMF, and World Bank




 Figure 8: Performance of the domestic revenues in the first half of FY 2015/16




       Source: Uganda Revenue Authority




                                                                                                                      11
The overall fiscal deficit in FY 2015/16 is expected to be                                  support construction. The oil import bill is estimated to have
slightly lower than had been planned, being financed                                        declined to US$ 671 million during FY 2015/16, down from
mainly with externally borrowed resources. By the end                                       US$ 933 million in FY 2014/15. Even as demand for petroleum
of the year, total expenditure is expected to reach a value                                 products continues to grow, particularly to support the
of 22.1 percent of GDP, which was the level projected in                                    booming construction and transport industry, the unit price
the budget. However, the outturn for the level of collected                                 of oil imports has continued to decline drastically. However,
revenues is higher than projected, and so the fiscal deficit is                             the postive impact of this decline has been more than fully
projected to reach 6.4 percent of GDP. This would be lower by                               offset by increases in the Government import bill, with this bill
0.6 percentage points of GDP than the level in the approved                                 increasing by 96 percent to US$ 335 million, mainly as a result
budget, although still at the highest level in more than a                                  of the need for inputs for major infrastructure projects, and for
decade. Originally, Uganda’s authorities had planned to finance                             security and election related materials. With a sizable decline
80 percent of the fiscal deficit through external borrowing.                                in the prices of most of Uganda’s commodity exports over the
This is consistent with the Government’s policy to use external                             past two years, the value of exports of merchandise recorded a
resources to finance large infrastructure projects. Hence, while                            modest rate of growth, with this growth being primarily driven
the Karuma project will continue to draw on government                                      by a growth in non-traditional exports, mainly going to regional
savings accumulated from the oil related capital gains tax,3                                markets. At the same time, the impact of low commodity prices
the value of net external financing is projected to reach 4.8                               on Uganda’s traditional commodities, including coffee and tea,
percent of GDP. With the decline in concessional donor inflows,                             was significant. These commodities remain the most significant
the value of loans from commercial sources (non-concessional                                contributors to the overall value of exports, accounting for 30
loans) will reach 3.6 percentage points of GDP. The value of                                percent of the total value of export earnings during the last
domestic financing is forecast to decline to around 1.6 percent                             fiscal year. Consquently, the trade deficit is estimated to have
of GDP, compared to the budgeted level of 2.0 percent after the                             widened, increasing from a value of 8.9 percent of GDP during
Government adjusted the modalities for financing its budget                                 FY 2014/15, to 9.3 percent in FY 2015/16.
to manage the high cost of borrowing recorded during the first
half of the year.                                                                           In addition, the current account has been negatively
                                                                                            affected by the decline in the net value of inflows of
1.4 Uganda’s external position                                                              services, income, and transfers. The impact of lower oil
weakened further                                                                            prices on freight charges was to reduce the net value of
                                                                                            foreign outflows related to services. However, the value of
                                                                                            tourism receipts declined as a result of the impact of terrorist
During FY 2015/16, Uganda’s external position continued                                     incidents on consumer perceptions; lower global incomes;
to weaken due to the combined impacts of the weak                                           and the impact of election-related uncertainties. The value of
global economy and domestic factors. The current account                                    net transfers also estimated to have declined, with the value
deficit is estimated to have reached a value of 9.6 percent of                              of these transfers envisaged to reach US$ 1,217 million, down
GDP in FY 2015/16, significantly higher than the figure recorded                            from the figure of US$ 1,312 million recorded in the previous
in the previous year, when it stood at 9.2 percent. This is                                 year, as income sources for these flows adjusted to the weak
largely due to the continued weakness of the global economy                                 economic environment abroad and as domestic uncertainties
leading into the sustained decline in commodity prices, and                                 increased due to the elections.
a decline in inflows related to exports, income, transfers, and
foreign direct investment. Therefore, a stronger capital and
financial position wil have been achieved only through the                                  The capital and financial account is estimated to have
disbursement of public loans. Thus, the overall balance of                                  improved by about 15 percent in FY 2015/16, mainly due
payments deficit is estimated to have declined from US$ 353                                 to disbursements to finance public projects. In addition
million in FY 2014/15 to US$ 139 million in FY 2015/16, with                                to almost doubling the value of disbursements for project
the deficit being financed through a reduction in international                             grants to US$ 337 million, it is estimated that an additional
reserves from US$ 2,895 million to US$ 2,745 million. This level                            US$ 946 million worth of funds derived from non-concessional
of reserves will have been sufficient only to cover 3.9 months                              borrowing has been disbursed to finance construction work on
of import of goods and services, compared to reserves of 4.0                                the Karuma and Isimba projects. Nevertheless, the value of FDI
months of import cover in FY 2014/15.                                                       inflows is estimated to have declined to US$ 838 million, from
                                                                                            US$ 1,153 million over the year, as investors adopted a ‘wait
                                                                                            and see’ approach with respect to oil production related flows,
The reduced cost of oil imports should have resulted in a                                   particularly in the context of the uncertainties related to the
decline in the goods trade deficit. However, this was more                                  election and its aftermath.
than offset by the increased volume of imports required to



3. These revenues arose from the taxes levied on the US$ 1.5 billion sale of oil exploration rights between Heritage and Tullow oil companies.




         12
 Figure 9:	 Uganda’s external current account, direct investment and international reserves worsen in the face of
            uncertainties




     Source: IMF and bank of Uganda



The weak external position was accompanied by                     rate of depreciation since 1993, when the forex market was
depreciation in the value of the local currency, with             liberalized. A significant driving factor was the negative market
this depreciation being marked by a significant degree            sentiments in the run up to the elections and the related high
of volatility. The deterioration of the balance of payments       level of currency speculation (see Box 2). These pressures
position during FY 2015/16 resulted in a continuation of the      on the currency were alleviated when the Bank of Uganda
adjustments to the value of the Shilling that commenced in the    tightened monetary policy and as the private sector demand
previous year (in September 2014). During the first nine months   for foreign exchange declined as the election approached.
of the year, the value of the currency had depreciated by an      In real terms, the value of the Shilling has depreciated at an
average of 24 percent. The bulk of the depreciation occurred      average of 10 percent over the 10 months to March 2016, with
during the first three months, with the currency losing value     such depreciation expected to allow for an adjustment of the
by 40 percent over a 12 months period, an unprecedented           real economy to the balance of payment shock.




                                                                                                             A Total E&P fuel staition




                                                                                                             the impact of lower
                                                                                                             oil prices on freight
                                                                                                             charges was to
                                                                                                             reduce the net value
                                                                                                             of foreign outflows
                                                                                                             related to services




                                                                                                                             13
   Box 2: Lower commodity prices is a double edged sword for Uganda




Over the past five years, commodity prices have experienced sharp      commodity prices has improved Uganda’s terms of trade by about
swings, generally declining on account of the slowdown in the          2.5 percent.
global economy. Uganda imports oil and a significant number
of food items, with oil constituting 19 percent of the country’s
imports bill during FY 2014/15. A reduction in the unit price of
these imports can result in a positive balance of payments shock.
However, Uganda is also a commodity exporter, with 39 percent of
the total value of its exports being derived from commodities. Thus,
a decline in commodity prices may result in lower export receipts,
which results in a negative balance of payments shock.




                                                                       The domestic effects of lower commodity prices can be varied,
                                                                       depending on the transmission channels. Lower oil prices can be
                                                                       expected to assert downward pressure on the costs of production,
                                                                       particularly within the industrial and mechanized agriculture
                                                                       sectors. They also result in lower costs for lighting for the more
                                                                       than five million Ugandans who rely on kerosene for lighting; and
                                                                       generally reduce the cost of transporting goods and services.
                                                                       These effects have been less pronounced because of imperfect
                                                                       transmission from the international market price to the fuel pump
                                                                       prices. Indeed, while the average crude oil price declined by
                                                                       71 percent in the period from June 2014 to February 2016, the
As the global price of a barrel of crude oil plummeted from US$
                                                                       pump prices of petrol declined by only 25 percent, kerosene by
108 in June 2014 to US$ 31 by end of February 2016, the oil import
                                                                       26 percent and diesel by 30 percent over the same period (see
bill also declined from an average of US$ 90 million per month
                                                                       Figure 1). The failure for the decline in fuel pump prices to reflect
during FY 2013/14 to US$ 55 million in FY 2015/16, even though
                                                                       the decline in global crude oil prices can be partially explained
the volume of imported oil is estimated to have increased by
                                                                       by depreciation in the value of the shilling against the US Dollar,
more than 50 percent over this period. While the price of other
                                                                       which declined by 30 percent during the first half of FY 2015/16.
commodity imports did not fall as steeply, they too have been on
                                                                       It is estimated that the exchange rate explains 7 percent of the
a declining trend since 2011. The decline in global commodity
                                                                       variation in petrol pump prices, 11 percent in pump kerosene
prices has resulted in a decline in Uganda’s import bill by at least
                                                                       prices, and 12 percent in diesel pump prices. Other factors
16 percent, which is equivalent to about US$ 800 million, despite
                                                                       constraining this transmission include the taxation and domestic
an increase in the volume of imports by 20 percent. In terms of
                                                                       supply issues, with the latter comprising inefficiencies such as
exports, the price declines were less significant, with the price of
                                                                       inadequate storage capacities and non-standard commercial
coffee declining by 25 percent, tea by 17 percent, and maize by 21
                                                                       practices due to weak regulation. According to a World Bank
percent, in the period from June 2014 to Febarury 2016. Thus, on
                                                                       (2010) report, such inefficiencies contribute 50 percent of the retail
balance, Uganda received an average of US$ 213 million per month
                                                                       price, higher than any other country included in the study, except
during FY 2015/16, which is US$ 15 million lower than the average
                                                                       Madagascar.
level recorded over the past two years. Overall, the decline in




       14
   Box 3: Accounting for the Uganda shilling depreciation during FY 2015/16

By November 2015, the Shilling had lost 32 percent of its value       economies. In the period from January to December 2015,
against the US dollar relative to the position at the beginning       the Food, Beverage and Agriculture raw materials price indices
of FY 2015/16. This rate of depreciation was far higher than the      declined by 29 percent, 16 percent and 29 percent respectively.
depreciation of 3.8 percent recorded over the same period in
FY2014/15. Many other currencies across the world also weakened
against the US dollar during this period. Within the region, the
Uganda Shilling depreciated in value relative to the Rwandan
franc by 25 percent; to the Kenyan Shilling by 14 percent;
and to the Tanzanian Shilling by 3 percent, with these rates of
depreciation being significantly higher than those recorded in
the corresponding period in FY2014/15 (1 percent, 2 percent and
zero percent respectively). This was because the value of Kenya’s
currency depreciated by 4 percent; Tanzania’s by 4 percent; and
Rwanda’s by 8 percent against the US dollar over the same time
period.
                                                                      Country specific, domestic shocks became even more important
                                                                      in the case of Uganda. It is estimated that these domestic
                                                                      shocks accounted for an average of 10 percent of the volatility in
                                                                      exchange rate in 2015, compared to about 3 percent in 2014. The
                                                                      most significant factors propagating these domestic shocks were
                                                                      the negative market sentiment and the outbreak of speculative
                                                                      behavior driven by memories of currency fluctuations during the
                                                                      previous election in 2011, even though the latter had resulted from
                                                                      a combination of exogenous shocks and policy slippages that also
                                                                      fueled inflation. This time, the external position remains weak on
                                                                      account of weaknesses in the global economy. Meanwhile the
                                                                      implementation of pre-emptive monetary policy and deflationary
                                                                      pressures from the external environment prevented the emergence
                                                                      of a vicious cycle that could have been sparked off speculative
External shocks were a major driver of the currency’s depreciation.   transactions and resulted in more significant depreciations in the
As a result of the weak global economy, mainly driven by with a       value of the currency to levels that did not reflect the true state of
deceleration of growth in China, Brazil and the US, commodity         the economy.
prices declined and weakened the external accounts of regional




                                                                                                                          Oil mining in the Albertine
                                                                                                                          region




                                                                                                                          lower oil prices can
                                                                                                                          be expected to assert
                                                                                                                          downward pressure on
                                                                                                                          the costs of production,
                                                                                                                          particularly within
                                                                                                                          the industrial and
                                                                                                                          mechanized agriculture
                                                                                                                          sectors




                                                                                                                                     15
                  2. Economic Outlook




The outlook for the Ugandan economy is broadly favorable. With uncertainties arising from the February
2016 elections having dissipated, the low energy prices and the stimulus effect from large public
investments intended to address infrastructure constraints and prepare Uganda for oil production should
boost investment and drive an increased rate of growth, higher than those recorded over the past five
years. Despite the adverse impact of a weak external sector, with the impact of low oil prices on investments
in the oil sector being particularly significant, the rate of growth for the Ugandan economy is projected
to accelerate to 5.9 percent in FY 2016/17 and to remain on an upward trajectory into the medium term.
However, there are risks to these growth prospects, including risks related to the protracted weak global
economy, volatile weather, regional insecurity, and poor implementation of the huge investment program.
In particular, this latter risk could reduce the ability of the planned investments to facilitate the achievement
of the intended growth acceleration.




2.1 Economic growth prospects                                                            prepare for oil production. Together, these factors should boost
                                                                                         investment, and thereby drive a greater momentum for growth.
improve as Uganda returns to its
investment path                                                                          The domestic policies have to be managed alongside a




T
                                                                                         volatile global economy, with the ongoing possibility of
          he World Bank forecasts that Uganda’s rate                                     shocks that could have a significant negative impact on
          of economic growth will accelerate from the                                    Uganda’s growth outcomes. The global environment remains
          estimated 4.6 percent recorded in FY 2015/16 to                                unstable, with a possibility that the global rate of growth will
          about 5.9 percent in FY 2016/17, as short-term                                 remain low, possibly lower than the 2.9 percent that has been
domestic uncertainties recede. With the completion of                                    projected by the World Bank for 20164 if a more protracted
the current electoral cycle, the purpose of domestic policies                            slowdown across large emerging markets spill over to other
is expected to be to create a more conducive economic                                    developing economies. Under such a scenario, Uganda’s
environment, as policymakers balance the need to reduce the                              external position would be further constrained by the lower
cost of borrowing; the need to avoid exacerbating upward                                 level of demand for merchandise exports, tourism, remittances
inflationary pressures; and the need to build the confidence of                          and FDI. However, this forecast assumes that a modest recovery
investors in the post-election period. It is envisaged that the                          in the advanced economies will continue and that activity will
looser monetary conditions, together with the reduced use                                stabilize among major commodity exporters, resulting in some
of domestic borrowing to finance large public investments,                               upward pressure on commodity prices. Indeed, the World Bank
will increase the availability of credit to the private sector                           is raising its 2016 forecast for crude oil prices to US $ 41 per
and reduce the crowding out of private investment that has                               barrel from US $ 37 per barrel in its latest Commodity Markets
occurred in recent years. At the same time, there will be gains                          Outlook5, as an oversupply in markets is expected to recede.
from low energy prices and from the construction boom, with                              This could resuscitate export growth and lead to an increase in
this boom expected to result from the continuing high level of                           FDI, especially in oil related sectors, which would compensate
public investment to address infrastructure constraints and to                           for the gradual decline in official aid.


4. World Bank, 2016. Global Economic Prospects ‘Spillovers Amid Weak Growth’; January 2016.
5. http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/04/26/world-bank-raises-2016-oil-price-forecast-revises-down-agriculture-price-projections




        16
Table 2: Summary Assumptions for the Medium Term Outlook, Baseline Scenario
                                                               2013                 2014        2015 e         2016 f         2017 f        2018 f
 Real GDP growth, at constant market
                                                                  3.2                4.8            5.0            4.6           5.5            5.9
 prices
  Private Consumption                                             0.1                3.2           12.3           13.2           8.7            8.8
  Government Consumption                                         -5.1                -5.8           3.7           10.3           5.3            2.5
  Gross Fixed Capital Investment                                  9.2                3.3            1.1            4.0           8.0           10.0
  Exports, Goods and Services                                     6.7                0.0           -5.4            0.9           8.0            9.0
  Imports, Goods and Services                                     0.0                -6.4          14.5           25.5          16.2           16.0
 Real GDP growth, at constant factor
                                                                  3.4                3.9            4.8            4.5           5.0            5.1
 prices
  Agriculture                                                     1.8                3.0            2.3            3.2           4.3            4.0
  Industry                                                        4.3                3.9            7.8            3.0           7.0            9.0
  Services                                                        3.9                4.3            4.8            5.7           4.6            4.1
 Prices: Inflation                                                                                                                                 
  Inflation (GDP Deflator)                                        4.1                2.3            3.5            7.6           4.2            5.0
  Inflation (CPI period average)                                  5.5                4.3            2.7            7.7           6.3            5.0
 Current Account Balance (% of GDP)                              -8.1               -10.5          -9.2           -9.6         -10.0           -10.3
 Financial and Capital Account (% of
                                                                  6.1                7.4            8.1            7.2           8.3            9.6
 GDP)
 Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP)                         4.5                4.2            4.5            3.7           4.6            4.2
 Fiscal Balance (% of GDP)                                       -4.2                -4.2          -4.6           -6.4           -6.5           -6.3
 Debt (% of GDP)                                                 26.2               29.1           33.2           36.9          40.2           44.3
 Primary Balance (% of GDP)                                      -2.2                -2.6          -2.8           -4.6           -4.7           -3.8
 Poverty rate ($2.5/day 2005 PPP terms)
 a,b,c                                                           33.3               33.0           32.6           32.2          31.6           30.9

 Poverty rate ($5/day 2005 PPP terms) a,b,c                      63.1               62.8           62.5           62.2          61.6           60.9


Source: Compiled by World Bank staff using historical data from official sources.
Notes: f = forecast
(a) Calculations based on 2009-UNHS and 2012-UNHS. | (b) Projection using annualized elasticity at the regional level with pass-through = 1 based on
GDP per capita constant PPP. | (c) Actual data: 2012. Projections are from 2013 to 2017.


It is expected that patterns of growth will remain roughly                          it will remain sufficiently flexible to enable policymakers to
similar to those that have characterized Uganda’s economy                           manage the impacts of exogenous shocks. According to the
over the past decade and a half. The predominant source of                          FY 2016/17 National Budget, the total value of expenditure
growth will continue to be an increase in the economic activity                     is forecast to increase to 22.4 percent of GDP, up from the
of the construction and services sectors, with manufacturing                        level of 22.1 percent recorded in FY 2015/16. The major driver
continuing to grow from a small base. Growth in the output                          of this increase is the perceived need to implement priority
of the agricultural sector will remain subdued, largely due                         infrastructure projects to facilitate private sector development
to supply-side constraints. Though still accounting for only a                      and to enhance the productive capacity of the economy.
small share of GDP, the mining and quarrying sector could be                        These projects include the Karuma, Isimba and Ayago hydro
a significant source of growth in coming years, as the sector’s                     projects; a number of electricity transmission projects; the
proven potential begins to attract increased attention from                         construction of a standard gauge railway; the construction of
investors.                                                                          the Kampala-Jinja and Kampala-Entebbe Express Highways;
                                                                                    and the rehabilitation of the Entebbe Airport. Among other
Fiscal policy will continue to be used as the key instrument                        benefits, these projects are expected to increase the rate
to stimulate growth. As mandated by the second NDP and                              of electrification by doubling Uganda’s power generation
by the resource allocation framework and the charter of fiscal                      capacity; enhancing its transmission capacity; and easing
responsibility required by the Public Finance Management Act                        the transportation of goods, services and passengers, both
(PFMA 2015), fiscal policy during FY 2016/17 will continue on                       internally and across borders. In total, the value of resources
an expansionary path, with the key intent being to continue                         allocated to the transport sector will reach 19 percent of the
with the construction of key infrastructure. At the same time,                      total budget, while that to the energy sectors will be 12 percent
                                                                                    (see Figure 10).


                                                                                                                                          17
Meanwhile, the budget aims to continue allocating                           to finance new administrative units and the increased size
resources to improve the quality of social services, even                   of parliament, amongst other perceived needs. The overall
as these are being squeezed by the increasing pressures                     administrative burden reaches a level of 2.1 percent of GDP,
from the security and public administration sectors. It                     which is far higher than the level recorded in most other
is expected that 12 percent of the budget will be allocated to              countries around the world.
the education sector in FY 2016/17, with this allocation taking
up the third largest share of the budget. With 66 percent of                With increased pressure for exemptions in the context
the allocation for education going to pay teacher salaries, a               of modest revenue collection efforts, the authorities
significant amount of resources will have to be sought off                  face a significant challenge in their endeavors to finance
budget for other non-salary requirements that can support                   proposed expenditures while maintaining debt at a
the sector’s key priority of improving the quality of primary               reasonable level. To some degree, the recently implemented
education and of ensuring a higher rate of transition to                    measures to boost the performance of revenue collection6
secondary education. Without this, Uganda will not be able to               have had a positive impact, with the actual revenue collections
equip the rapidly expanding labor force with the requisite skills           exceeding budget for two consecutive years. However, if
to facilitate the achievement of higher levels of productivity.             the Government is unable to resist a new wave of demands
The health sector, which takes up seven percent of the total                for exemptions, it may be difficult for the Uganda Revenue
value of the budget, has also received a large portion of its               Authority to collect revenues to the budgeted value of 14.4
funding off budget. This trend towards off budget financing                 percent of GDP in FY 2016/17. If revenues collected fall below
raises serious concerns regarding planning within the affected              this level, the fiscal deficit will exceed 6.4 percent of GDP in FY
sectors. At the same time, off budget financing can enable                  2016/17, with more than 80 percent of the fiscal deficit funded
the Government to close critical gaps in cases where it is not              through external borrowing. The value of net external financing
possible to allocate sufficient resources under the national                is projected to reach 5 percent of GDP. With the decline in
budget. With increased regional security and terrorism                      concessional donor inflows, the value of loans from commercial
concerns, the value of budget allocations to the security sector            sources (non-concessional loans) will amount to 3.9 percent of
have increased rapidly over the recent past, with this allocation           GDP. Domestic financing is forecast to amount to 1.3 percent
amounting to 8 percent of the total value of the budget in FY               of GDP, with the Government drawing on the petroleum
2016/17. On the other hand, the wider public administration                 fund to support and modestly increase the level of domestic
sector, including the legislature and public sector management              borrowing, with lower interest rates reducing the Government’s
agencies, continues to require increasingly large allocations               cost of borrowing.


     Figure 10: Proposed sector allocations maintain same priorities into FY 2016/17




        Source: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development



6. Government of Uganda National Budget Speech for Financial Year 2015/16




        18
In FY 2017/18, Uganda’s economic growth should                      improvements in the productivity of the economy to sustain
increase by an additional percentage point to reach                 higher growth in the medium to long term.
approximately 6.8 percent. Thereafter, it should remain
on an upward trajectory into the medium term, perhaps               The fiscal deficit is likely to remain high into the medium
facilitating a further reduction in poverty levels by around 1 to   term, but with an increasing proportion of expenditure
2 percentage points per year. The negative effects of a possible    being allocated towards capital investments and with an
protracted slowdown in the global economy notwithstanding,          increasing proportion of financing being derived from
the continuation of a fiscal strategy focused on removing           external sources. It is expected that capital expenditures will
constraints to growth and proceeding with key oil projects          gradually increase to around 11 percent of GDP by FY 2019/20.
is expected to boost economic activity, particularly in the         With only modest improvements to revenue collection, the
construction sector. In addition to completing major energy         overall deficit is projected to decline only marginally, to around
and transport projects that have already commenced, a               6.2 percent of GDP by FY2017/18. It is then expected to remain
number of projects within these areas will continue to pre-         at around the level of 6.5 percent of GDP in subsequent years.
occupy the Government over the next three years. And with           To finance the deficit, it is expected that there will be a reduced
key decisions related to the development of infrastructure to       emphasis on domestic sources of financing and an increased
support the oil production, distribution, and the transportation    emphasis on external sources, with most of the external
of its products to the Indian Ocean having been made (see Box       borrowing contracted on non-concessional, but still favorable,
3), it is expected that upfront investments to a total value of     terms. If the Government manages to reduce the deficit
US$ 8-12 billion could be undertaken over the next five years.      following the implementation of its planned large infrastructure
It is assumed that these investments will boost construction        projects, Uganda is likely to remain on a fiscally sustainable
activity to accelerate the rate of economic growth in the near      path, consistent with the charter of Fiscal Responsibility
term, and if managed well should to be expected to lead to          mandated by the PFM Act (2015).




                                                                                                               Pregnant women
                                                                                                               attending an
                                                                                                               antenantal clinic in
                                                                                                               Mukono HC iv




                                                                                                               the Uganda National
                                                                                                               budget aims to
                                                                                                               continue allocating
                                                                                                               resources to improve
                                                                                                               the quality of social
                                                                                                               services, even as these
                                                                                                               are being squeezed
                                                                                                               by the increasing
                                                                                                               pressures from the
                                                                                                               security and public
                                                                                                               administration sectors




                                                                                                                                  19
      Box 4: Key Decisions are Moving Uganda’s oil Sector


The oil sector is a critical element in supporting Uganda attaining the key objectives of achieving middle income status by 2020 and
transforming into a modern economy. Uganda’s 6.5 billion barrels of proven reserves could support the proposed production of 100,000-
200,000 barrel per day (BPD) over a 20 to 30 year period, depending on the speed of extraction. If oil prices remain low, the expected
stream of revenues in the medium term could be lower than forecast. Nonetheless, if oil production starts in the next two years and
investment accelerates over the next decade, the real rate of GDP growth is expected to reach an average of 8.8 percent annually in the
period from 10 years after production starts. This is 2.2 percentage points higher than in a scenario without oil and/or with a more limited
investment surge. In per capita terms, the emergence of the oil sector and the continued emphasis on public investment will allow
Uganda to reach the US$ 1000 GDP per capita mark by 2019/20. This level of per capita income is 32 percent higher than for a scenario
without oil and with lower levels of public investment. Realizing these impressive scenarios would depend on a number of factors:


i.	   Preparing for production - Infrastructure investments taking shape, must be executed efficiently
First, the construction of the refinery with an initial capacity of 30,000-60,000 barrels per day (BPD), a capacity considered sufficient to
cater for the region’s demand for refined petroleum products commenced in 2015. This task was assigned to a consortium led by RT
Global Resources, which is owned 100 percent by Russian defence conglomerate Rostec, and including among others South Korean
conglomerate GS Group. Located in Kabaale Township, in Hoima District, along the eastern shores of Lake Albert, the refinery capacity is
expected to increase to 120,000 bpd in the mid-term and 180,000 bpd in the long-term, if more reserves are discovered in the country.
Building a refinery in Uganda was jointly decided by the East African heads of State in the Northern Corridor infrastructure project.
It is mainly aimed at boosting petroleum production in the sub-region and serving as a back-up to the aging one in Mombasa. The
refinery will be funded as a Public Private Partnership (PPP) involving a 60 percent equity share by the private sector. This implies the EAC
governments will be the minority shareholder with 40 percent of the equity. The Governments of both Kenya and Tanzania have proposed
holdings in the project amounting to 2.5 percent and 8 percent, respectively. Rwanda and Burundi are still evaluating their position.
Second, for landlocked Uganda, decisions reached in April 2016 related to the location of the export pipeline was a major milestone in
terms of progress towards addressing the logistical challenges to tapping Uganda’s oil resources. Issues related to the location of the
export pipeline have been a source of uncertainty and delay, contributing to the postponing of the commencement of the production of
Uganda’s oil, with the dates for this commencement being a moving target over the past few years.


Now that Uganda has opted to use the Southern route through Tanga port of Tanzania to export its crude oil to the coast, processes
to allow for the construction of pipeline should be hastened. Estimated to involve the sum of US$ 3.55 billion for its construction, the




2.2 Risks are mainly downward                                             exempted members of parliament from taxes on allowances.
                                                                          If assented to into law by the President, this amendment alone
                                                                          will reduce the expected tax collections by at least 0.3 percent
There are several downside risks to the growth outlook,
                                                                          of GDP, pushing the expected amount of taxes during FY
a number of which have been present for some time.
                                                                          2016/17 down to 13.3 percent of GDP. In the short to medium
The most important of these relates to weaknesses in the
                                                                          term, the other source of fiscal management risk relates to
area of fiscal management. In the near future, fiscal policy
                                                                          the sequencing, financing and management of the public
still faces a challenge of remaining prudent in the context
                                                                          infrastructure development program. Moreover, with only
of political pressures to fulfill election promises related to an
                                                                          meager improvements to domestic revenue mobilization and
expanding size of parliament and to increasing emoluments
                                                                          with a considerable degree of uncertainty regarding when oil
for its members, both of which would significantly increase
                                                                          production and the subsequent flow of revenues will actually
the cost of public administration. In April 2016, the Parliament
                                                                          commence, there remains a considerable degree of risk related
hastily passed an amendment to the Income Tax Bill 2016 that
                                                                          to the financing of investments. Financing risks may become




        20
Tanga port option was considered to be the least costly option, significantly cheaper than the Northern route, which would have cost
around US$ 4.20 billion. The Southern route is 400 kilometers longer than the Northern route, but other factors, such as weather and
environmental risks; adjustments required to the supporting infrastructure such as rail and roads; terrain; and security concerns, make the
Southern route much more favorable. With financing already secured (from Total), it is expected that the construction of the pipeline could
take 3-4 years, which implies that oil export revenues will start to flow no sooner than 2020 . However, at a regional level, this development
distorts the original aspirations of the “Coalition of the Willing” group of countries to connect South Sudan and Kenya to Lamu, Kenya.
However, if Kenya goes ahead with the construction this pipeline, it would provide an alternative route in the long run.


ii.	 Expanding the horizons reap further from Uganda’s rich natural resource base
With more than 60 percent of the oil rich Albertine Graben region unexplored and with the formal production of other valuable minerals
yet to commence, Uganda should continue its exploration efforts. In line with the new legislative and regulatory framework approved in
December 2012, the Government announced its first competitive bidding round for exploration in six blocks, these being Ngassa (410
Km2) in Hoima District; Taitai and Karuka (565 Km2) in Buliisa District; Ngaji (895 Km2) in Rukungiri and Kanungu Districts; Mvule (344 Km2)
in Moyo and Yumbe Districts; and Turaco (425 Km2) and Kanywantaba (344 Km2) in Ntoroko District). Together, these six blocks cover 3,000
square kilometers. A number of firms submitted bids, including Armour Energy Limited of Australia; Walter Smith Petroman Oil Limited of
Nigeria; Oranto Petroleum International Ltd of Nigeria; Niger Delta Petroleum Resources Ltd of Nigeria; Rift Energy Corporation of Canada;
Glint Energy LLC of USA; and Swala Energy Ltd of Australia. It is hoped that this higher level of competition in the sector will result in
increased efficiency.


iii.	 Managing the challenges for efficiency and effectiveness of investments
Three main challenges that must be managed. First, the granting of production licenses take an abnormally long time. Given that the
bidding process has already commenced, the next milestone is to issue the production licenses. Previous experience suggest that this can
take an excessive amount of time. While production licenses applications that were submitted by three companies, CNOOC (1); Tullow
(3); Total (5) in 2012, only one license has been issued. Secondly, projects do not seem to be properly sequenced. While efforts toward
the construction of a refinery has progressed well, with the commissioning of the project to a Russian Firm, its construction also needs
to be fast-tracked, as in the case of the pipeline. Third, oil development projects should be synchronized with regional development.
The commitment of regional countries to take equity shares in the refinery project is critical for its viability. Rwanda and Burundi need to
indicate their interests in the project while Kenya is yet to indicate whether it will increase its participation to the average 8 percent.
Source: World Bank, Country Economic Memorandum, 2015




more critical if the rapidly expanding list of investments                 confirmed that Uganda continues to be at a low risk of debt
including hydro projects, oil refineries, oil pipelines, a standard        distress. Beyond the planned fiscal expansion to support the
gauge railway and numerous road transport infrastructure                   infrastructure investment program, sustainability was judged
projects, is not properly managed and sequenced. Even if these             against a lower threshold, following the downgrading of
projects are taken on by the private sector, there remains risks           the Uganda’s CPIA rating from ‘strong performer’ to ‘medium
related to the financing component expected to come from                   performer.’ The downgrading of this rating was mainly due
the public sector.                                                         to the limited improvements in the areas of transparency,
                                                                           accountability and corruption in the public sector since 2012.
Uganda is currently assessed to be at a low risk of                        The implication was that Uganda had moved into a category of
debt distress. However, continued failure to collect                       countries considered to have a much lower capacity to borrow
revenue in the context of a rapid fiscal expansion could                   and manage their debt than is the case for strong reformers.
increase this risk. The update of the Joint World Bank/                    However, based on these assumptions, including that of a
IMF Debt sustainability analysis undertaken in March 2016                  growth dividend, all debt burden indicators are projected




                                                                                                                                       21
to remain below Uganda’s country-specific debt burden                                      could have significant negative effects on consumption and
thresholds7 under the baseline scenario and the standardized                               livelihoods and could complicate the management of inflation.
stress tests. However, if the investments in infrastructure do
not result in an improved rate of growth or if they are delayed                            Lastly, the Government’s enormous infrastructure development
significantly, as has been the case with several energy projects,                          program has the potential to generate massive benefits, which
this could also result in rapid increases to the debt-to-GDP                               justify increased levels of the fiscal deficit. However, this is
ratio, most likely to a level in excess of 50 percent. This is a key                       contingent on the investment program delivering its intended
convergence criteria agreed upon in the East African Monetary                              results, which would ensure that the fiscal position can be
Union Protocol last December by all East African Community                                 reconsolidated and debt serviced sustainably. The increase
member states.                                                                             in development expenditure can be justified on the grounds
                                                                                           that it mainly involves one-off investments necessary to
In terms of external risks, downside risks are becoming                                    address Uganda’s significant infrastructure gap. Any short-term
increasingly significant. While low oil prices are beneficial to                           destabilizing effects on the macroeconomy may be mitigated
Uganda’s balance of trade in the short term, such benefits could                           by the high level of import content for these planned projects,
easily be offset by the negative impact on Uganda’s exports                                which should prevent upward pressures on domestic prices.8
(see Box 2), which impact will be even more significant if oil                             However, in the absence of improvements to public investment
prices remain at extremely low levels. Furthermore, if oil prices                          capabilities, the increase in expenditure on infrastructure could
take a long time to recover from the current levels of around                              rapidly lead to the build up of the debt stock. The question
US$ 30 per barrel, compared to the estimated breakeven                                     then is whether the expansive fiscal policy intended to facilitate
price of US$ 60 per barrel for production in Uganda, it may                                the building of infrastructure can generate the intended results.
require a re-evaluation of the phasing of refinery and pipeline                            The next chapter turns to this questions.
investments. With China still rebalancing its growth towards
consumption and services, its economy may decelerate much
sharper than has been forecast, leading to further declines
in the commodity prices, with negative effects on exports.                                                                           a
Furthermore, a decline in the Chinese economy could adversely
                                                                                                                                  Debt
impact Uganda’s planned investments in its infrastructure
development program generally. It is forecast that China will                                                           sustainability
account for about 37 percent of Uganda’s investment program                                                     analysis continues to
in the period from FY 2016/17 to FY 2019/20. The impact would
                                                                                                            confirm that Uganda is at
be particularly significant for investments in the development
of the oil sector.                                                                                         a low risk of debt distress
                                                                                                             Uganda’s CPIA rating was
Uganda remains vulnerable to risks associated with                                                        downgraded from ‘strong
volatile climatic conditions and volatile food prices.
                                                                                                               performer’ to ‘medium
Although the overall rate of inflation is expected to decline
gradually as a result of good macro-economic management,                                                                   performer’
food prices are expected to remain volatile due to unstable
food production patterns, particularly given the limited
availability of mitigation measures involving irrigation systems.
Thus, food price volatility is likely to remain a significant
issue. Moreover, there is a strong divergence in food price
developments across Uganda, largely due to the insufficient
integration of food value chains. With agriculture remaining the
primary source of livelihoods for more than 69 percent of the
population, supply disruptions resulting from climate change


7. These thresholds indicate the maximum level to which a country can increase its debt with no major concern about with respect to solvency. For ‘medium reformers’, this
suggests that the ratio of the present value of external debt should not exceed 40 percent in total exports, 150 percent in GDP, and 250 percent in domestic revenues. With
respect to ability to service debt, the thresholds for this group of countries stand at a ratio of 20 percent for the debt service both in domestic revenues and in exports.
8. It is assumed that 90 percent of such projects are used to finance imports, leaving a mere 10 percent to be spent in the local economy.




         22
23
  2
Part
       Moving beyond spending
       to creating productive
       assetS
Uganda can increase the rate of GDP growth from 6.5 percent to 9.2 percent per year,
if the efficiency infrastructure investments was raised by a percentage point over the
next decade.


Uganda has recently pursued expansionary fiscal policies, driven by the desire to
improve the country’s infrastructure, increase the production of assets, and facilitate
accelerated growth and productive exploitation of oil resources.


Challenges related to budget execution could prevent Uganda from achieving its
objective of accelerating growth in the short-term and raising productivity to be able
to sustain a high rate of growth of its economy in the medium to long term.


Overcoming these challenges and related investment inefficiencies will require
addressing issues related to political interference, haphazard project selection,
poor project preparation, and weaknesses in implementation processes such as
procurement. To varying extents, all of these factors have affected Uganda’s capital
investment program.


Uganda’s public investment management system contains good elements, but
needs to improve with respect to project preparation. As it is, the quality of projects
at entry is poor; and project implementation is delayed ; cost escalated; resulting
in the poor quality of completed projects; and poor operation and maintenance of
completed assets.


To convert its large investment program into productive assets, Uganda would need
to strengthen the current system of PIM across all MDAs to ensure it maximizes value
from public investments and eliminates waste.


A systematic process of reform is required to strengthen institutions; to promote a
common understanding of reforms that need to be implemented and how; and to
strengthen mandates and incentives through legal reform.


A sequenced action plan should first and foremost focus on the most binding
constraints, namely better preparation of projects. Once this is addressed, further
actions can be implemented to achieve ongoing improvements over a five year
period.




                                                                                    25
              3. Can Uganda’s fiscal policy 	
                 deliver its ambitions?


Uganda’s fiscal policy has generally been ambitious and expansionary over the past decade in support of
the National Development Plans and the Vision 2040 aimed at transforming the country to middle income
status. The fiscal deficit almost reached over six percent of GDP by FY 2005/16, with over 40 percent of
the resources allocated to the infrastructure sectors. The expansionary fiscal policy stance is expected to
be sustained into the medium term as the Government continues its plan of addressing the key binding
constraints to growth and building production capacities to exploit oil. Meanwhile, up to 36 percent
of budgeted resource have not been released to the implementing agencies in the past. As a result,
consumption has remained the key driver of growth in economic activity, and there are indications of a
decline in the efficiency in utilization of public capital. These challenges have constrained the efficacy of
fiscal policy in attaining the stated national objectives.




O
            ver the past 15 years, Uganda’s fiscal policy       The past four years, fiscal policy has been highly ambitious
            has passed through a number of significant          and extremely expansionary as also demonstrated by
            transitions. Following an expansionary              the significant size of both Uganda’s overall and primary
            phase in the period from FY 1999/2000 to FY         deficits. In fact, Uganda’s fiscal policies have almost been
2002/03, policies intended to facilitate fiscal consolidation   the most expansionary of any country within the region.
were implemented in the period from FY 2003/04 to FY            Uganda’s fiscal deficit is estimated to have reached a value
2008/09, with the intention to crowd in the private sector.     of 6.6 percent of GDP in the FY 2015/16 budget. At this level,
From the beginning of FY 2008/09, fiscal stimulus policies      in regional terms, the size of the fiscal deficit is second only
were implemented in order to address Uganda’s significant       to that of Tanzania’s, which was projected to reach a value of
infrastructure constraints and to mitigate the impacts of       6.9 percent of GDP in the same year, while Kenya, which has
the global financial crisis that was beginning to become        also been in a worse position over the past five years sought
apparent. However, policy makers continued to implement         to reverse it (see Figure 11). The increased fiscal deficits have
expansionary policies, particularly during the 2011 election    come with a corresponding increase in the stock of debt,
year, representing a departure from the principle of prudence   with the value of this debt increasing from 24.9 percent of
and, in turn threatening macro stability.                       GDP in FY 2009/10 to an estimated value of 37.3 percent in FY
                                                                2015/16.


  Figure 11: Uganda’s fiscal policy becomes one of the most expansionary within the region in recent years




      Source: Ministry of Finance



      26
                                                                                                                   Jinja Road the major
                                                                                                                   gateway to and from
                                                                                                                   Kampala City to the East


                                                                                                                   Uganda plans
                                                                                                                   to increase its
                                                                                                                   expenditure to
                                                                                                                   support a huge
                                                                                                                   public investment
                                                                                                                   program to address
                                                                                                                   the country’s
                                                                                                                   infrastructure
                                                                                                                   deficit and to build
                                                                                                                   production facilities
                                                                                                                   to enable it exploit
                                                                                                                   its oil resource




Expansionary fiscal policies are not necessarily ill-                   an ambitious public investment program, without
advised or unjustifiable. It is an established principle of             corresponding increases in terms of revenue collection.
economic theory that deficit-financed public investment                 Over the period from FY 2008/09 to FY 2014/15, the value of
projects can be justified as a corrective response, acting both         total expenditures increased from 15.0 percent of GDP to 19.4
as a countercyclical stimulus and potentially enhancing the             percent. Uganda’s average annual expenditure amounted to
                                                                        a value of 17.4 percent of GDP over this period, which was at
stock of public assets, which in turn serves to stimulate the
                                                                        least 10 percentage points lower than that of any of its regional
private sector and thus facilitate the achievement of long-
                                                                        peers, with Kenya’s average expenditure standing at 29 percent;
term economic growth. However, to appropriately assess
                                                                        Rwanda’s at 28 percent; and Tanzania’s at 27 percent (see
and provide recommendations for the Government’s fiscal
                                                                        Figure 12). However, over the same period, the average annual
policy, this Economic Update discusses how the Government is            value of Uganda’s collected revenues amounted to only 11.8
spending its resources, on what, and if this expenditure is resulting   percent of GDP, which resulted in the rapid increase in the fiscal
in the creation of the intended economic value.                         deficit. As discussed in Chapter 2, Uganda plans to increase its
                                                                        expenditure to support a huge public investment program that
                                                                        is intended to address the country’s significant infrastructure
3.1 Fiscal strategy almost consistent
                                                                        deficit and to build production facilities to enable exploiting
with national development priorities                                    the country’s oil resource. Under this scenario, Uganda may
                                                                        catch up with and even surpass its regional peers before the
Recent fiscal expansion in Uganda is largely the result                 requirement to limit fiscal expenditures, which is part of the
of significant increases in expenditure to implement                    EAC convergency criteria, is implemented.


   Figure 12: Uganda lags regional peers in level of public expenditure




        Source: IMF




                                                                                                                                 27
The Government is increasingly emphasizing allocations             The fiscal policy implemented over the recent past is
to the development budget, the value of which has                  generallly supportive of the Government’s Vision 2040
grown by 126 percent in nominal terms over the past four           and the National Development Plans. Consistent with
years. This shift in emphasis reflects the Government’s efforts    these plans, the budget framework allocates the most
to build its capital base as a means of facilitating accelerated   significant proportion of financial resources to the public
economic growth and transformation. Correspondingly, the           works and transportation sector, and the allocation has
share of allocations for recurrent expenditure has declined        increased from an average value of 1.9 percent of GDP in the
from an average value of 64.6 percent of total expenditures        period from FY 2004/05 to FY 2008/09 period to 3 percent
in the period from FY 2003/04 to FY 2007/08, to 58 percent in      over the past seven years (see Figure 13). The sector receiving
the period from FY 2008/09 to FY 2014/15. As a share of GDP,       the second largest proportion of financial resources is the
the value of development expenditures has almost doubled,          energy and minerals sector, where the budget allocation has
from 4.3 percent to 7.6 percent over that period. The value        increased from an average value of 1.2 percent of GDP in the
of recurrent expenditure has grown at a much slower rate,          period from FY 2004/05 to FY 2008/09, to 2.3 percent over the
increasing from 7.9 percent of GDP to 10.2 percent over the        seven years prior to FY 2015/16.
same period.


  Figure 13: The shift in infrastructure spending has exploded and will continue to be significant




        Source: Ministry of Finance



The Government’s medium-term fiscal framework                      figure of UGX 4.2 trillion recorded in FY 2014/15 to UGX 38
targets the total value of expenditures to be below 22             trillion FY 2020/21 in oder to finance a number of flagship
percent of GDP for the next five years to FY 2020/21.              projects identified in the NDPs. Over the next five years,
However, the proportion of budgetary resources allocated           allocations for investments in infrastructure are estimated to
to the infrastructure sectors, including works and transport,      reach a value of approximately US$ 9 billion. These planned
and energy and water, will increase to an aggregate value of       projects include rehabilitation of Entebbe airport, and the
41 percent of the total budget by FY 2017/18. It is expected       construction of a standard-gauge railway line; three large
that the proportion will gradually decline from FY 2018/19         dams for hydropower generation; an oil refinery; and two
back to its current level of approximately 31 percent. In          highways to improve the connection between Kampala and
nominal terms, the aggregate value of the allocation to            Jinja (the main eastern gateway for the country) and Entebbe
both the roads and energy sectors will increase from the           (the main air gateway) respectively.




      28
3.2 smart budgetING IS undermined by                            can be determined is in terms of the proportion of funds
                                                                released to implementing agencies. In FY 2003/04, 86
implementation challenges
                                                                percent of overall budgeted resources to implementing
While Uganda’s fiscal policies appear to have been well         agencies were released. However, this figure declined to
planned and appropriate, the ability of these plans             64 percent by FY 2014/15, even if some improvement was
to facilitate the achievement of the Government’s               recorded in the period from FY 2007/08 to FY 20009/10.
objectives has been undermined by significant                   Furthermore, in the past, the execution of the recurrent
deficiencies in execution. These deficiencies have been         budget was generally better than for the development
particularly apparent in the execution of the development       budget. However, for FY 2013/14 and FY 2014/15, the level
budget. The first measure by which the level of deficiencies    of execution seems to be roughly the same for both types of
                                                                expenditure (see Figure 14).


   Figure 14: The share of budgeted resources that is actually used has declined




       Source: MFPED BOOST Data base, 2014/15



Deterioration of budget releases has been recorded              administration sector, which includes Police, State House,
in all sectors, but it is most pronounced in the                President’s Office, among others, has over-released by an
infrastructure and human capital development sectors.           average figure of 33 percent in the same period.
Compared to the level of performance in the period from FY
2003/04 to FY 2007/08, budget releases have worsened in all
sectors except tourism, trade and industry; accountability;
public administration; and justice, law and order (see Figure
15). If the proportion of budgeted resources released
indicates the extent to which implementing agencies
                                                                              the development of
have actually executed planned projects, then overall
implementation performance has deteriorated. For the                       infrastructure has been
priority infrastructure sectors, the level of budget releases              the Government’s stated
has declined from an average figure of 73 percent recorded
                                                                           priority for at least the
in the period from FY 2003/4 to FY 2007/8, to 55 percent
in the five years to FY 2014/15. The level of performance
                                                                                 past eight years.
of the energy sector has been particularly bad, with an
average of 36 percent of its budget released each year in the
period from FY 2008/9 to FY 2014/15. By contrast, the public




                                                                                                                   29
  Figure 15: Worsening gap between ex post budget allocation and funds released




     Source: MFPED BOOST Data base, 2014/15



Another measure by which the execution of fiscal                   of 3.7 percent of GDP, significantly higher than the value of
policy may be assessed is in terms of the proportion               2.3 percent recorded in the periom FY 2004/5 to FY 2008/09.
of released resources spent to support investments                 However, these priority sectors are also the sectors in which
that actually facilitate the achievement of the stated             the most significant deterioration in performance in terms
goals of the fiscal policy. According to data provided by          of the level of execution of public investment projects has
Uganda’s public investment plan, which maintains a data            been recorded (see Figure 16). Overall, both the energy and
base for all projects that are publically funded, investments in   transport infrastructure sectors have not been able to realize
infrastructure, particularly energy and transport, have been       over two percentage points of GDP due to issues related to
the Government’s top priority for the past five years, with the    execution.
value of these investments reaching an average annual value


  Figure 16: Energy and transport sectors have largest execution gaps




     Source: MFPED BOOST Data base, 2014/15




      30
The significant under-execution of the infrastructure                       make decisions, to implement projects, and to maintain
budget has contributed to a huge backlog of                                 them after completion. This underscores the need to build
infrastructure investments and has significantly                            capacity to implement projects to realize full value from the
weakened the impact of the Government’s fiscal                              investment program. The value of donor financing (excluding
policy and overall development program. During the                          non-concessional loans) has declined from 3.4 percent of GDP
implementation of the first NDP from FY 2009/10 to FY                       in the period from FY 2004/05 to FY 2009/10 to 2.9 percent in
2014/15, the level of actual development expenditure                        the period since. The value of public investments financed by
remained well below the levels envisaged under the plan.                    the Government’s own resources has meanwhile increased
According to the Public Investment Plan (PIP), only 78                      from an average of 3.5 percent of GDP to 5.4 percent over
percent of planned investments were actually realized in this               the same time period (see Figure 17). A similar trend can be
period. While there was no change in the composition of                     seen in the proportion of investments funded through the
planned expenditure over the period, domestically-financed                  use of non-concessional borrowing (NCB), with a particularly
development budgets were under-executed by an average                       significant increase occurring in FY2015/16. This may also be
rate of almost 30 percent. This rate of under-execution                     regarded as a positive development, as the use of this form
was particularly significant in the area of infrastructure                  of finance increases the Government’s autonomy to select,
investments, for which the actual average value of                          appraise, manage and evaluate PIP projects. However, the
expenditure was lower than planned levels by around a full                  capacity to implement these projects may not have increased
percentage point of GDP. As a result, the value of the backlog              in tandem. As such, the rate of execution of the donor-funded
of planned infrastructure investments had increased by more                 component of PIP improved from 46 percent to 80 percent for
than US$ 1 billion by the end of the first NDP. As a result of the          the periods in question, whereas the rate for the Government
failure of planned infrastructure investments to materialise, or            component deteriorated from 86 percent to 72 percent. This
at least only after significant delays, the objectives of the fiscal        calls for further improving the capacities in the area of public
policy as well as its overall development objectives were not               investment management at central level as well as on local
achieved.                                                                   government level, given the significant value of investments
                                                                            managed at the local level.
The Government’s increased use of own resources to
finance public investments provides it more autonomy to




                    Figure 17: 	 GOU own financing of public investments increasing, as deviation of actual expenditures
                                 from budget increases



                      Sources on financing for the public investment plan                    Deviation of actual expenditure from budget in PIP
 percent of GDP




                                                                            percent of GDP




                  Source: World Bank Computations based on MFPED DATA




                                                                                                                                            31
3.3 Fiscal under-execution matched                                                        capital development. However, it is not clear if the invested
                                                                                          resources are generating actual value. In fact, the rate
by inefficiencies in investments and
                                                                                          at which the value of the Government investments are
the economy                                                                               generating increases to the rate of growth of GDP is
                                                                                          declining. In the period from FY 2010/11 to FY 2014/15, the
There is little evidence that public investments have                                     Government’s total investments contributed to 26 percent
contributed to improvements in the productivity of the                                    of the total rate of GDP growth. This is a much lower rate
economy with consumption contributing the largest                                         than the figure of 40 percent recorded in the period from
share to economic growth. Over the past decade, the                                       FY 2005/06 to FY 2009/10. Instead private consumption has
Government facilitated the achievement of accelerated                                     been the most significant contributor to increases in the rate
economic growth through the fiscal policy by significantly                                of economic growth of (see Figure 18).
increasing the value of its budget for investments in



      Figure 18: Uganda’s investment contributing less to economic growth in recent years




      Source: World Bank staff computations, using UBOS Data



The efficiency of the Government’s investments also leaves                               been able to leverage further private investments to generate
room for improvement given the value of the output that                                  faster economic growth. Examining the trends for Uganda’s
has been generated through public investment. Increases                                  Incremental Capital Output Ratio (ICOR)9, a rough indicator of
in the ratio between capital inputs and productive outputs                               this type of efficiency, shows that there has been a significant
can be seen as a measure of efficiency. Considering the recent                           increase in this ratio in recent years , which suggests declining
increase in the value of the Government’s investments, it                                efficiency. Moreover, over the past decade, the average level of
is noteworthy that even when these investments have not                                  the ICOR has been significantly above the ideal average for a
been impacted by the execution issues described in the                                   developing country using capital inputs efficiently (see Figure
previous sections, they have not resulted in significant levels                          19).
of increased growth. In short, these investments have not




9.	 The incremental capital output ratio (ICOR) is defined as the ratio between investment in a period and the subsequent growth in output. The higher the ICOR is, the
  lower the efficiency. Since, growth in output can arise from other factors beyond investment in new capital (e.g. productivity enhancements or increased capacity
  utilization rate), and the lag between investment and increased output varies, reliable measure of ICOR should be over a long period of time, say three decades. Therefore,
  estimations over shorter periods are only rough estimates.



         32
                       Figure 19: Additional capital generating less output over past decade




           World Bank staff computations, using UBOS Data




The decline in the level of efficiency in the utilization                                    Fiscal policies will only facilitate the achievement of their
of public capital is a cause of significant concern. The                                     intended objectives and economic value if well-designed
extent to which Uganda’s public investments will contribute                                  budgets are effectively executed. The challenges related to
to increases in the rate of economic growth and productivity                                 budget execution could therefore easily prevent Uganda from
is determined by the extent to which they improve the level                                  achieving its objective of accelerating growth in the short-
of the public capital stock, thereby reducing the cost of                                    term, and raising productivity to be able to sustain a high rate
production for the private sector and thereby enabling it to                                 of growth of its economy in the medium to long term.
engage in increased levels of economic activity and to create
a greater number of productive employment opportunities.
In the USA, for every dollar invested in the development of
the interstate highway network in the period from 1954 to                                                                      the rate
2001, six dollars of economic productivity was generated. If                                                             of returns on
Uganda maintains its ICOR at the levels recorded over the last                                                         Uganda’s public
eight years, then for every dollar invested in the development
                                                                                                                 investments depends
of public capital stock, it would generate only 0.8 dollar
worth of economic activity. Thus, the rate of return (economic                                                on how effectively and
and social) on Uganda’s public investments depends on                                                            efficiently the public
how effectively and efficiently the public investments are                                                            investments are
managed.                                                                                                                     managed.




10.	 Fiscal policies will only facilitate the achievement of their intended objectives if well-designed budgets are effectively executed. It is only in this manner that the
    investment of resources will facilitate the delivery of the intended economic value. The issues related to the execution of the budget that have been described in this
    section of the update could easily prevent Uganda from achieving its objective of accelerating growth in the short-term, and raising productivity to be able to sustain a
    high rate of growth of its economy in the medium to long term.




                                                                                                                                                                       33
              4.	Why is Uganda not generating
                 good returns on its investments?


Addressing the binding constraints to growth in Uganda and building production capacities to exploit oil
requires managing investments effectively. Currently, the ability of the Government’s fiscal policy to achieve
its planned objectives is to some extent constrained by inefficiencies in public investment management.
Uganda is currently ranked in 46th position out of 71 countries in terms of quality of institutions for
public investment management. Among the issues affecting the effectiveness of public investments are
implementation challenges that result in delays, cost overruns, and perpetuity. Based on lessons from other
countries, the systems in Uganda could particularly be improved in the area of project appraisal and ex-post
evaluation to establish minimum conditions to support efficiency.




T
          he discussion above indicates that there is              average difference between the ideal value of efficiency of
          a clear need to enrich fiscal policies with              investments and the realized values (efficiency gap) stands
          policies and strategies that acknowledge the             at a 27 percent. The gap for countries in the Sub-Saharan
          weaknesses in the management of public                   Africa Region is significantly higher, with the average figure
investments. It recognizes that these can derail public            estimated to be 38 percent. At this level of inefficiency,
spending and weaken the growth process, with adverse               even very high levels of investment in the development of
consequences for fiscal solvency and stability. In this respect,   a country’s infrastructure stock will produce disappointing
global lessons abound, but these can only offer guidance           results (see Figure 20). In other words, whatever the level of
where own capacities have been assessed and workable               input, the degree of inefficiency prevents the investments
approaches adopted.                                                from being converted into productive assets and hence
                                                                   achieving the overall objective of an accelerated rate of
4.1 Inefficiencies in investment                                   economic growth. On the one hand, the selection of the
                                                                   investments may be based on badly formed criteria. On the
result in failed capital accumulation
                                                                   other hand, implementation may be weak, characterized by
efforts across the world
                                                                   waste, corruption and misappropriation. Finally, even if the

Global evidence shows that public investments can be               investment does result in the production of a potentially

affected by a range of different types of inefficiencies, any      useful public good, it is often not operated or maintained

one of which can have costly economic implications. The            well, which again reduces the level of return on the

International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimates that the global        investment.




                                                                                                              Kampala CBD which houses
                                                                                                              a number of government
                                                                                                              ministry offices




                                                                                                              there is a clear need to
                                                                                                              enrich fiscal policies
                                                                                                              with strategies that
                                                                                                              acknowledge the
                                                                                                              weaknesses in the
                                                                                                              management of public
                                                                                                              investments




      34
     Figure 20: The large efficiency gap in public investments costly to public capital




     Source: IMF (2015); “Public Infrastructure Trends and Improving the Quality of Investments”




The tools to manage public investments have evolved                            Over the past two decades, many governments have
significantly over the past decades, but this has                              adopted an increasingly strategic approach to both the
not necessarily led to efficiently managed capital                             management of public investment projects and public
investments. In the 1970s and 1980s, the management of                         financial management (PFM), with these two areas being
public investments focused mainly on Public Investment                         two sides of the same coin. This often involved moving
Programs (PIP). These programs were originally designed                        towards a more integrated approach, with investment
to put together capital investments intended to facilitate                     decisions increasingly delegated to line ministries. Although
the construction of physical assets. However, over the past                    this approach resulted in some initial successes, especially
two decades, there has been a paradigm shift, with the                         in the area of budgeting, it did not place sufficient emphasis
integration of a range of projects and programs under PIPs                     on the strategic importance of public investment to the
to match them with government’s medium term financial                          economy. Thus, costly decisions with long-term implications
frameworks. This shift meant that the PIP became a database                    may be undermined by short-term political considerations.
to organize a range of projects and programs that are not                      The realization of the inherent dangers of this approach
necessarily intended to build capital assets. The PIP enabled                  has led to the resurgence of a different approach to public
the centralized collation of plans for the development of                      investment management, with the more systematic
affordable projects and programs to support the spending                       identification of long-term priorities.
allocation process. Once such assets were constructed, they
ceased to be part of the PIP, with the resources required for                  However, unless accompanied by measures to strengthen
their operation and maintenance being allocated through                        the framework and capacities of institutions involved in
the recurrent budget. However, because of the link between                     PIM, the new integrated approach did little to facilitate
the PIP and the budget, the PIP could only include projects                    the achievement of higher levels of efficiency. It was
that had been already included in the budget. These projects                   expected that within the new integrated process, there
could also be characterized by varying degrees of quality,                     would be a centralized framework to guide the management
depending on the prevailing regulations for appraising                         of projects, including selection and screening processes.
projects for financing. Therefore, the PIP did not fulfill the                 It was also expected that PIPs would serve as a means to
purpose of collating a bankable, ready-to-finance pool of                      manage overall public expenditure. Unfortunately, there were
capital projects, a process required to ease implementation                    many cases in which institutional capacities to handle these
and to improve the overall level of efficiency of public                       processes became overstretched, both within the Ministry of
investments                                                                    Finance and within the line ministries. This was particularly
                                                                               true in the case of ministries of finance and planning,




                                                                                                                                   35
which are usually expected to scrutinize all projects and                                high level of institutional capacity, such as the UK, the cost
programs, even when they do not include a significant level                              and duration of construction may exceed initial estimates
of capital expenditure. In some countries, the share of capital                          by an average 7-10 percent. The contrast with nations with
expenditure within the PIP is less than 50 percent. Moreover,                            weak PIM systems can be startling. For example, in Tanzania,
if there is no designated process for the preparation and                                it is not unusual for the construction of a project to cost
implementation of projects, projects are sometimes included                              more than 60 percent in excess of the original estimate, or
into the PIP before these projects are ready to move to the                              to be completed in more than twice the original planned
investment phase. In some instances, this results in delays to                           time. In the case of Ethiopia, these overruns can be twice as
implementation, with feasibility studies only conducted after                            high again.10 In circumstances such as these, investments
funds have been allocated to the capital budget. In others                               in the establishment of effective systems to manage public
cases, the quality of the projects may have been undermined                              investment are likely to yield high returns.
by the failure to implement pre-appraisal or feasibility studies.
                                                                                         While consistent data to measure sector specific waste
As a result of these factors, the quality of PIM has often                               are not available, indices that measure the overall
remained poor, with many national administrations                                        quality of the institutional environment on which public
failing to realize their intended objective of developing                                investment management is based indicate that the
their stock of physical capital in a manner that facilitates                             management of public investments in Uganda does not
increased economic growth. The causes of these failures                                  facilitate the achievement of optimal value. According to
are many and varied, including undue political interference                              the Public Investment Management Index (PIMI),11 Uganda
and corruption in the management of public investments;                                  ranks in 46th place out of the 71 countries that were assessed.
haphazard project selection, with no objective selection                                 While this ranking indicates that Uganda’s performance is
criteria; unclear lines of responsibility and accountability;                            comparable to those of its neighbors, including Kenya (which
skill and capacity gaps in the areas of project appraisal,                               ranked in 44th place) and Tanzania (in 48th place), it places it
procurement and management; perverse incentives                                          well behind the best performers in the region, such as Ghana
for project managers to underestimate risk; and lack of                                  (in 27th place) and Rwanda (in 12th place) (see Figure 21).
coordination between different levels of government, across
jurisdictions.                                                                           Meanwhile, efficient management of public investments
                                                                                         will become even more important for Uganda in the
As a result of weaknesses of this nature, the level of                                   coming years. With the prospect of significant revenues
wastage in public investments is often significant. On the                               from the exploitation of oil, Uganda is also expected to
one hand, there are numerous recorded cases of countries                                 increase its investments to use these revenues for the
investing huge amounts of resources in “white elephants”,                                intended purpose of transforming its economy. When
or projects that just simply do not generate a significant                               oil production begins to generate substantial additional
return on investment. Such cases are usually characterized                               revenue for the Government, new challenges will emerge.
by significant weaknesses in the areas of fiscal and overall                             The most critical objective may no longer be to further
economic management. In particular, countries that generate                              accelerate the implementation of public investments,
significant revenues from the export of natural resources                                but rather to slow down the growth of public spending,
but that have weak institutional capacities may be afflicted                             including public investment, in order to mitigate the
by the so-called “resource curse,” which refers to the paradox                           negative impact of the sudden inflow of revenue from oil
that countries with an abundance of natural resources tend                               production. In this context, the top priority should be to
to have less economic growth, less democracy, and worse                                  increase the absorptive capacity of the Government in terms
development outcomes than countries with fewer natural                                   of the size of its executed public investment program and
resources. On the other hand, there are many cases of projects                           to improve the structure of this program, including through
that run well over their planned costs and completion dates                              improvements to project selection processes and practices.
not only as a result of bureaucratic delays and the diversion
of resources, but also from the underestimation of costs as                              Implementation of the PIM reform program designed
a result of over optimism. In many developed nations with a                              by the Government will develop Uganda’s absorptive




10. Construction Sector Transparency Initiative (2011).
11. The PIM index is based on the four categorization of elements of public investment management: i) strategic guidance and project appraisal; ii) project
selection; iii) project management and implementation; and iv) project evaluation and audit; as an attempt to measure the efficiency of the public investment
management process across 71 countries, of which 40 are low-income countries.




         36
capacity. It will also prevent overspending (at least initially),                                                                         its public investment management systems, with these
as it will take time to develop a pipeline of sound, high-                                                                                improvements particularly crucial for the achievement of
priority projects and to complete all the necessary feasibility                                                                           stability and prudent management with the prospect of
and pre-investment studies for these proposed projects.                                                                                   increased revenues.
Thus, now is the critical moment for Uganda to revamp


                                                  Figure 21: Uganda fairs poorly in public investment management in relation to peers
       PIM Index Score (0-lowest, 5-highest)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Madagascar*
                                                                                                                                                                                                    FYR Macedonia
                                                                                                                Mozambique
                                                                        Sierra Leone




                                                                                                                                                                                    Cote d’Ivoire




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Burkina Faso




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kazakhstan
                                                                                                                                           Mauritania




                                                                                                                                                        El Salvador



                                                                                                                                                                      Philippines
                                                                                                                             Montenegro




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Afghanistan
                                                                                                   Azerbaijan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bangladesh


                                               Source: IMF (2014), The Public Investment Management Index data base




4.2 Global Experience: How are PIM                                                                                                        With the growing recognition of the need for the
                                                                                                                                          systematic identification of long-term priorities,
systems being improved around the
                                                                                                                                          global experience suggests that good PIM systems are
world?                                                                                                                                    characterized by a number of common features.12 For
                                                                                                                                          countries in varying conditions and with varying levels of
Global experience demonstrates that the establishment
                                                                                                                                          development, these features emphasize the minimum basic
of an efficient PIM system involve significant challenges.
                                                                                                                                          processes and controls that are likely to generate optimal
In particular, it involves building institutional capacities to
                                                                                                                                          levels of efficiency in decision-making processes related
manage the wide range of technical aspects of investment
                                                                                                                                          to public investments and to the implementation of these
management. It also involves coordinating these processes
                                                                                                                                          investments. In situations where traditional budgetary
across many institutions in a range of different sectors
                                                                                                                                          financing and capacity have been recognized as insufficient
to ensure the achievement of a common objective.
                                                                                                                                          to meet a country’s development goals, governments have
Depending on the specific characteristics and backgrounds
                                                                                                                                          developed a range of new institutions, such as private-public
of the country involved, the approaches to institutional
                                                                                                                                          partnerships, sovereign funds, and others semi-autonomous
arrangements, processes and outputs expected out of a PIM
                                                                                                                                          entities to undertake large investments on behalf of the
system can differ. The desired outcome is to match these
                                                                                                                                          Government. However, it is still critically important to establish
specific characteristics with systems to design and implement
                                                                                                                                          the conditions that ensure the efficiency of investments
projects in a manner that will maximize economic value for
each country.                                                                                                                             and maximize the value for money that these investments



12. Rajaram, A., Le, T.M., Biletska, N., Brumby, J. (2010). A Diagnostic Framework for Assessing Public Investment Management. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
5397, Washington, DC.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           37
generate. This approach focuses on the identification of the               and the preliminary screening process. The key aim at
institutional features that would minimize major risks and                 this stage is to ensure that investment choices are justified
provide an effective systemic process for the management                   in terms of the country’s development objectives. Many
of public investments. It also defines indicators for inputs,              countries, including most countries within the East African
processes and outputs to enable a meaningful assessment                    region, have developed both a national vision and a
                                                                           framework to provide such guidance. However, the challenge
of the functioning of public investment systems. These
                                                                           is to ensure that these frameworks are sufficiently specific and
indicators are linked to institutional features with eight key
                                                                           coherent. They should have sufficient authority to effectively
stages that characterize a good practice PIM system and are
                                                                           guide the PIM process, including defining the criteria for
intended to provide objective measures to identify sub-
                                                                           the rejection of some projects at the point of preliminary
optimal processes (see Figure 22).
                                                                           screening. Chile, which has one of the most effective PIM
                                                                           systems in the world, uses a screening system that rejects
The first stage, the guidance stage, involves the provision
                                                                           between 5-8 percent of project proposals at this stage.
of guidance for the development of the project concept,




   Figure 22: The Eight Stages of the Public Investment Management Cycle




      Source: World Bank (2015): “The Power of Public Investment Management: Transforming Resources into Assets for Growth”, Washington DC



The second stage, the appraisal stage, involves                            define a clear, standardized approach to economic, social
an assessment of the quality of project proposals                          and environmental evaluations. It should also ensure that
presented for investment in terms of their social and                      the technical capacities of the Government agencies are
economic value, with this assessment being used                            adequate to handle these responsibilities. The technical
as a basis for preliminary acceptance or rejection of                      guidance provided should be appropriate to the scale
the concept. A key component of this assessment is a                       and scope of the project, with projects of higher value
rigorous cost-benefit analysis, which ensures the cost-                    requiring more rigorous tests to determine their degree of
effectiveness of the proposed project (see Box 5). For                     financial, economic, social and environmental feasibility and
project appraisal to be effective, technical guidance should               sustainability.




       38
It is good practice at this stage to also generate an                          circumstances change so that these rejected projects become
inventory of appraised projects. This inventory, with                          likely to generate net positive benefits. The key element of
each appraised project ranked and prioritized for budget                       efficient PIMs is the provision of formal, standardized, clear
consideration, will facilitate the selection process. As has been              guidance to all MDAs, with the provision of this guidance
implemented by Chile, the inventory should also be used to                     for all projects of defined economic value, including those
track projects that have been selected for implementation and                  implemented as public private partnership.
enables policymakers to revisit rejected projects if underlying



         Box 5: Cost-benefit analysis is not just about the profitability of the project!


Cost-benefit analysis (CBA) assesses the costs and benefits of a project and reduces them to a common denominator. If benefits exceed
costs, with both expressed in terms of present value, then the project is acceptable. If not, the project is rejected. Benefits are defined
relative to their effect on the fundamental objectives, while costs are defined relative to their opportunity cost, which is the benefit
forgone by not using these resources for the best alternative use. By doing so, cost-benefit analysis seeks to ensure that no alternative use
of the resources consumed by the project would secure a better result from the perspective of a country’s objectives.


In contrast to the concept of financial profit, this CBA seeks to measure both the economic and social profit, which in turn demonstrates
the effect of the project on the fundamental economic and social development objectives. These different concepts are reflected in
the different items considered to be costs and benefits and in their valuation. Thus, a money payment made for wages is by definition a
financial cost, but it will be an economic cost only to the extent that the use of labor in this project implies some sacrifice elsewhere in the
economy with respect to output and other objectives. Conversely, if the project has an economic cost which does not involve a financial
flow—for example, because of environmental costs—this does not constitute a financial cost.


The key requirements for cost-benefit analysis are:
(i)   specification of the costs and benefits;
(ii) valuation of costs and benefits;
(iii) choice and formulation of constraints;
(iv) treatment of risk and uncertainty;
(v) choice of the rate of interest for discounting future costs and benefits; and
(vi) choice of a decision rule for accepting or rejecting projects.


Economic costs and benefits are measured by “shadow prices” which may approximate market prices in well-functioning market systems.
However, measuring these prices within imperfect markets-like those characterizing Uganda – can be a big challenge. This underscores
the need for clear guidance on how such inputs into the CBA are derived.



Source: World Bank report “Russia: Towards Improving the Efficiency of Public Expenditures” (2001)




The third stage involves the independent review                                entity responsible for developing the project proposal. In
of the project appraisals. The key element of an                               many countries, this function is performed by the ministries
independent review is to provide the basis for checking any                    of finance or planning. However, the use of independent
subjectivity or optimism bias that may be reflected through                    entities, such as research institutes or universities, can give
underestimated costs or overestimated benefits. Therefore,                     even higher credibility to the process, and some countries
the independent review should be conducted by an entity                        also undertake public hearings (see Box 6).
that is as detached and independent as possible from the




                                                                                                                                       39
        Box 6: Lessons on independent review in PIM systems


The United Kingdom: Since 2001, business cases for projects have been subject to independent review under the so-called “Gateway
process”, which embodies a series of short, focused, independent peer reviews at key stages of a project. These reviews highlight the risks
and issues that need to be addressed to ensure the successful delivery of the project. However, more attention is paid to larger projects,
with Treasury approval required for road projects of a value of more than £500 million. However, the level of Treasury involvement in
reviewing the appraisal of other transport projects varies widely depending on the project’s scale and complexity. In addition, major
infrastructure projects are subject to a public hearing before the end of the appraisal stage.

Chile: Project appraisal is conducted by the planning ministry rather than by the sponsoring ministry. To subject these appraisals to
independent review, a separate unit was created within the planning ministry.

Korea: The Public and Private Infrastructure Investment Management Center (PIMAC) was established in 1999 in the Korea Development
Institute (a semi-autonomous agency under the umbrella of the Ministry of Strategy and Finance) to conduct pre-feasibility studies of large
projects independent of the sponsoring ministry. In practice, PIMAC conducts all appraisals for projects above a defined threshold.

Source: World Bank 2015; “The Power of Public Investment Management” Washington DC.




The fourth stage is the selection and budgeting stage,                    haphazardly, simply not implemented, or subjected to
at which point a project is formally selected and                         political influence. However, these stages form a strong
entered into the budget cycle as a capital expenditure.                   foundation for the effective implementation of any project.
This stage is the most critical intersection between the                  Countries such as China and Brazil have been growing fast
budget and project cycles, even though budget must be                     and investing heavily, with investment rates reaching to
flexible to allow for recurrent expenditure incurred prior to             a value of 50 percent of GDP over the past two decades.
this stage, to prepare the project, and after this stage, to              However, the weaknesses in these countries’ PIM systems,
maintain and operate the asset. Therefore, this stage is a key            particularly in the area of screening and preparing projects
determinant of the level of efficiency of budget execution                for investment, may negatively affect both nations’ growth
and overall fiscal policy management, and thus serves as a                prospects. With the increasing tendency of governments
“gate keeping stage.” At this stage, the pressures to include             to formulate comprehensive national development plans,
projects on the basis of political considerations, including              many countries have in place a relatively solid basis for the
pressures exerted by MDAs, development partners, private                  identification of projects at the national level. However,
lobbyists and contractors, can be enormous, regardless of                 despite the vital role that these plans play, they do not
the results of an effective appraisal. Therefore, it is absolutely        necessarily prevent the inclusion of poorly designed and
essential that a strong “gate keeper function” exists, with               poorly conceived projects into a public investment program
clear, formally defined criteria for the selection of projects,           nor allow for a process that scrutinizes a new concept for
with such criteria legally backed and publicized amongst                  consideration.
all stakeholders. In many countries with good practice PIM
systems, including the United Kingdom and Chile, this gate                The pre-investment phase is followed by the investment
keeper function is exercised by the Ministry of Finance or                phase, with the first of the four stages that characterize
National Treasury.                                                        this second phase being the project implementation
                                                                          stage. This stage involves the planning, procurement,
In summary, these first four stages discussed above                       fabrication, civil work construction, installation, and the
take place during the pre-investment phase and                            formulation of the terms and conditions of contracts in
determine whether the projects being implemented will                     order to develop detailed schedules and plans for the
be executed efficiently and will deliver the expected                     construction or implementation of the project. During
economic value. In many countries, many of the processes                  the processes related to the execution of the project, the
that characterize the pre-investment phase, particularly                  construction team operates on the basis of the prepared
those during the first three stages, are implemented                      schedules, procedures and templates.




       40
In a good PIM system, the defining characteristic of this                                widely depending on the level of development of the
stage is the availability of the appropriate capacities,                                 country and the nature, size and complexity of the projects
including the capacities to disburse funding, procure                                    being executed. The project and procurement planning
materials and undertake engineering and construction                                     capacities necessary for the implementation of a relatively
works on the project. If the pre-investment phase works                                  simple project, such as a straightforward road development
effectively so that projects that reach implementation                                   project, will clearly be different from those required for the
are indeed ‘ready-to-go’, with designs that include clear                                implementation of a project involving the development of
organizational arrangement and a realistic timetable,                                    multi-part technological systems, concessional contracts
implementation of such projects will be easier. However,                                 or public-private partnerships. Clearly, mechanisms for the
failures can still result from weak capacities within the                                selection and procurement of contractors can influence
agencies responsibility for the implementation of a project                              price and quality and can either exacerbate or mitigate
or a failure to coordinate across many agencies. In practice,                            the risk of fraud and corruption. On the other hand, if such
projects are implemented by a range of different MDAs                                    mechanisms are accompanied by excessively stringent
or sub-governments. This calls for a clear delineation of                                regulation or lack of capacities, they can result in delays to
responsibilities and functioning coordinating arrangements                               implementation.
based on a consideration of the institutional capacities
required to manage and monitor project implementation                                    In many countries, where core PFM functions such as
timelines, project costs, multi-year budgeting processes and                             contact management and cash management are not
effective procurement.13                                                                 functioning well, procurement processes are often
                                                                                         prone to significant efficiency losses. This is because
Procurement is a core aspect of the execution of                                         procurement processes involve large, discrete contracts,
investments and is often forming the most significant                                    with an associated risk of abuse and corruption, facilitated
challenges to the implementation of a project. In                                        by poor accounting practices and collusion within and
many countries, the procurement function has evolved                                     between political elites. A recent review of around 500
significantly over recent years due to technological                                     World Bank funded projects around the world concluded
innovations, although capacity requirements can vary                                     that unsatisfactory performance in the area of procurements




                                                                                                                                                 The Nothern Bypass,
                                                                                                                                                 built to reduce traffic
                                                                                                                                                 congestion from the city
                                                                                                                                                 center



                                                                                                                                                 after a project is
                                                                                                                                                 fully operational, the
                                                                                                                                                 final stage involves
                                                                                                                                                 a comprehensive
                                                                                                                                                 process of evaluation
                                                                                                                                                 to determine
                                                                                                                                                 the quality of all
                                                                                                                                                 previous phases




13. In a number of countries, including the UK and Malaysia, centralized units, known as delivery units, have been established to coordinate and monitor all processes
related to implementation of priority projects or programs, including the identification of constraints and a determination of the means to address them to ensure the
efficient implementation of public projects. However, even under such arrangements, the capacities of implementing agencies within the sectors remain critical.




                                                                                                                                                                41
significantly affected the development outcomes of a high                                projects. During this stage the ex post collection of data related
proportion of these projects, with poor outcomes being three                             to the total expenditure involved in the project compared to
to five times more likely in cases involving unsatisfactory                              projected expenditure at the commencement of the project
procurement performance. Poor procurement practices are also                             and a selective evaluation of project results, all of which can
associated with poor design and appraisal and cost overruns.                             serve as input for the planning and implementation of future
The level of implementing agencies’ technical capacities can                             projects.
have major implications on how the project is delivered, even if
these agencies are merely responsible for the oversight of the                           4.3 Uganda’s PIM system: Works to
construction of projects.
                                                                                         some extent, but leaves room for
Somewhat overlapping with the project implementation                                     improvement
stage, the next stage of the investment phase is the
project adjustment stage. This stage involves processes                                  There is room for improving public investments in Uganda
related to monitoring and adjusting implementation to ensure                             to better facilitate the achievement of increases to the
the achievement of development objectives. Adjustments                                   rate of growth of GDP and to the achievement of the
to implementation are almost inevitable because the cost                                 country’s development objectives. A number of factors,
of materials may fluctuate; the cost of funding may change;                              including a non-conducive regulatory environment and
physical and social conditions may evolve; providers might                               external shocks, can hinder the effectiveness of investments
not perform as expected; and political demands might evolve                              in these terms. However, it is also clear that the public sector
as the project is implemented. The need for adjustment is                                has not performed at optimal levels. For public investments
often exacerbated if projects are not appropriately prepared                             to be considered effective, the resources invested must result
and designed to standard during the initial stages. The key                              in increases to the value of public capital stock, thereby
processes related to adjustment include project monitoring,                              facilitating improvements to the level of productivity at the
contract management, management of contract variations,                                  national level. Public investments have this effect if they create
and the evaluation of budget and funding arrangements. This                              capital that lowers the cost of production and distribution, and
phase of project execution is also sometimes referred to as                              hence enable the private sector to achieve higher levels of
“project execution and control.” 14 The current construction of                          productivity, thereby facilitating increased economic growth
the Karuma dam, a mega hydro project which has attracted                                 and the creation of productive job opportunities.
major attention because of what appears like the construction
defects in the dam walls, will provide a good example if it is                           Over the past 30 years, the Government of Uganda has
handled professionally.                                                                  developed systems and processes to ensure a higher level
                                                                                         of efficiency throughout its operations.15 One measure
The next stage of the investment phase is the operation                                  implemented to achieve these improvements was the sector-
of facilities stage. The realization of value is also determined                         wide approach (SWA) introduced in FY 1999/2000 to ensure
by the degree to which it is operated efficiently and effectively                        that institutions delivering related services cooperated to
to deliver the intended services. Thus, it is vital that sufficient                      achieve higher levels of synergy and allowed the stakeholders
financial resources are allocated to ensure appropriate                                  from cluster sectors16, through sector working groups (SWG),
operations and maintenance of the project as a means of                                  to participate in decision making processes to facilitate the
ensuring that it continues to deliver value.                                             achievement of Uganda’s strategic objectives. The SWA was
                                                                                         implemented to improve systems to examine and review
The final stage of the investment phase involves the basic                               policies and plans; to identify priorities; to assess resource
completion review and evaluation stage. After the project                                requirements and cost implications, including proposed
is fully operational, the final stage involves a comprehensive                           medium term budget allocations; to review performance
process of evaluation to determine the quality of all previous                           targets and outcomes; and to facilitate the identification and
phases, with this evaluation providing inputs to policymakers                            approval of development projects. The SWGs are accordingly
for future interventions and for the development of new                                  responsible for the formulation and delivery of sector



14. The term “control” is utilized because execution does not refer merely to the implementation of previously formulated plans, but involves a watchful process in
which the project manager should understand what is being done, how circumstances surrounding the project evolve, whether there are significant changes that
require adjustments to the project and how he or she should adjust to these circumstances.
15. A detailed assessment of the PIM in Uganda along the eight stages of project cycle can be found in “Strengthening Public Investment Management in Uganda: A
Diagnostic Report”, an output of the technical assistance to strengthening Uganda PIM System.
16. These sectors include: Agriculture; Lands, Housing and Urban Development; Energy and Mineral Development; Works and Transport; Information and
Communication Technology; Tourism, Trade and Industry; Education; Health; Water and Environment; Social Development; Security; Justice, Law and order; Public
Sector Management; Accountability; Legislature; and Public Administration.



        42
investment plans; sector budget framework papers; annual             to ensure that there are no unused resources remaining at
budget estimates; annual procurement plans; quarterly                the end of the fiscal year. At the end of this phase, the project
monitoring reports; reviews of existing/ongoing projects;            is commissioned and handed over. This process involves
annual budget performance reports; and proposals for new             performance tests, hand-over, close down, or decommissioning
projects.                                                            and disposal.

More recently, as Uganda has continued to streamline                 Uganda has an elaborate procurement process,
the national planning process to facilitate longer term              underpinned by the Public Procurement and Disposal of
planning for the country. This involved the establishment            Public Assets Act of 1996 and as subsequently amended.
of the National Planning Authority (NPA), as mandated by             The process is supervised by a semi-autonomous authority,
the National Planning Act of 1999. The NPA is tasked with            the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets
the preparation of the National Vision and an associated             (PPDA) Authority. All public projects are supposed to be
roadmap to guide national development. After the end of              handled by the Contracts Committee, which is chaired by the
the period of the first NDP in June 2015, the NPA launched           Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance. This committee
the current five-year development plan, which is intended to         provides oversight over the entire procurement process, which
guide development processes for the period until FY 2019/20.         starts with the implementing agency sending a statement
The NDPs are formulated with reference to the National               of requirements to the PPDA. Ideally, the statement includes
Vision 2040, which defines Uganda’s overall development              all information pertaining to the procurement requirements
objectives, and which provides broad guidelines as to how            for the project, including the technical specifications of the
this vision will be achieved. On the basis of lessons learnt from    project, the terms of reference and any other supporting
the implementation of the first NDP, a significantly greater         information from the user department. It is this information
emphasis has been placed on aligning the medium term                 that the Contracts Committee assesses in order to guide the
expenditure framework with the priorities identified in the          agency on the most appropriate method of procurement to
second NDP.                                                          be used. It is then that the PPDA then, with support from the
                                                                     implementing agency, processes the contract by preparing the
MDAs and local governments are responsible for activities            bidding document, issues solicitation documents, receives bids,
related to implementation of a project in the investment             nominates evaluation team, recommends award and prepares
phase. Depending on the modalities of execution, some or all         contracts for submission to Solicitor General for clearance.
of these responsibilities may be delegated to and/or shared          After the contract has been signed, it is handed over to the
with the private sector. Funding for the implementation of           implementing agency for contract management. The contract
a project is incorporated into the Sector Budget Framework           manager is required to provide regular reports to PPDA on
Paper (SBFP) and eventually into the annual budget. Once the         performance of the supplier/contractor or consultant, and to
funds allocated to the approved projects have been released          advise when an amendment to the contract is required. The
to the MDAs, procurement and implementation processes                user department is responsible for providing all the technical
are effected by MDAs responsible for the construction                input throughout the procurement cycle.
and operation of the project. In Uganda’s case, this phase
sometimes also includes the design of the project. In addition,      Overall, Uganda’s PIM system is intertwined with a number
the Ministry of Finance sometimes still has to make decisions        of other public processes, including planning, budgetary,
related to which of the bankable projects within the PIP are to      procurement, and monitoring and evaluation. The
be funded and what the source of funding for these projects          institutions and processes that currently constitute Uganda’s
will be. The sources of funding could include the fiscal budget,     PIM closely match the country’s planning and budgetary
as is traditionally the case, or other alternatives, such as PPPs.   system (see Figure 23). The question is how or whether these
                                                                     different processes are coordinated to effectively and efficiently
Typically, this is the phase in which the vast majority              implement the projects. The aim is not just to align processes
of budgetary resources are utilized. In this regard, the             and institutions to design and select projects for financing
Ministry of Finance ensures that allocated funds are                 by public resources, but to ensure that existing technical and
released effectively during the budget year to ensure                administrative capacities are sufficient to implement and
efficient implementation of the capital investment budget.           operate the project.
The Ministry of Finance monitors the disbursement of allocated
funds and can also provide incentives or implement penalties




                                                                                                                            43
     Figure 23: Uganda’s PIM System closely follows the budget process




    Source: Compiled from “Strengthening Public Investment Management in Uganda: Diagnostic and General Recommendations”, 2015.




4.3.1 Great ideas and plans                                              Second, each sector is required to prepare and submit
                                                                         sectoral budget framework papers according to the
undermined by weak appraisals and
                                                                         budget guidelines developed by the Ministry of Finance.
political considerations                                                 This is intended to facilitate the provision of public resources
                                                                         to fund proposed initiatives in the following fiscal year. The
Uganda’s current processes for identification of projects
                                                                         SBFP defines a budget strategy for a specific sector, specifying
and for ensuring alignment with national priorities
                                                                         the sector’s objectives and performance targets for the
contain many features that characterize good practice PIM
                                                                         financial year. It defines sectoral objectives, performance
systems. The first phase of the cycle is identifying potential
                                                                         targets, planned actions and outputs, strategies to improve
public sector projects, which is mandated by the NDP. The
NDP applies both a bottom-up approach to capture sectoral                performance and draft work plans with outputs for spending
priorities and a top-down approach that expresses national               agencies. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic
aspirations as outlined in the Vision 2040. The purpose of the           Development (MFPED) consolidates the SBFPs from the 16
processes implemented at this stage is to determine the basic            sectors and prepares the National Budget Framework Paper
desirability of a proposed project and to identify high-priority         (NBFP), which is presented to the Parliament no later than
projects that are the mandated responsibility of the public              March 31 each year. The NBFP is the Government’s overall
sector. The NDP is required to inform and be informed by                 budget strategy document and is intended to link the
sector investment plans, defined as the detailed statement               Government’s overall policies, as identified under the National
of performance, issues and opportunities, development                    Development Plan, with the annual budget. This document
objectives, policies and strategies that support development             describes macroeconomic policy and plans; overall fiscal
in specific sectors. These provide a framework, which should             strategies, including revenue projections; the overall medium-
be aligned with the NDP, for the identification of initiatives           term resource envelope; and priority interventions, as identified
and projects for government agencies, the private sector, civil          in the proposed sectoral expenditure plans.
society, development partners and academia.




      44
Third, the MFPED implements a number of processes                  implementation process. First, at the project identification
associated with the independent review stage of the                stage, many projects are introduced into the cycle without any
public investment management system. The preparation               process to determine whether they are aligned with national
of studies, including the profile study, the pre-feasibility and   priorities or to appraise their effectiveness (see Box 7). In part,
feasibility studies, and the identification, preparation and       this is because projects identified under NDP are very broadly
evaluation of the project, begins with the MDA submitting          defined. This creates space for unwarranted interventions
the proposal to the SWG to ensure it is consistent with sector     from various stakeholders during the implementation process.
investment priorities; to avoid duplication; and to develop        In addition, with the national planning process occurring
synergies. The approved proposal is then submitted to MFPED,       only every five years, there is no systematic framework for
where the Development Committee appraises the project on           continuously collecting project ideas and concepts in between
the basis of established guidelines to determine the degree        the planning cycle. Ideally such new concepts should be
to which it is aligned with national priorities and to which it    submitted to the responsible MDAs for appraisal to ensure their
will generate value for money and thereby determining its          economic viability and value to the economy, and for possible
suitability for inclusion in the public investment plan (PIP).     inclusion in the sector and national plans. Furthermore,
The PIP is intended to serve as a central data base covering       it would appear that the SWGs do not perform their
all active public investments in the development budget. The       responsibilities in terms of scrutinizing the project proposals,
projects that meet the minimum requirements for inclusion          due to weak capacities or as a result of political pressures.
in the PIP are also considered suitable for funding through the    As a result, the public investment plan includes a number
budget. In recent years, the composition of the Development        of projects that are poorly aligned with national priorities,
Committee has been expanded to include the NPA and Office          including many that are also poorly planned. Other challenges
of the Prime Minister (OPM), to strengthen the linkage between     are the low level of ownership by implementing agencies
the appraisal and planning processes and the monitoring and        and the inclusion of projects not clearly aligned with normal
evaluation functions of the Government.                            planning process. Therefore, while the PIP plays a positive role
                                                                   in centralizing data related to government projects, it is not an
Fourth, the Parliament exercises its oversight role to             optimally effective tool because of the poor quality of many
ensure that proposed projects are consistent with                  proposed projects; because it includes projects of a recurrent
national priorities and scrutinizes detailed expenditures.         nature; and because it does not provide a pipeline of ready-
This process represents another layer of scrutiny to ensure        to-go projects (see Box 8). Moreover, given that only projects
that funded initiatives will facilitate the achievement of         with identified sources of funding are included in the PIP, a
development objectives.                                            number of potentially beneficial projects are excluded. For the
                                                                   purpose of this Update, it was not possible to estimate how
Meanwhile, despite the positive aspects of the process,            many projects in the PIP had been subjected to an economic
Uganda’s pre-investment phase is still affected by                 assessment, due to the poor quality of information.
significant weaknesses, with severe consequences for the




                                                                                                               Uganda Parliament,
                                                                                                               where most government
                                                                                                               policies are sanctioned



                                                                                                               the preparation
                                                                                                               of studies,
                                                                                                               identification and
                                                                                                               evaluation of a
                                                                                                               project, begins with
                                                                                                               the MDA submitting
                                                                                                               the proposal to the
                                                                                                               SWG to ensure it
                                                                                                               is consistent with
                                                                                                               sector investment
                                                                                                               priorities




                                                                                                                           45
      Box 7: Lessons of project ideas differ and projects enter budget process in variant form


1.	   Private sponsors, enterprises or development partners: In this case, a private partner usually proposes a specific investment project
      to an MDA. In most cases, this project involves a productive sector (for instance, infrastructure) rather than a social service sector
      (health or education). In general, these projects come with a proposal for funding by the private partner.
2.	   National needs identified by high level authorities: This category entails the identification of projects by executive representatives of
      public institutions, such as the ministries and the president’s office. It includes local government agencies that have a direct contact
      with the area and its people. It also includes regional investment projects involving the participation of other countries, such as
      energy and pipelines projects.
3.	   National needs identified by MDAs: In this case, a technical team from MDAs identifies projects conceived as a possible solution to
      a specific problem and then In addition, it may include regional investment projects that might involve the participation of other
      countries, such as energy and pipeline projects.
4.	   Complement projects: This category includes projects identified by sectors that require a project to be implemented to support
      another, bigger project in order to optimize benefits. An example of this case is a road project (complement project) which is
      needed to provide connectivity to a mine project (principal




In addition to limited capacities and resource constraints,               Finance, imputed from the broader aspects of the PFM Act
the most important weakness in Uganda’s PIM system                        2015. Thus, its authority is constrained, which potentially
is the lack of a comprehensive framework that can be                      undermines its sustainability. Without a clear, legally
adopted across sectors to facilitate project proposal                     mandated framework, the overlapping mandates create
assessments. This weakens the requirement set by the                      additional confusion. Under NDP II, it has been found that
Development Committee that the sectors undertake                          there is often duplication between the roles of the NPA and
detailed pre-feasibility and feasibility studies to guide                 the Development Committee in the identification of tasks
decision-making processes. Without a solid legal mandate,                 such as project appraisal and analysis. Another source of
the Development Committee is not currently empowered                      weakness emanates from the inconsistencies between the
to operate effectively. At present, the Development                       development partner requirements and the country’s PIM
Committee derives its authority from the administrative                   processes for investment projects funded by development
powers of the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of                      partners.




                                                                                                                         Construction of the
                                                                                                                         Malaba one border post



                                                                                                                         the key element
                                                                                                                         of an independent
                                                                                                                         review provides a
                                                                                                                         basis for checking
                                                                                                                         any subjectivity
                                                                                                                         or optimism
                                                                                                                         bias that may be
                                                                                                                         reflected through
                                                                                                                         underestimated
                                                                                                                         costs or
                                                                                                                         overestimated
                                                                                                                         benefits




       46
Box 8: Public Investment Plan: It should do what its name says! form

As in many other countries, the Government of Uganda maintains a public investment plan (PIP), which was first established in 1994/95
to support the management of public investments. The PIP replaced the Rehabilitation and Development Plan (RDP) Volume 11, and is
intended to serv P captured only priority projects, with these being mainly donor funded projects. It is estimated that as of FY 2008/09,
the PIP covered only about 30 percent of all public investments, with most of these involving counterpart funding. Later, the PIP was
restructured with the intention of including all projects and programs receiving support from the development budget. However, not all
expenditure included in the development budget was utilized for investment, partly because not all budgeted development expenditure
is converted on a one-for-one basis into additional public investment. In addition, the development budget included some expenditure
items of a recurrent (i.e. consumable) nature, with these items being included in the development budget because they were associated
with specific projects. This was mainly the case for donor funded projects. The PIP also included programs that were judged to have a long
term growth impact, even if their capital expenditure component was low or non-existent (e.g. National Agricultural Advisory Services).
By FY 2008/9, the PIP covered 295 projects. Of these projects, 58 percent had a defined closing date, with the average lifespan of these
projects being six years. The remainder had no defined closing date, suggesting they were being funded and implemented in perpetuity.
In fact, the actual investment component of the PIP was still quite small, estimated at about 40 percent of all the projects.

Over the last five years, the PIP has undergone a number of refinements, including the development of clear guidelines related to the
inclusion of projects. These guidelines mandate that an included project must involve a capital expenditure component of at least 70
percent for new projects and at least 50 percent for existing projects, with this provision intended to distinguish capital investments from
recurrent expenditure. The assessment of projects is intended to be an ongoing process, with an annual review to exclude projects that do
not conform to the requirements. As a result, while the total number of projects in the PIP increased to 410 by FY 2014/15, the investment
component of the PIP had also increased to 60 percent. To improve accountability, the PIP was revised so that expenditures were tagged
to vote functions. In line with the overall fiscal framework and the NDP, the bulk of investments are in infrastructure sectors.

However, the PIP still focuses on the affordability of projects, since projects that fit within the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF)
ceiling are included. While this ensures that resources are not wasted on projects for which there are no MTEF allocation, it undermines the
development of a culture of planning and preparing bankable projects that can be funded once resources become available. Secondly,
because the process of preparing projects starts after they have been included in the budget, no feasibility and/or pre-appraisal studies are
conducted for many of the projects included in the PIP. This exacerbates the low levels of budget execution and other weaknesses in the
management of public investments. Thirdly, government and externally funded projects are still managed under separate data systems,
leading to difficulties in timely reconciliation of the full PIP database, as well as variant quality standards for the two sets of data.

Therefore, while the PIP currently provides the most comprehensive database of public sector investment projects, it still has a long way to
go before it becomes an effective tool for public investment management. Efforts ae underway to include additional project information
and data to develop the list of projects that have been appraised and are bankable but that do not have allocated financing, and to
subsequently introduce an Integrated Bank of Projects (IBP) will be very useful. This will furnish the PIP with information and have a priority
list of future projects to be implemented. In addition the IBP will assist in tracking implementation of the project from commencement
to closure, easing multi-year budgeting, cost tracking, and project adjustments monitoring, among others. So far, a manual has been
development and some capacity building for preparation and appraisal of projects initiated.


                                                                                         0.5                       2009/10-2014/15         2004/05-2008/09
                                        11 Security   0.1
                                                        0.1
                           16 Public Administration    0.1
                                                                     0.3
                               12 Justice and Order      0.1
                                                            0.1
                              06 Tourism and Trade         0.1
                                                       0.1
                                          02 Lands            0.2
                                                                                        0.4
                          09 Water and Environment                        0.3
                                                                                              0.5
                                      07 Education                          0.3
                                                                                                0.5
                                     01 Agriculture                               0.4
                                                                                                    0.5
                                         08 Health                                0.4
                                                                                                            0.6
                                           13 PSM                                              0.5
                                                                                0.3
                                  14 Accountability                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                        0.9
                                         03 Energy                                                    0.6
                                                                                                                                                             1.6
                            04 Works and Transport                                                                       1

                                            -0.1      0.1           0.3                  0.5                0.7   0.9         1.1    1.3           1.5             1.7




                                                                                                                                                                         47
4.3.2 Implementation challenges                                      is generally poor. This results from poor appraisals in the pre-
                                                                     investment stage and the bypassing of established procedures,
result in delays, cost overruns and
                                                                     and also from delays that are so protracted that designs and
perpetual projects                                                   feasibility studies become outdated.

In Uganda, most projects enter the investment phase                  Another significant issue is the frequency of budget
before they are ready for implementation. These projects             overruns and delays in procurement and implementation
require additional time for preparation through processes            processes. Weaknesses in the project design also sometimes
such as planning and drawing designs, with these processes           result into redesigning of plans or even constructing
being conducted only after resources have been allocated or          completely new works during the course of construction,
when disbursements are ready to begin. As discussed earlier,         resulting in the need for the allocation of additional financial
rather than start off with projects that are ready to execute,       resources and delays to delivery. Institutions responsible for
the investment phase in Uganda begins with the preparation           project execution state that many construction companies
of a full feasibility study and the drawing of designs, following    involved in implementation do not have the necessary
which procurement, fabrication, construction, and other              technical and financial capacities, which leads to additional
processes commence. Thus, Uganda’s investment phase starts           implementation challenges. Due to issues related to the
off on a default of a longer project life span than would be         quality of data within the PIP, it is not possible to estimate
the case under a more efficient system. Within the current           the overall completion rate, or the extent of cost overruns
                                                                     and delays with public projects. Nonetheless, evidence from
PIP, projects have an average life span of five years, although
                                                                     a sample of World Bank funded projects currently active or
many of them have remained in the PIP for more than 10
                                                                     completed over the past 10 years confirm that significant
years. The Karuma dam project has been budgeted to start
                                                                     challenges remain in project execution. World Bank projects
implementation every year since 2012, but significant progress
                                                                     accounts for a small proportion of (about 0.1 percent) of the
in construction was only visible starting in FY 2014/15. In some
                                                                     approximately US $ 1.8 trillion stock of Government active
instances, implementing agencies face challenges related
                                                                     infrastructure projects. However, the level of performance
to inadequate funding, particularly counterpart funding for
                                                                     has been declining over the past three years to the point
externally funded projects, acquisition of right of way, and         that out of a project portfolio of a value of US$ 2.3 billion, less
poor quality of designs. These inevitably lead to a failure          than 6 percent of these funds has been disbursed. Almost
to deliver projects on time and on budget. This was in fact          all the reasons explaining the low performance relate to the
the experience of the Transport Corridor Project, which the          ineffective PIM systems. According to this project profile,
Government conceived and budgeted for in FY 2008/09, but             project life extends to approximately seven years, which is
with construction only starting three years after.                   much longer than the average for sub-Saharan Africa. Cost
                                                                     overruns are frequent, partly resulting from delays to project
The quality of projects included in the investment plan is           implementation. In some cases, cost overruns amount to a
often poor. As discussed above, because of non-adherence to          value of up to 50 percent of the original cost of the projects.
the established PIM system, the quality of the projects in the PIP




                                                                                                                 National semi arid
                                                                                                                 resources research
                                                                                                                 institute, Serere


                                                                                                                 to ensure that
                                                                                                                 investments generate
                                                                                                                 better value for
                                                                                                                 money, a higher level
                                                                                                                 of scrutiny should be
                                                                                                                 applied to ensure that
                                                                                                                 these investments
                                                                                                                 actually improve
                                                                                                                 public welfare




      48
  Box 9: Lack of communication and coordination of public investments costly to the economy




In August 2016, Uganda expects to commence construction of
its part of the more that 1300 km of East Africa’s first standard
gauge railway (SGR) linking Kampala to Mombasa. Work on the
Kenya side began in 2013. In Uganda, the contract for the stretch
covering at least 40 km between Malaba and Kampala has been
awarded to China Habour Engineering Company. This portion of                                    KYOGA
                                                                                                                               NAMUTUMBA BUTALEJA
                                                                                                                   LUUKA
th SGR is expected to be completed by December 2020.
                                                                                                                                                    TORORO
                                                                                                                           IGANGA


                                                                                                           JINJA
The SGR project has broad benefits, key among which is to
reduce the cost and time taken for goods to be transported
between Kampala and Mombasa. This development should                         KAMPALA
                                                                                       MUKONO
                                                                                                  BUIKWE
                                                                                                                           MAYUGE

also enhance the potential for Uganda to leverage its unique
                                                                           WAKISO
geographical location to become a regional transport and                                            VICTORIA

logistics hub.


However, while the SGR project is generally viewed positively,
government communication with the transport and logistics
industry and coordination across the industry remains
insufficient. Key stakeholders like the Inland Container Depot (ICD) at Mukono, managed by Rift Valley Railways (RVR), have limited
information with respect to the SGR project, with implications that it may not sufficiently benefit from it. If the ICD Mukono is not
connected to the SGR, it may become uncompetitive with the potential effect of future investment in the facility declining. This scenario
cannot come to reality as is confirmed by information from the Ministry of Works and Transport. However, lack of information to key
stakeholders can result in sub-optimal investment decisions. In this scenario, the container depot could still remain uncompetitive, even if
it is connected to SGR, if the investors continue to base decisions on misinformation.

Source: World Bank




In the monitoring and ex post analysis phase, some                      Systems for the monitoring and evaluation of service
institutions have specific units and systems to monitor                 delivery quality during project operation are weak. This
progress during execution. These institutions, which                    issue is exacerbated by a poor maintenance culture in the
exist both within the Ministry of Finance and within other              management of public assets, resulting from the inefficient
line ministries, evaluate budget execution, overruns and                use of available resources, capacity constraints and a failure
compliance with schedules, among other matters. The                     to implement ex post evaluations of completed projects.
operation, maintenance and ex post evaluation of the                    Uganda’s budget allocations to operations and maintenance
performance of the public asset is usually the responsibility           have increased from about 3.4 percent of the total budget
of the project sponsoring agency or in other designated                 in the period from FY 2004/05 to FY 2008/09 to 8.4 percent
entity. However, a number of public sector institutions                 over the past five years. However, this level of spending on
are also responsible for the evaluation of the execution                operations and maintenance is still far lower than the level
process. These institutions focus on the overall progress of            of 20 percent suggested by global good practice, and hence
investment projects implemented by the Government, with                 leaves many agencies with inadequate resources capacities
examples of such institutions including OPM and NPA.                    to maintain assets.




                                                                                                                                                             49
Overall, existing processes and programs are marred                Inefficiencies resulting from poor inter-agency
by weaknesses that undermine project management                    coordination lead to delays in evaluating projects
and result in failures to achieve good value for money.            and poor project selection, which together result in a
The current public investment program involves the ad              failure to produce productive public capital. According
hoc identification of projects, with an analysis of projects       to the IMF PIMA index, Uganda is ranked lowest among
conducted only after they have been earmarked for                  its peers in the area of project appraisal selection and ex
financing. There are insufficient mechanisms to ensure             post evaluation. While it is ranked highly for its selection of
the efficient management of implementation of the                  projects, the score for the management of these projects
construction of assets, let alone the operation and                is also lower than its peers. As a result, the overall score for
maintenance of these assets. The current process results in        public investment management is worse than that for all
significant economic and social costs.                             other countries, except Tanzania (see Figure 24).



  Figure 24: Uganda’s largest challenge lie in appraisal, managing and evaluation of projects
     PIM Index Score (0-lowest 20-highest)




To ensure that investments generate better value for
money, a higher level of scrutiny should be applied to
ensure that these investments actually improve public
welfare. In addition, the Government should implement                                      According
measures to ensure that investment projects are managed                                 to the IMF PIMA
effectively and completed on schedule; that projects are
                                                                                       index, Uganda is
operated efficiently and sustainably; that there is a process of
learning to improve future project selection, implementation,                     ranked lowest among
and operation; and that risks are allocated appropriately                           its peers in the area
to ensure efficient and effective implementation of the                            of project appraisal
project, especially the risks between the public and private
                                                                                  selection and ex post
entities. As Uganda embarks on a road to reform the way
public investments are managed, it should draw from global                                evaluation.
good practice while taking stock of its own capacities for
implementation.




                             50
                5.	 How can Uganda maximize value from
                    its public investments?


To convert its large investment program into productive assets, Uganda needs to improve its public
investment management system. The Government has already initiated key reforms in this area, but given
the complexity, particularly related to governance and political economy issues, this requires sustained
efforts and commitment. The Government may therefore adopt a systematic approach to streamline
and strengthen institutions for managing public investments, including building capacity of Ministries,
Departments and Agencies; promote a common understanding of what is required to do through the
process, and how it should be done, through clear guidance and standard criteria on key processes; and
close gaps in the legal and regulatory framework to clarify and strengthen mandates and incentives.




B
           uilding effective public investment systems can                          to make a careful assessment of who will win and who will
           be a complex undertaking, given the various                              lose as a result of the reforms and formulate an appropriate
           institutions, processes and mandates that have                           strategy to manage vested interests. Third, public projects
           to come together to form a system that is able                           present opportunities for politicians to engage in pork-
to manage investments efficiently. If any part of it does                           barreling, which allows them to claim delivery of benefits
not function properly, then the entire system can be rendered                       for their constituents. Unfortunately, political pressures to
ineffective. For example, it is not sufficient to build efficient                   locate and build projects to meet these needs are normally
budget allocation systems, if projects being funded cannot                          limited to seeing these projects commence, as opposed to
be properly appraised to ensure that they meet criteria                             following them through to completion to deliver economic
for economic return. Nor is it useful to build capacities for                       value to society. Therefore, designing an effective reform
appraisal when there are no mechanisms to enforce the                               strategy needs to ensure that (i) easy to implement, low-cost
results of these appraisals, or if procurement challenges will                      reforms have been identified and implemented to create
raise costs well above the original estimates from the cost-                        a demonstration effect; (ii) timing coincides with periods
benefit analysis, sometimes making the project economically                         within the political cycle when political leaders can push for
unviable.                                                                           politically challenging reforms; (iii) display a certain level of
                                                                                    political realism by providing some visible benefits to political
Perhaps most important to recognize is the fact that                                leaders; and (iv) identify champions, even where a reform is
implementing changes to the PIM systems can also be                                 widely supported, while strategizing on how more difficult
affected by political and governance challenges. First,                             parts of reform can be implemented. These challenges
the reform of any public management function requires a                             notwithstanding, improving efficiency of public investments
protracted commitment and a high level of discipline. For                           can bring considerable benefits to the country. It has been
reforms to succeed, the approach adopted should recognize                           estimated that if Uganda increased spending efficiency in
the environment in which the reform will be implemented,                            infrastructure, it could use the same amount of resources
including the technical feasibility of the reform, capacities                       to generate a rate of growth of GDP over the next 10 years
to implement it, and political economy dynamics. Secondly,                          reaching 9.5 percent per annum17 . This rate of growth is
some parts of the project cycle, especially during the                              3 percentage points higher than the forecasted rate of 6.5
implementation phase, may generate benefits for well-                               percent over this period and can allow the country to reach
connected interests. Reforms that threaten the status quo                           coveted ‘middle income status in much less time that what
can be met with public or covert resistance. Thus, it is vital                      the current average rates of growth imply.



17. Agenor, P-R., and J-P. Nganou. 2014. “Expenditure Allocation and Economic Growth in Uganda: An OLG Framework.” Uganda CEM Background Paper.




       52
5.1 Reforms to Uganda’s PIM system: A                                                  included a new audit tool and a framework that focuses on
                                                                                       15 critical entities to improve the efficiency of procurements.
great start, but a continued effort
                                                                                       The Government also commenced the e-Government
still needed!                                                                          Procurement Strategy, which was launched in 2014. It also
                                                                                       opened regional offices in two towns to place procurement
Recently, the Government has implemented a number
                                                                                       services closer to the implementing entities. A Public
of measures intended to start a reform process that may
                                                                                       Procurement Policy is expected to professionalize the
improve Uganda’s PIM system. First, a number of reforms
                                                                                       procurement cadre and to streamline the framework for high
to budgeting and overall public financial management have
                                                                                       value contracts. This policy is awaiting Cabinet approval.
been initiated through the promulgation of the PFM Act
(2015), with these reforms expected to result in improved
                                                                                       5.2 Moving forward with reforms
efficiency to the management of public finances. Second, the
Ministry of Finance has embarked on measures to strengthen
                                                                                       In many cases, it is clear what needs to be done to
its gate-keeping function by creating a department in
                                                                                       improve Uganda’s PIM systems. However, actually
charge of Project Analysis and Public-Private-Partnerships
                                                                                       implementing these measures will require a strong effort,
(PAPP) in 2015. This creates a systematic structure with
                                                                                       given the nature of the reforms needed. To achieve
clearly defined mandates to manage the project cycle,
                                                                                       a genuine improvement in the efficiency of public
and project quality assurance. Among other matters, the
                                                                                       investments, a systematic approach to close gaps must
PAPP Department is expected to ensure that technical and
                                                                                       address the following three issues: (i) streamlining the
economic analysis of public investment initiatives at the
                                                                                       institutional arrangements for the management of public
national and/or regional level is conducted thus acting as
                                                                                       investments across the project cycle; (ii) ensuring a shared
an independent reviewer of the projects. Therefore, it is
                                                                                       understanding across institutions regarding what needs
responsible for analyzing, appraising and recommending
                                                                                       to be done and how it should be done. This involves
or rejecting public investment projects for financing and
                                                                                       standardizing the information and documentation needed
execution; defining and updating general and sector rules,
                                                                                       to guide the identification, formulation, preparation,
guidelines, circulars and norms that inform the formulation
                                                                                       appraisal, investment decision, operation, monitoring and
and appraisal of investment projects; providing technical
                                                                                       evaluation of projects across all implementing agencies;
support to MDAs and local government evaluation teams
                                                                                       and (iii) determining where gaps in the legal and regulatory
or planning units; coordinating the provision of nation-wide
                                                                                       environment exist and how they should be closed to
training on issues of project preparation and project appraisal;
                                                                                       strengthen mandates and the incentive structures. The
providing the secretariat to the Development Committee,
                                                                                       actions already implemented by the Government are a
with the latter mandated to approve or reject submitted
                                                                                       significant step forward in this regard. The establishment
projects for project execution by granting a seal of approval;
                                                                                       on a department for the appraisal and analysis of projects
and undertaking selected monitoring and ex post evaluation
                                                                                       and measures to build capacity in project preparation and
for selected key projects. With technical assistance, the unit
                                                                                       appraisal for the PAPP department and other selected MDAs,
has developed public investment guidelines and manuals
                                                                                       are certainly steps in the right direction. In addition, the
and started building capacity in the area of project appraisal
                                                                                       formulation of simplified guidelines for the preparation
within the Ministry and in other MDAs.18 Amongst other
                                                                                       and appraisal of projects to be used by MDAs is a good
measures, it has developed a simplified manual for public
                                                                                       example for the drafting and formulation of other
investment appraisal. This department can indeed champion
                                                                                       documentation that guides the PIM process. Meanwhile it
the strengthening of the overall PIM system, while remaining
                                                                                       is necessary to maintain momentum to address remaining
cautious not to overburden the MFPED with roles that should
                                                                                       challenges to make a lasting positive impact on the way
be undertaken by other agencies along the PIM cycle.
                                                                                       public investments are managed in Uganda (see Table 3).
                                                                                       If there is no follow through on these reforms, then issues
In recent years, there have also been major
                                                                                       resulting from inadequate oversight, poor projects, delayed
improvements to the procurement function. Closely
                                                                                       implementation, cost overruns, neglected assets, and
following the amendment to the PPDA Act in 2014 March,
                                                                                       corruption, among others; will continue to erode value form
the PPDA Strategic Plan 2014-2019 was developed, with
                                                                                       Uganda’s public investments.
this plan providing for initiatives to improve the manner in
which public procurements are managed. These changes


18. Through funding from DfID trust fund, the World Bank provided a technical assistance to the Government of Uganda to support it to strengthen its PIM system.




                                                                                                                                                            53
 Table 3: Reforms in public investment management: Addressing key gaps

PRINCIPLE           SOME REMAINING CHALLENGES IDENTIFIED                                                       CONSEQUENCE
                    Guidance: Some projects included in the NDP are too broad and others not fully             Projects not aligned with
                    owned by sector MDAs. Some projects from sectors are weak and/or not consistent            national priorities
                    with national priorities. No process exists to ensure that new project ideas and
                    proposals are taken through the same screening process as those in NDP to ensure
                    consistency with the national priorities.

                    Appraisal: Overlapping mandates, weak capacities and the lack of coordination              Poor quality projects
                    between the different institutions lead to poor quality projects, sometimes without        Delays in implementation
                    pre-feasibility or feasibility studies. They also lead to major differences between
                    donor- and government-funded projects. The NDP2 also indicates some tasks related
                    to project appraisal and selection, which clearly overlaps the work being done in
                    MFPED. In addition, Uganda is yet to develop a database of ready-to-go projects and
                    is yet to decide on the model for management of PPPs.
Institutional       Independent review: The new unit established within the MFPED to appraise and              Poor quality projects
streamlining and    select projects for financing may in some cases serve as the independent reviewer.
strengthening       Lack of clarity on mandate, thresholds, and other aspects, for which projects should
along the project   be subjected to independent reviews leaves different projects being subjected to
cycle               different standards.

                    Implementation: Projects are implemented by a range of MDAs with varying levels            Cost and time overruns
                    of capacity. In addition, poor project preparation, delays in the disbursement of
                    resources, acquisition of right of way, social safeguards, and procurement, among
                    others, lead to chronic under-execution and to cost and time overruns.


                    Operation and ex post evaluation: The systems for monitoring execution of                  No tracking of
                    projects are weak and not coordinated across different MDAs. Even after they are           performance
                    completed, monitoring and evaluation of value created by public investments is             Inappropriate erosion of
                    non-existent because Uganda does not undertake a systematic follow-up on project           public assets
                    completion reports; it does not maintain an asset management strategy; and it does         Increase in cost of capital
                    not carry out impact assessment reports. This is further complicated by the poor
                    maintenance culture.
                    Enforcement and gate-keeping role has to be strengthened for these frameworks to           Poor quality projects
                    be binding.                                                                                High cost of projects
                    In addition to the simplified manuals that have been created, other critical
                    documents that should be prepared include: (i) Standard criteria for formulating
Document            project performance indicators, with this criteria also emphasizing the strategic fit
standardization     with national priorities; (ii) Standard national parameters to use in project assessment
                    (e.g. shadow prices, unit costs, discount rate, among others); (iii) a comprehensive
                    framework for PPPs, SOEs and local governments; (iv) a framework for the monitoring
                    and evaluation of all public capital assets.

Legal and           There is no explicit legal provision for a PIM framework. Clarity of mandates of           Political interference
Regulatory          institutions would require legal provisions to remove overlaps as is the case for the      Poor quality project
Framework           appraisal function within the PAPP department, but claimed by NPA.                         Projects not consistent
                                                                                                               with national priorities




        54
The strategy to reform Uganda’s PIM system should                 2. 	 Build the capacities of Ministries, Departments and
prioritize addressing the most binding constraints                     Agencies (MDAs) and other implementing agencies,
preventing good investment. With the current poor                      particularly in the area of project preparation,
execution of projects in Uganda, there is a temptation to              appraisal, approval and monitoring phases (Action A2
apportion the problem to be solely due to the way projects             in the PIM Reform Action Plan)
are implemented and to prioritize reforms related to project
execution. However, as the previous sections have made            In the short term, training should be focussed on capacitating
clear, most delays in the execution of projects result from       a core group of technicians across the different MDAs
the poor quality-at-entry of these projects. Moreover, as         involved in the preparation and appraisal of projects within
the contribution of external donors to financing of projects      their own agencies. Building and sustaining the range of
declines, the Government puts greater emphasis on non-            skills required for effective PIM system can be accelerated
concessional funding, and with the expectation that oil           through the establishment of linkages with higher education
revenues will eventually finance a large component of             centres. Susequently, building capacities at all levels of the
projects, it becomes vitally important to improve capacities      Government, would require developing training programs
to manage investments. Building capacity is in the area of the    targetting officials and staff at the basic, intermediate and
preparation of projects and their appraisal and selection could   advanced levels for all agencies, particularly those involved in
generate the most rapid gains. Thus, the proposed action          preparing and implementing projects.
plan consists of some actions that should be implemented
                                                                  3.	 Document and implement good practice operational
as soon as possible, while other actions can be implemented
                                                                      processes, starting with project preparation and
over the next five year period. A PIM reform action plan that
                                                                      appraisal (Action B1 in the PIM Reform Action Plan)
has been carefully calibrated along the three dimension of
strengthening institutions, document standardization, and
                                                                  This action relates to standardizing the information and
closing the gaps within the legal and regulatory framework
                                                                  documentation that guide the PIMs. This should focus on
is summarized in Figure 25. It recommends that the reform
                                                                  developing manuals that support the different processes and
could move as follows:
                                                                  ensure that they are implemented. To improve the capital
                                                                  investment project design, appraisal and selection processes,
I. Immediate actions to progress PIM reform
                                                                  the procedures for preparing and presenting projects for
The Government can pursue the following six actions               final appraisal and approval must be streamlined. To achieve
immediately:                                                      this, guidelines and manuals must be prepared for MDAs and
                                                                  other implementing agencies to ensure that they implement
1. 	 Formalize and strengthen independent review of new           the appropriate measures to achieve the meaningful
     project proposals (Action A1 in the PIM Reform Action Plan   economic evaluation of projects.
     below)
                                                                  The integrated project appraisal can be a key technical tool
Currently, the role of independent review of project proposals    to facilitate decision-making processes and to ensure the
is partially being handled by the PAPP Department within the      efficient allocation of public resources. To ensure that project
Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.           appraisals fulfil these functions, a range of project appraisal
This department is new and would need to be nurtured              methodologies need to be developed. This will involve the
and groomed to fully perform the role of an independent           development of templates and applied case studies, with
reviewer. This would strengthen the role of the Ministry as the   priority given to sectors and project types that have the
gate-keeper with respect to spending of public resources to       highest budgetary impact. The process of developing these
generate value. To fulfill its mandates, the PAPP department      methodologies should involve periodic training activites for
must prepare clear procedures and guidelines to define how        a range of different types of users. There is a need to develop
the economic analysis of projects should be conducted, with       capacities to use the various methods of analysis for all
these guidelines defining the norms, standards and rules to       projects, incluidng those executed in cooperation with the
be followed. The unit must also determine how it will be able     private sector through PPP arrangements.
to provide support to other MDAs and local governments,
including through training, and what criteria it will use to      A key component of this exercise will be to establish a set
approve or reject projects.                                       of standard national parameters, including shadow prices,
                                                                  unit costs, and the discount rate, as well as standard criteria




                                                                                                                        55
for project performance indicators, aimed at ensuring that        thereafter be the basis for legal and regulatory changes for its
projects are aligned with national strategies priorities. The     implementation.
MFPED has already begun to prepare a number of such
manuals. However, it is also necessary to create incentives to    II. Medium term actions to gradually reform the PIM
ensure the compliance of all parties involved, including the      process
MDAs, hired consultants and donor agencies. To achieve this,
                                                                  As previous sections have made clear, it will not be possible
project profiling criteria should include qualitative criteria
                                                                  to implement comprehensive reforms to Uganda’s PIM system
based on strategic priorities and linkages; a mapping with
                                                                  through a single action. Rather, it will involve an ongoing
expected outcomes; a determination of the impact in terms
                                                                  process in which the most binding constraints are addressed
of the achievement of final objectives; and a prioritization
                                                                  first, with later actions intended to build and refine upon
of projects in accordance with qualitative and quantitative
                                                                  earlier achievements. In the medium term, Government
criteria that stresses the achievement of efficiency and cost
                                                                  should consider implementing further improvements in
effectiveness in the implementation of the projects.
                                                                  efficiency and effectiveness in PIM. Four actions to achieve
Furthermore, the standard framework for the management of         this include:
PPPs should be documented, as should the framework for the
                                                                  1. 	 Clarify roles, mandates and responsibilities of various
management of projects by SOEs and local governments.
                                                                       entities within the PIM process (Action A3 in the PIM
4.	 Create a technical fund to facilitate feasibility studies          Reform Action Plan below).
    during the pre-investment stage (Action B2 in the PIM
                                                                  To support the proposed changes, it will be necessary to
    Reform Action Plan)
                                                                  determine how the new paradigm for the management of
This is a prerequisite for ensuring that agencies can actually    public investments can fit into the Government’s existing
undertake the required feasibility studies. Similar modalities    structure. With PIM system decentralized to different
could be adopted for both GOU and externally funded               entities, each of which has specific roles to play within the
projects to ensure projects are properly prepared by the          project cycle, it will be critical to re-evaluate the different
MDAs before they are submitted for consideration in the           entities to remove redundant, un-coordinated, overlapping
medium term fiscal framework.                                     responsibilities, which leads to wastage and inefficiency. The
                                                                  outcome should be a mapping and re-engineering of the PIM
5. 	 Establish a standard framework for the monitoring            processes to support the better implementation of projects.
     and evaluation of all public capital investment
     projects under implementation (Action B3 in the PIM          2. 	 Develop an integrated bank of projects (IBP), to
     Reform Action Plan)                                               constitute a central database and depository for
                                                                       public projects, including pipeline projects, with clear
While MDAs currently undertake this function to some extent,           criteria and a systematic approach for their inclusion
and monitoring and evaluation is being done both by the                (Action A4 in the PIM Reform Action Plan below)
MoFPED and Office of the Prime Minister, there needs to be a
single entity and standard framework that can ease tracking       Such a data bank directly corresponds to the function of
and ensure remedial actions. The immediate step under             improving the quality-at-entry and having ready to go
this action could be to re-assess the existing portfolio of       projects for implementation. It should contain information
projects already under implementation and take action where       related to beneficiaries, sector statistics, technical parameters,
financial and technical risks are highest.                        demographics, information on poverty, social indicators,
                                                                  and other matters relevant to project formulation. In order
6. 	 Formulate a policy framework for PIMS (Action C1 in the      to manage the IBP effectively, it will be necessary to build
     PIM Reform Action Plan below)                                focussed systems capacity in technical (such as software
                                                                  management, data collection for project formulation at sector
This will create the background for overall understanding of      level) and in non-technical matters (such as the interpretation
the PIM system across the various institutions of government,     of information from the IBP to ensure it is used efficiently and
including the executive, parliament and the judiciary, and will   appreciation of usefulness of the process to PIMS.




      56
Therefore, development of the the IBP will involve the             amendments or the enactment of new laws to strengthen
development of software components structured around               the system. While this update has focused on the need to
four sub-systems that regulate the entire process of public        strengthen institutions and streamline their mandates, it
investments: (i) the identification (technical economical          is likely that implementation of the proposed reforms will
analysis) sub-system; (ii) the pre-investment (capital budget      uncover the need for changes to the legal and regulatory
formulation) sub-system; (iii) the implemention (budget            framework. The proposed policy framework suggested in
execution) sub-system; and (iv) ex post evaluation sub-            the action 6 among the immediate actions, will provide the
system. As an integral part of the IBP, a data collection module   background for required legal reforms.
should be developed to support project formulation at the
sector level. The purpose of this module should be to collate      4. 	 Develop a system for monitoring and ex post project
information that improves project formulation at the sector             evaluation of projects (Action B4 in the PIM Reform Action
level.                                                                  Plan below)

Capacity building should also involve training of trainers to      Usually, ex post assessment and evaluation is conducted
facilitate the rapid and effective transfer of knowledge. In the   by funding agencies as a required process for compliance
medium term, selected local universities should be involved        with their funding arrangements. In general, particularly for
in the delivery of these courses, with training sessions open to   projects using the Government’s own funds, the ex post
staff of central and local government agencies.                    assessment of public investment projects is weak, with basic
                                                                   comparison of project costs, timelines and deliverables
3. 	 Enhance the legal and regulatory framework required           against budgets and plans being rarely conducted. For the
     to support PIM (Action C1 in the PIM Reform Action Plan       development of an effective PIM system, a comprehensive
     below)                                                        system to facilitate the evaluation of past project experiences
                                                                   and to formulate lessons learned to serve as input for future
Implementation of the PIM system may expose gaps in the            project designs and implementation is vital. To achieve this, it
existing legal and regulatory framework that may warrant           is equally vital to build capacities for managing the system.




     Figure 25. The PIM Reform Action Plan




                                                                                                                         57
annexes




          59
                                                Table A1: Key Macroeconomic Indicators
     Indicator                               Unit measure    2009/10    2010/11    2011/12    2012/13    2013/14    2014/15    2015/16




60
     Population                                   Millions      31.0       31.9       32.9       33.9       34.9       35.9       37.0
     GDP                                      USD millions   20,181.4   20,262.5   23,237.3   24,624.3   26,953.1   26,898.4   27,392.1
     Per capita GDP                                   USD      578.9      562.4      652.0      670.0      709.0      748.6      740.9
     GDP growth                                         %         5.2        9.7        4.4        3.3        4.5        5.0        5.0
     Gross Domestic Savings                    as % of GDP       19.7       19.5      17..7       21.7       19.9       21.9       24.3
     Gross Investments                         as % of GDP       12.5       12.3       28.2       29.5       29.0       31.5       24.3
     Inflation (period average)                         %         9.4        6.5       23.4        5.8        6.9        2.7        7.7
     Exchange Rate (end-year)                    UGX/USD      2,283.3    2,623.2    2,484.4    2,630.6    2,599.7    2,918.8    3,102.5
     External Sector
     Exports - Goods and Services              Million USD    3,470.1    3,828.6    4,698.3    5,051.5    5,048.6    4,974.3    6,327.6
     Imports - Goods and Services              Million USD   -5,757.2   -6,839.9   -7,684.4   -7,579.3   -7,745.4   -7,965.6    9,696.8
     Current Account Balance                   Million USD   -1,631.0   -1,984.0   -2,219.0   -1,856.0   -2,363.0   -2,430.0   -2,187.0
     Balance of Payments (overall balance)     Million USD     235.0      -597.0     759.0      337.0      509.0      -356.0     -239.0
     Gross Foreign Reserves                    Million USD    2,384.7    2,044.0    2,643.8    2,912.3    3,394.0    2,895.0    2,645.0
     External Debt                             Million USD    2,343.4    2,904.9    3,067.3    3,742.9    4,339.5    5,103.1    7,058.1
     Foreign Direct Investment                 Million USD     693.0      719.0     1,244.0     940.0     1,225.0    1,153.0     838.0
     Monetary Sector
     Average Deposit Rate                               %         2.0        2.1        3.2        3.0        3.1        3.3        3.2
     Average Lending Rate                               %        20.7       19.8       24.6       24.8       22.1       25.2       23.7
     Growth in Money Supply (M3)                        %        23.6       25.7       26.1       17.4       15.7       16.6       15.2
     Government Finance
     Total Domestic Revenue                    as % of GDP       10.5       13.6       11.2       11.4       11.9       13.6       13.9
     Tax Revenue                               as % of GDP       10.3       10.9       10.1       11.0       11.4       12.8       13.4
     Non Tax Revenue                           as % of GDP        0.3        0.2        0.4        0.5        0.5        0.6        0.5
     Grants                                    as % of GDP        2.1        1.9        1.9        1.5        1.0        1.2        1.7
     Total Expenditure and net lending         as % of GDP       16.7       19.1       15.6       16.5       16.7       19.4       22.1
     Recurrent Expenditure                     as % of GDP       10.5       12.7        9.4        9.1        9.8       10.3       10.8
     Development Expenditure                   as % of GDP        6.1        6.1        5.8        6.6        6.9        7.0        8.2
     Fiscal Balance (overall)                 as % of GDP        -4.0       -3.6       -2.5       -3.6       -3.8       -4.6       -6.4
                                           2008/9   2009/10   2010/11   2011/12   2012/13   2013/14   2014/15   2015/16
     Monetary Aggregates
     M3 as % of GDP                         18.3      15.1      13.4      10.6      10.0       9.4       9.0       7.9
     M2 as % of GDP                         14.3      11.7      10.4       8.3       7.9       7.5       7.2       6.2
     M3 growth rate (%)                     25.0      23.6      25.7      26.1      17.4      15.7      16.6      15.2
     M2 growth rate (%)                     26.3      22.7      22.2      24.3      21.2      17.6      17.9      16.1
     Domestic Credit
     Total domestic credit (% of GDP)        9.2       7.8       7.3       5.2       5.2       5.2       4.7       4.2
     Private sector credit (% of GDP)       10.4       9.2       7.9       6.3       6.2       5.7       5.4       4.7
     Total domestic credit growth (%)       64.1      52.4      50.6      32.7      27.8      19.7      17.8      27.9
     Private sector credit growth (%)       31.3      30.7      26.8      21.5      23.9      18.6      17.3      17.0
     Interest Rates Structure
     Average TB rate (period average, %)     8.4       5.3       7.6      17.2      10.3       9.3      18.7      14.0
     Average lending rate (%)               20.9      20.7      19.8      24.6      24.8      22.1      25.2      23.7
     Average deposit rate (%)                2.1       2.0       2.1       3.2       3.0       3.1       3.3       3.2




61
62
                                                Table A2: Growth and Structure of the Economy

     Economic Activity                                       2009/10       2010/11       2011/12       2012/13       2013/14       2014/15      2015/16
     Real GDP Growth Rates (%)                            5.2           9.7           4.4           3.3           4.8           5.0           5.0
     Agriculture                                           3.2           2.9           1.1           1.8           3.0           3.0          2.8
     Industry                                              7.8          11.4           3.0           4.4           3.9           7.9          7.8
     o/w manufacturing                                     4.5           7.8           2.7          -2.5           2.2          11.0          9.7
     o/w construction                                     12.5          15.0           3.9          10.8           5.3           2.7          5.5
     Services                                              5.9          12.4           3.9           4.1           4.3           5.3          5.5
     GDP Shares (% of constant GDP)
     Agriculture                                          26.2          24.6          23.8          23.5          23.1          22.6         22.1
     Industry                                            18.1          18.4          18.2          18.4          18.2          18.7          19.2
     o/w manufacturing                                     8.5           8.4           8.2           7.8           7.6           8.0          8.4
     o/w construction                                      5.8           6.0           6.0           6.5           6.5           6.3          6.4
     Services                                             48.5          49.7          49.9          50.3          50.2          50.2         50.4
     Fish and net taxes                                    7.2           7.3           8.1           7.9           8.7           8.2          0.0
     GDP Shares by expenditure type (% of nominal GDP)
     Final Consumption Expenditure                        83.2          84.2          86.6          82.0          82.6          86.5
     Households                                           73.8          74.6          73.9          74.1          74.1          76.9
     Government                                           9.4           9.6          12.7           8.0           8.5           9.6
     Gross Capital Formation                               27            27            28            28            27           24.9
     Gross fixed capital formation                        26.6          26.5          28.1          27.4          26.5          24.4
     Charges in inventories                                0.4           0.3           0.3           0.4           0.5           0.5
     Net exports                                         -10.1         -11.0         -15.1         -10.3         -10.1         -11.9
     Gross domestic saving (% of GDP)                     12.5          12.3          17.7          21.7          19.9          21.9         24.3
     Public                                                2.9           3.3           2.4           3.1           1.4           1.5          2.3
     Private                                               9.6           9.0          15.3          18.6          18.5          20.4         22.0
                                            Table A3: Central Government Fiscal Framework (% of GDP)
                                                                                                                  Approved
     Ushs Billions                          Outturn   Outturn   Outturn   Outturn   Outturn   Outturn   Outturn              Projection   Budget
                                                                                                                   Budget
                                            2008/9    2009/10   2010/11   2011/12   2012/13   2013/14   2014/15   2015/16     2015/16     2016/17


     REVENUE & GRANTS                        13.5      12.7      15.5      13.1      12.9      13.0      14.8       15.1       15.7        16.2
     Revenue                                 11.0      10.5      13.6      11.2      11.4      11.9      13.6       13.6        13.9       14.4
     URA Revenue                             10.6      10.3      10.9      10.1      11.0      11.4      12.8       12.9        13.4       13.9
     Other Non Tax Revenue                    0.4       0.3       0.2       0.4       0.5       0.5       0.6       0.6         0.5         0.5
     Grants                                   2.6       2.1       1.9       1.9       1.5       1.0       1.2       1.6         1.7         1.8
     Budget Support Grants                    1.5       1.1       1.1       1.0       0.3       0.3       0.3       0.3         0.4         0.3
     Project Grants                           1.0       1.0       0.8       0.9       1.2       0.7       0.9       1.3         1.3         1.5
     EXPENDITURE                             15.0      16.7      19.1      15.6      16.5      16.7      19.4       22.1        22.1       22.5
     Recurrent Expenditure                    9.5      10.5      12.7       9.4       9.1       9.8      10.3       10.4        10.8       10.4
     Wages & Salaries                         3.4       3.2       3.5       3.1       3.4       3.5       3.7        3.5        3.6         3.6
     Non Wage                                 4.4       5.4       8.2       5.3       4.3       4.9       5.0        4.9        5.2         4.7
     Interest Payments                        1.0       0.9       0.9       1.0       1.4       1.4       1.6        2.0        2.0         2.2
     Development Expenditure                  4.8       6.1       6.1       5.8       6.6       6.9       7.0        8.6        8.2         9.7
     Net lending and investment               -0.2      -0.1      -0.1      -0.1      0.6       0.0       1.8        3.0        2.9         1.9
     Others                                   0.8       0.2       0.4       0.5       0.1       0.0       0.3        2.7        0.1         0.4
     OVERALL DEFICIT
     Including grants                         -1.5      -4.0      -3.6      -2.5      -3.6      -3.8      -4.6      -7.0        -6.4        -6.2
     Excluding grants                         -4.0      -6.1      -5.5      -4.5      -5.0      -4.8      -5.9      -8.6        -8.1        -8.0
     FINANCING                                1.5       4.0       3.9       2.0       3.3       3.6       4.6       7.0         6.4         6.2
     External Financing (net)                 1.6       1.9       1.5       2.0       2.2       1.3       1.2        5.0        4.8         5.0
     Domestic financing (net)                 0.0       1.7       2.3       0.0       1.0       2.3       3.3        2.0        1.6         1.3


     memoranda items




63
     GDP at market prices (Ushs billions)   34,504    40,946    47,078    59,420    63,905    68,407    74,565     83,596      84,306     92,878
64
                         Table A4: Balance of Payments (percent of GDP unless otherwise stated)
     Variable                                             2009/10    2010/11    2011/12    2012/13   2013/14   2014/15   2015/16
     Current Account (incl transfers)                        -8.1       -9.8       -9.5       -7.5     -8.8      -9.2      -8.0
     Exports of goods                                        11.5       11.3       11.4       11.8     10.1      10.3      10.8
     o/w coffee                                               1.3        1.8        1.9        1.7       1.5       1.5       1.4
     Imports of goods                                       -20.4      -23.1      -22.6      -20.4     -18.8     -18.8     -18.6
     o/w oil imports                                         -2.5       -3.4       -4.1       -4.2      -4.0      -3.5      -2.5
     Services (net)                                          -2.1       -3.4       -1.7       -1.7      -1.2       6.6      -2.5
     Trade balance                                           -8.9      -11.8      -11.1       -8.6      -8.7      -8.5      -7.7
     Income (net)                                            -1.7       -1.7       -2.0       -2.2      -2.9      -2.9      -2.5
     Current transfers (net)                                  4.6        7.1        5.3        4.9       4.0       5.0       4.7


     Capital and Financial Account                           8.8        5.3       10.1        7.3       8.4       6.4       7.1
     Capital account                                          1.0        0.8        0.8        1.2       0.8       0.7       1.2
     Financial account                                        7.9        4.5        9.3        6.1       7.6       5.7       5.9
     o/w direct investment                                    3.4        3.5        5.4        3.8       4.5       4.4       3.1
     o/w portfolio investment                                 0.2        0.0       -1.1        0.2       0.0      -0.6       0.0


     Overall Balance                                          1.2       -2.9        3.3        1.4       1.9      -1.3      -0.9
     Gross International Reserves (million USD)          2,384.67   2,043.98   2,643.77   2,912.34   3,394.0   2,895.0   2,645.0
     Gross international reserves in months of imports        4.4        3.2        4.3        4.5       5.1       4.3       3.6
For more information, please visit:
www.worldbank.org/uganda
Join the discussion on:
http://www.facebook.com/worldbankafrica
http://www.twitter.com/worldbankafrica
http://www.youtube.com/worldbank
