          DISCUSSION PAPER          NO. 1605




          Do Bilateral Social Security
Agreements Deliver on the Portability
of Pensions and Health Care Beneﬁts?
     A Summary Policy Paper on Four
      Migration Corridors Between EU
          and Non-EU Member States
                             Robert Holzmann




                                 May 2016
 Do Bilateral Social Security Agreements Deliver on the Portability
 of Pensions and Health Care Benefits? A Summary Policy Paper on
Four Migration Corridors Between EU and Non-EU Member States

                                          By Robert Holzmann


Abstract
This policy paper summarizes four corridor studies on bilateral social security agreements
(BSSAs) between four European Union (EU) member and two non-member states, draws
conclusions on their results, and offers recommendations. BSSAs between migrant-sending
and migrant-receiving countries are seen as the most important instrument to establish
portability of social security benefits for internationally mobile workers. Yet, only about 23
percent of international migrants profit from BSSAs and their functioning has been little
analyzed and even less assessed. The four corridors studied (Austria-Turkey, Germany-
Turkey, Belgium-Morocco, and France-Morocco) were selected to allow for comparison of
both similarities and differences in experiences. The evaluation of these corridors’ BSSAs was
undertaken against a methodological framework and three selected criteria: fairness for
individuals, fiscal fairness for countries, and bureaucratic effectiveness for countries and
migrant workers. The results suggest that the investigated BSSAs work and overall deliver
reasonably well on individual fairness. The results on fiscal fairness are clouded by conceptual
and empirical gaps. Bureaucratic effectiveness would profit from information and
communication technology-based exchanges on both corridors once available.
JEL-Code: D69, H55, I19, J62
Keywords: acquired rights, labor mobility, migration corridor, administration, evaluation




  The study was initiated by the World Bank International Labor Migration team at the Marseille Center for
Mediterranean Integration and the project was led by Manjula Luthria—now in headquarters in Washington,
DC, and working as international labor mobility team leader in the Global Practice on Social Protection and
Labor.
The paper profited from suggestions by the participants of the June 2015 in Marseille, of the June 2016 OECD
Development Centre "DEV TALKs" in Paris, comments by the co-authors of the corridor studies, and written
comments by Jason Gagnon (OECD), Aline Coudouel, Cem Mete, and Robert Palacios (all World Bank). The
author takes responsibility for all remaining errors.
  Robert Holzmann is a Fellow of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (Vienna); Professor of Economics and Chair,
Old-age Financial Protection, University of Malaya (Kuala Lumpur); Honorary Chair, Centre of Excellence in
Population Ageing Research, University of New South Wales (Sydney); and Research Fellow of IZA (Bonn) and
CESifo (Munich). He was an academic in Austria and Germany and has held various positions at the International
Monetary Fund, OECD, and the World Bank.


                                                      i
Contents
1.     Motivation, Approach, and Structure of the Corridor Studies ................................................. 1
2.     Conceptual Considerations on the International Portability of Social Benefits ......................... 6
     2.1.    Three Key Dimensions of Interest in Portability..................................................................... 7
     2.2.    The Prevalence of Portability Between Countries.................................................................. 7
     2.3.    Why is Portability Difficult to Establish? ................................................................................ 9
     2.4.    Which Benefits Should be Portable? .................................................................................... 10
     2.5.    Policy Options to Establish Portability.................................................................................. 12
     2.6.    Considerations and Criteria for the Selection of Portability Instruments ............................ 14
3.     Investigating the Four BSSAs: Design and Implementation ................................................... 16
4.     Similarities and Differences of BSSAs across the Four Migration Corridors ............................ 23
     4.1.    Migration Developments...................................................................................................... 23
     4.2.    The BSSAs in the Four Corridors ........................................................................................... 26
     4.3.    Pension Portability ............................................................................................................... 29
     4.4.    Health Care Portability ......................................................................................................... 36
     4.5.    Portability of Family Benefits ............................................................................................... 40
5.     Evaluating the BSSAs According to Criteria Fulfillment ......................................................... 43
     5.1.    Fairness for Individuals ......................................................................................................... 43
     5.2.    Fiscal Fairness for Countries ................................................................................................. 46
     5.3.    Bureaucratic Effectiveness ................................................................................................... 50
6.     Conclusions, Reflections, and Recommendations ................................................................ 54
7.     References ........................................................................................................................ 59
List of Boxes
Box 4.1. Example of Portable Pension Benefits Calculated with Direct and Pro Rata Methods .......... 31




                                                                       ii
List of Tables
Table 2.1. Global Migrant Stock Estimates by Origin Country Income Group and Portability Regime,
2000 ....................................................................................................................................................... 9
Table 3.1. Number of Bilateral Social Security Agreements Across Corridor Countries in 2015 ......... 19
Table 4.1. Population, Migration Background, and Foreign Citizenship .............................................. 25
Table 4.2. The Origin and Status of the BSSAs ..................................................................................... 27
Table 4.3. Scope of Benefit Coverage under the Four BSSA Corridors (as of January 2015) ............... 28
Table 4.4. Minimum Income Guarantee in Old Age (€ [rounded] Per Month as of January 2016) ..... 32
Table 4.5. Taxation of Pension Benefits by Origin of Payment and Residency of Recipient ................ 35




                                                                             iii
Acronyms and Abbreviations

AM        Aide Memoire
BSSA      Bilateral Social Security Agreement
CNSS      Caisse Nationale de Securite Sociale
DC        Defined Contribution
DTT       Double Taxation Treaty
EU        European Union
ILO       International Labour Organization
MA        Multilateral Arrangement
MP        Multinational Provider
OECD      Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
UA        Unilateral Action




                                      iv
 1. Motivation, Approach, and Structure of the Corridor Studies

The share of individuals living outside their home country is increasing again after a
temporary low in the 1960s, reaching 3.3 percent of the world population in 2015 (up from
2.8 percent in 2000), or an estimated 244 million people (United Nations - Department of
Economic and Social Affairs 2015). In 2013, non-European Union (EU) citizens residing in EU-
28 numbered 20.4 million, or 4 percent of the EU population; the share of the foreign-born
population in 2013 was 7 percent and is rising (Eurostat 2015). Overall, the world’s population
seems to be in a new phase of migration movements, soon to match the migration peaks in
mankind’s history (Manning 2013; Maunu 2014).

This rising share of individuals living temporarily or permanently abroad broadly reflects three
developments: (a) globalization, which besides the expanding trade in goods and services and
the movement of capital also increasingly includes the international mobility of labor; (b)
population aging, which in the most advanced countries implies a stagnating or even falling
domestic population, creating pull/push effects from countries with an exploding young labor
force; and (c) military conflicts, terrorism, and environmental degradation, all of which create
waves of migrants in search of protection and better lives.

As a result, the migrant stock numbers outlined above—impressive as they may be—
underestimate the underlying labor mobility dynamics, that is, the number and increasing
share of individuals who have lived or will live at least some part of their working or retired
life outside their traditional country of residence. While this development is difficult to
quantify due to individuals’ multiple migration spells, sometimes to multiple countries,
indications from across the world are strong that time spent abroad is increasing. In the EU,
the number of citizens who spend at least some of their adult life living outside their home
country (as a student, intern, intra-firm and inter-firm mobile employee, labor migrant, or
‘snowbird’ retiree) is definitely rising and may soon be as high as one out of every five
individuals. Labor migration pressure toward Europe and labor market needs within Europe
have been prevalent for some time and will intensify with population aging. These


                                               1
phenomena are conjectured to be particularly pronounced for the EU’s neighboring countries
across the Mediterranean and build on migration movements that started as early as the
1960s. Yet, countries such as Japan and Korea will also be pressed to consider migration as
part of the solution to their declining labor forces.

Based on past cross-border labor flows dating back several decades, an indicator of the
magnitude and dynamics of pension benefit portability is the number or amount of pension
benefits paid abroad as a share of total benefits. Table 1.1 offers available but not easily
accessible information for the investigated corridor-sending countries: Austria, Germany,
Belgium, and France. 1 For the smaller countries, Austria and Belgium, the share of number of
benefits paid abroad is around 10 percent and rising but not linearly. For the larger sending
countries, France and Germany, the magnitudes are less but are rising markedly for Germany
as measured by the number of benefits paid abroad and rising slowly for France, as measured
in benefit expenditure. The French euro value measure underestimates the magnitude
compared to that of Belgium as it relates the flows sent abroad from a subset of pension
schemes (that is, without civil servants and so on) to the total expenditures of all schemes
(no comparable data accessible). The difference in benefit numbers and euro amounts
flowing abroad represents the lower benefits for returning migrants, reflecting their shorter
contribution period and often lower wage levels.

For internationally mobile migrant workers, two issues are particularly crucial: (a) the access
of foreign workers and their families to social security benefits while working abroad and (b)
the portability across borders of acquired rights/benefits in disbursement for foreign and
national workers when they retire to a different country of residency. Working foreigners and
their families are basically interested in all social benefits and as a starting position of policy
analysis, they should face no discrimination in benefit access compared to local workers. This
policy perspective may change with regard to temporary migrants, particularly seasonal


1
  For some corridor countries, better cross-section data are available but cannot be easily transformed into
longitudinal data and compared with similar data across countries. For some of the German data on pensions
to Germans and foreigners, see Himmelreicher and Keck (2015).


                                                     2
workers, in as far as their needs’ profile differs from that of long-term migrants (Holzmann
and Pouget 2012). For foreign workers moving to another country for work, returning to their
home country, or retiring in a third country, what matters is that benefits in disbursement or
rights in accumulation are not forfeited (that is, benefits in disbursement are exportable and
rights in accumulation are fully portable to the new country of residence).

 Table 1.1. Total Number or Amounts of Pensions and Those Paid Abroad: 2004, 2010, and 2014
  Austria
  (Dec 31)                        2004                           2010                           2014
                      All             Old-age        All             Old-age         All             Old-age
  (numbers)           Pensions        pensions       Pensions        pensions        Pensions        pensions
  Total                  2 041 997      1 114 867       2 219 923      1 494 763        2 310 749      1 615 382
  Paid abroad              225 662        128 396         257 062        172 212          273 035        188 484
   in %                     11.1%          11.5%           11.6%          11.5%            11.8%          11.7%
  Germany
  (Dec 31)                        2004                           2009                           2013
                      All             Old-age        All             Old-age         All             Old-age
  (numbers)           Pensions        pensions       Pensions        pensions        Pensions        pensions
  Total                24 253 612      16 647 948     24 932 492      17 541 732      25 164 401      17 687 735
  Paid abroad            1 385 244        930 146       1 577 562      1 094 328        1 724 688      1 219 670
   in %                      5.7%           5.6%            6.3%           6.2%             6.9%           6.9%
  Belgium
  (Jan 1)                         2004                           2010                           2014
                      All             Old-age        All             Old-age         All             Old-age
  (numbers)           Pensions        pensions       Pensions        pensions        Pensions        pensions
  Total                  1 727 310        n.a.          1 791 526        n.a.           1 938 773        n.a.
  Paid abroad              164 243        n.a.            178 899        n.a.             190 477        n.a.
   in %                      9.5%         n.a.             10.0%         n.a.               9.8%         n.a.


  Amount in Euro      All             Old-age        All             Old-age         All             Old-age
  (in thousand)       Pensions        pensions       Pensions        pensions        Pensions        pensions
  Total 1/               1 314 388        n.a.          1 703 300        n.a.           2 000 523        n.a.
  Paid abroad 1/            53 358        n.a.             64 151        n.a.              78 783        n.a.
    in %                     4.1%         n.a.              3.8%         n.a.               3.9%         n.a.
  France
                                  2004                           2010                           2012
  Amount in Euro
  (in thousand)
                                                                                                         249 740
  Total 2/            224 087 790     170 930 510    286 139 250     240 094 700     314 750 890             950
  Paid abroad 3/        4 055 016       3 835 745      6 005 777       5 781 392       6 282 827       6 082 105
   in %                     1.8%            2.2%           2.1%            2.4%            2.0%            2.4%

  Sources:
  Austria: Hauptverband der oesterreichischen Sozialversicherunsgtraeger, Oesterreichische Sozialversicherung in Zahlen,
  jaehrlich.
  Germany: Deutsche Rentenversicherung, Rentenbestand am 31.12, jaehrlich.
  Belgium: Office National des Pension (ONP), Statistic annuelle des beneficiaires de prestations.
  France: Centre des Liaisons Européennes et Internationales de Sécurité Sociale (CLEISS), annuelle.




                                                             3
  Notes: 1/ monthly payment, workers and selfemployed (ONP)
  2/ yearly total expenditure (Eurostat)
  3/ yearly expenditure (CLEISS)



In principle, there should be little objection to benefit exportability and acquired rights
portability if they are based on prior contributions and eligibility is established according to
the contingency of the (social) insurance contract: they are essentially akin to property rights.
Both migrant-sending and migrant-receiving countries should be interested in making
benefits easily portable, as this enhances the advantages of an internationally mobile labor
force. If factors for benefit eligibility or its termination (for example, number of children, end
of unemployment, end of sickness, or end of life) cannot be properly observed abroad,
however, then exportability of social benefits may become restricted. Furthermore, acquired
rights based on contribution financing have a major savings component that by itself is not
easily established; consequently, neither is the correct amount due for transfer. Even if
acquired rights are fully aligned with individual contribution efforts, social benefits typically
contain a major redistributive component that is difficult to establish; even more difficult is
determining how much to transfer across borders or to be repaid.

The most important associated conceptual and operational questions include the following:

         (a) What principles should guide the (ex-)portability of benefits/acquired rights
                between migrant-sending and migrant-receiving countries?

         (b) How well are these principles translated into outcomes? Bilateral social security
                agreements (BSSAs) have been the main instrument to this end, but do they truly
                deliver what is expected?

         (c) What areas need to be investigated to better guide policy makers in migrant-
                sending and migrant-receiving countries to the benefit of their populations and
                of migrants and their families?




                                                        4
This policy research paper focuses mostly on item (b) and the functioning of BSSAs based on
four migration corridor studies undertaken during 2013/2014 under a World Bank project.
The paper thus fills an important institutional knowledge gap in the policy discourse of
international labor mobility. While the portability of social security has received increasing
attention over the last decade—starting essentially with Holzmann, Koettl, and Chernetsky
(2005) and including a recent review of literature (Taha, Siegmann, and Messkoup 2015)—no
attempt has been made to date to explore the functioning of its claimed key institution:
BSSAs. Do BSSAs really deliver on what is expected and what are the key areas of concern and
improvement? The Austria-Turkey, Germany-Turkey, Belgium-Morocco, and France-Morocco
corridors represent well-established migration corridors that reflect both similarities and
differences. 2 These similarities and differences across the selected corridors allow for some
first conclusions and offer insights to formulate recommendations for policy reforms and next
research steps.

Against this background, the structure of the paper is as follows: Section 2 contains a brief
introduction to the basic conceptual issues on portability. The objectives, methodology, and
process for the four corridor studies are presented in Section 3. Section 4 highlights the
similarities and differences in the BSSAs’ workings across the four migration corridors. Section
5 summarizes the extent to which the BSSAs fulfill the three proposed evaluation criteria.
Finally, Section 6 offers conclusions and recommendations.




2
 For the individual corridor studies, see Holzmann et al. 2016a and 2016b; Holzmann, Wels, and Dale 2016; and
Holzmann, Legros, and Dale 2016. For a comparison across the east corridors, see Fuchs and Elitok 2014; for the
west corridors, see Legros et al. 2014, and Wels, Bensaid, and Legros 2015 (in French). For an elaboration of
broader principles and further country experiences with portability, see the papers in a special volume of CESifo
Economic Studies 2015 and the overview paper by Holzmann and Werding 2015.


                                                       5
    2. Conceptual Considerations on the International Portability of
       Social Benefits

Discussions and agreements on policies and their instruments fare better if there is a shared
understanding of their objectives and conceptual underpinnings. If divergent interests exist
between different parties, such an understanding helps identify the source of the differences.
The working definition of portability used herein is: “Portability is defined as the ability to
preserve, maintain, and transfer social insurance rights vested or on disbursement,
independent of nationality and country of residence.” 3

To offer a conceptual background around this definition and the issues presented in later
sections, this section briefly discusses six conceptual domains (drawing on Holzmann and
Koettl 2015 and Holzmann, Koettl, and Chernetsky 2005):

         (a) The three key dimensions of interest in portability

         (b) The prevalence of portability between countries

         (c) Difficulty in establishing portability

         (d) Benefits that should be portable

         (e) Policy options to establish portability

         (f)   Criteria for the selection of portability instruments




3
 Portability issues continue to exist in various countries, most importantly between the public and private sector
and between states and regions in federal countries such as China. These are ignored in this paper.


                                                        6
    2.1.   Three Key Dimensions of Interest in Portability

In principle, establishing portability of social benefits should be straightforward, as three key
considerations—economic, social, and human rights (Holzmann and Koettl 2015)—favor it.

From a first-best economic point of view, an individual’s labor mobility decisions should not
be influenced by the lack of portability of social benefits for which she/he has established
acquired rights. Efficiency is increased by the absence of any distortionary obstacles toward
portability. 4

From a social policy point of view, such acquired rights are a critical element of an individual’s
(or family’s) life cycle planning and social risk management. Denying portability, particularly
once the mobility decision has been made and cannot be reversed, risks upsetting the life
cycle planning of individuals and families and creating substantial welfare losses.

From a human rights point of view, individuals have the right to social protection according
to national legislation and international conventions and these rights should carry over when
they leave the country or profession. A key question is whether these human rights apply
only to acquired (contributory) rights or to all social rights. As they are resource consuming,
economic and social trade-offs may emerge.

Combined, these three perspectives suggest that eligibility to and disbursement of social
benefits should not depend on one’s chosen country of residency.

    2.2.   The Prevalence of Portability Between Countries

Despite this rosy picture on the desirability of portability, the reality is more sobering. Table
2.1 offers the magnitude of portability regimes by countries’ income group: Regime I


4
  Some authors claim that in a second-best world, imperfect portability could be welfare-improving in the
presence of several market failures (see, for example, Becker 1964; Lazear 1979; and Fabel 1994). While these
arguments may have some validity for national labor markets, it is doubtful that such a human Tobin tax through
imperfect portability is relevant in cases of cross-border mobility, as the other involved costs will remain high.


                                                        7
(portability) signals the existence of a BSSA independent of its depth but typically covering
pension benefits. Regime II (exportability) indicates migrants in countries that have no BSSA
but allow the export of cash benefits, once eligibility is established. Regime III (no access)
indicates migrants in countries with no access to social insurance programs, which means no
mandated contribution obligation but also no pension or other benefits on return. Regime IV
(informal) offers an estimate of the share of migrants who are informal in the country, with
no contributions to pay and no benefits to take back.

Only 23 percent of the stock of migrants in the world are subject to BSSAs, and of this favored
group, the large majority (86 percent) are migrants from high-income countries living in other
high-income countries. These estimates, based on dated 2000 migrant data, may have
improved somewhat due to, among other things, the EU’s proliferation of portability
legislation and its conclusion of framework agreements with several neighboring countries.

A large share of migrants (55 percent) live and work in countries that allow cash benefits,
once established, to be exported (often restricted to pension-related benefits). However, this
may still not happen, as many countries have waiting periods of 10 or more years (for
example, a BSSA between Mexico and the United States was elaborated in 2004 but
implementation is still pending (Taha, Siegmann, and Messkoup 2015). If benefit eligibility
through totalization of insurance periods were established in the future, it still might not
cover the exportability of health care.

While the number of BSSAs between developed and developing countries has increased over
the years, they may still be of limited value to migrants from countries with low coverage
rates. These migrants typically come to developed countries with no or limited acquired
rights, and if they return to their (developing) home country before retirement, few acquired
rights may be added. This limits the benefits to those who acquire rights abroad under social
insurance provisions, and the loss of top-ups and the lower quality of health care services
may lead individuals to choose not to return.




                                                8
  Table 2.1. Global Migrant Stock Estimates by Origin Country Income Group and Portability Regime, 2000
                                        Regime I      Regime IIa       Regime IIIb   Regime IVc
   Origin Country Income Group                                                                        Total
                                      (Portability) (Exportability)   (No Access)    (Informal)
 Low-income countries (Number)          850,985       36,720,832       5,293,338     10,757,086      53,622,241
 % of total                                2              68               10            20               100
 Lower-middle-income countries
                                       11,312,511       47,224,671      3,476,163 14,473,805 76,487,150
 (Number)
 % of total                                 15               62              5             19             100
 Upper-middle-income countries
                                        3,521,212       10,724,671       189,357       7,203,975     21,639,215
 (Number)
 % of total                                 16               50              1             33             100
 Non-Organisation for Economic
 Co-operation and Development
                                        2,063,914        3,534,415       192,987         57,809       5,849,125
 (OECD) high-income countries
 (Number)
 % of total                                 35               60              3              1             100
 OECD high-income countries
                                       24,778,310        3,658,850       291,007        189,802      28,917,969
 (Number)
 % of total                                 86               13              1              1             100
 Total (Number)                        42,526,932      101,863,439      9,442,852 32,682,476 186,515,699
Source: Holzmann and Koettl 2015, based on Avato et al. 2010 and Holzmann, Koettl, and Chernetsky 2005.
Note: a. Legal migrants with access to social security in the host country in the absence of a bilateral or
multilateral arrangement; b. Legal migrants without access to social security in their host country; c.
Undocumented immigrants.

  2.3.     Why is Portability Difficult to Establish?

Political support for portability across countries is typically limited, as immobile labor by far
dominates mobile labor in both volume and influence. This is evident in countries where
mobility between the public and private sectors remains limited and special schemes remain
in place. This lack of political support is consistent with the development of national schemes,
which typically started with narrowly focused coverage on sectors (trades), and then
expanded from civil servants to white- and then blue-collar workers, to farmers and the self-
employed, and lastly to the voluntarily insured. This fragmentation within countries is not
conducive to establishing portability across countries. Thus, portability considerations for the
design and implementation of schemes have only slowly been incorporated, coinciding with
the rise in labor mobility. However, domestic considerations are still given priority in the
social protection area (unless they contradict EU objectives or ratified International Labour
Organization [ILO] Conventions). The situation is similar or worse in countries where benefit



                                                       9
eligibility is linked to length of residency. Portability of benefits is, at first sight, an alien
concept.

Technical reasons for limited portability are largely linked to the following:

         (a) The pseudo insurance nature of benefit determination, which does not allow a
             straightforward split of acquired rights into (i) a contemporaneous insurance
             component that is consumed in any period and hence incurs no portability issue;
             (ii) a pre-savings component that all benefits have to some extent and that could
             be made portable if its value could be easily established; and (iii) a redistributive
             component within and between benefit cohorts that can be huge (as in the case
             of traditional defined pension benefit schemes or health care benefits based on
             income-related contributions). The redistributive character of benefits is
             responsible for long vesting periods that internationally mobile workers may not
             fulfil in a single country but could easily if the insurance periods in all countries
             were added up (that is, totalized).

         (b) The tax treatment of contributions and benefits that allows for front- or back-
             loading of taxation for the three stages of contribution payment, return receipt,
             and benefit disbursement under a tax-exempt-exempt or exempt-exempt-tax
             regime, respectively. This leads to tax expenditures under an exempt-exempt-tax
             regime that are not necessarily recovered or reimbursed with a mobile
             workforce. Tax considerations are one main reason why even migrant-perfect
             (funded or unfunded) defined contribution (DC) plans continue to meet major
             obstacles in cross-country portability, albeit the savings component is clear and
             the redistributive component typically nil.

  2.4.     Which Benefits Should be Portable?

For what benefit types of social security does one want to establish portability: for all or only
a subset and based on what criteria?


                                               10
Social security covers both social insurance and social assistance programs. The difference
can be framed through the financing—social security contributions versus general
government financing—but is also related to the contingencies to be covered and the extent
to which they lend themselves to insurance considerations or reflect general
redistributive/anti-poverty considerations.

An incomplete list of social security benefits to consider includes the following:

       •    Old-age benefits

       •    Disability benefits

       •    Survivor’s benefits

       •    Workers’ accident and occupational diseases

       •    Sick pay and maternity benefits

       •    Severance pay

       •    Unemployment benefits

       •    Family benefits (such as children/family allowance)

       •    Health care benefits

       •    Long-term care benefits for the elderly

       •    Income replacement benefits for the care of children and sick or elderly people

While all benefits may be important from a social policy angle, not all are relevant from a
labor market standpoint, as not all bias mobility decisions in a relevant manner. For such
decisions, the long-term benefits—old-age and health care—are quite likely the most
important. Furthermore, for a number of the contingencies listed above it is difficult to



                                              11
determine the ‘state of the world’; that is, whether the risk situation (for example,
unemployment) is still valid. In others, the quantities (for example, number of children) or
price (for example, long-term care costs) cannot be correctly observed. Thus, cost-benefit
considerations are required that may call for a more comprehensive benefit package for a set
of countries with tight labor market integration (such as within the EU) than that for country
corridors with separate labor markets and unidirectional labor flows.

  2.5.       Policy Options to Establish Portability

Essentially two approaches are used to establish portability: (a) changing the benefit design
to make benefits as portable as possible without government action and (b) establishing
portability arrangements at the unilateral, bilateral, and/or multilateral level. These two
approaches are both substitutes and complements.

The key feature of changing the benefit design is to distinguish explicitly between the period
insurance element and the pre-funding element of social benefits in addition to making any
redistributive action outside the benefit scheme. While this may have limited bearing on the
portability of benefits in disbursement, having a clearly identified pre-funding element should
substantially ease portability for all social insurance-type benefits, except, perhaps, family
benefits. For cash benefits, this is accommodated by the (partial or full) move from a defined
benefit to a DC-type structure. DC benefits are inherently more portable than defined benefit
benefits (Holzmann and Koettl 2015).

A range of portability arrangements can be used to enhance or fully establish portability.
Most portability discussions focus on BSSAs, but the scope of arrangements is much larger
and includes the following:

         •     Unilateral actions (UAs): UAs can be taken by a country when individuals have
               established acquired rights; UAs can improve portability through full
               exportability of benefits in disbursement and of acquired rights.




                                                12
        •     BSSAs: BSSAs are the centerpiece of current portability arrangements between
              countries. While in principle they can cover the whole range of exportable social
              benefits, BSSAs focus mostly on long-term benefits such as old-age, survivor’s,
              and disability pensions and to a much lesser extent, on health care benefits. 5

        •     MAs: MAs represent a general framework of portability for a group of countries
              for all or a subset of social benefits. These general rules are typically supported
              by further BSSAs. The best known and most developed MA is the one among EU
              member states that is actually not an MA but a decree-based instrument that
              creates supranational EU law. Traditional MAs have been established in Latin
              America (MERCOSUR) and the Caribbean (CARICOM) and in 15 French-speaking
              countries in Africa (CIPRES); one was recently established between Latin America
              and Spain and Portugal (Ibero-American Social Security Convention); and one is
              under development for the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
              countries. The EU is also leading efforts to enhance social security cooperation
              within the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership.6

        •     Multinational providers (MPs): A promising approach is to use the services of
              multinational (private sector) providers, at least for supplementary benefits in
              health care and old age. MPs exist and function well for health care benefits; for
              example, Vanbreda (recently renamed Cigna), a Belgium service provider,
              services World Bank staff and retirees residing in Europe and is used by the
              European University Institute. MP arrangements have been discussed and




5
  For some historic and legal background on BSSAs, see Strban (2009); for a review of issues of BSSAs with non-
members within the EU context, see Spiegel (2010); for a legal analysis of social security coordination with
southern and eastern Europe, see ILO (2012); for a review of literature see Taha, Siegmann, and Messkoup
(2015). For the texts of the bilateral social security agreements worldwide, see the ILO NATLEX database:
www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.search?p_lang=en; No single study (inventory) captures the content of BSSAs
across the world or even of subregions such as Europe, and to the author’s knowledge, no single evaluation
assesses the effectiveness of BSSAs and MAs.
6
  Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, and the Palestinian Authorities.


                                                     13
               sometimes implemented, for supplementary pensions of international workers
               in multinational enterprises.

  2.6.       Considerations and Criteria for the Selection of Portability
             Instruments

A variety of considerations (objectives) can be raised to support the demand for full
portability of social benefits. Ultimately, they boil down to two: fairness and efficiency.

Fairness considerations can be raised at the individual and country levels. If an individual has
contributed (mandatorily or voluntarily) to programs to mitigate future risks to allow him/her
to smooth consumption across the main risks in his life, then acquired rights should be
portable over time and between countries, as a matter of fairness. Similar considerations
apply at the country level. If an individual moves between countries, denying him/her
portability of acquired rights provides a windfall profit for the home country while potentially
burdening his/her new host country, both of which are unfair.

Efficiency considerations of portability are closely linked with the labor market but go
beyond. Full portability should render the labor mobility, labor supply, and residence decision
independent of social benefits. In the absence of full portability, individuals (and families)
may decide not to migrate or return or may decide to offer labor in the informal sector,
possibly with stark implications for the overall tax revenues and economic growth of their
home country.

To assess whether portability arrangements succeed in delivering on fairness and efficiency
considerations, three broad results criteria have been suggested (Holzmann, Koettl, and
Chernetsky 2005; Holzmann and Koettl 2015) and are used in this paper:

         •     Criteria 1: No benefit disadvantage with regard to pension and health care for
               migrants and their dependents. Movements between host countries or back to




                                               14
    the home country should not lead to lower pension benefits or gaps in health
    coverage than if one stayed in one country.

•   Criteria 2: Fiscal fairness for host and home countries. No financial burden
    should arise for the social security institution of one country while the social
    security institutions of the other country benefit from any provisions on
    portability or the lack thereof.

•   Criteria 3: Bureaucratic effectiveness. The administrative handling of portability
    should not cause an undue bureaucratic burden for the countries’ institutions
    involved and should be easy to handle for migrants.




                                       15
    3. Investigating the Four BSSAs: Design and Implementation

BSSAs establish the portability of social benefits between two countries and thereby serve
multiple goals, including defining which social benefits will be coordinated (‘material scope’);
defining the individuals covered under the agreement (‘personal scope’); establishing the
depth of coordination (from time-limited exemptions to contribute to the host scheme to
exportability of benefits to full-fledged coordination); and establishing coordination on
eligibility criteria, benefit calculation, disbursement, service delivery, financing, and
processes of application, decision, and information. 7

To be effective, to deliver on their overall objective, and to detail their goals, BSSAs should
ensure the following:

        •     Equality of treatment: This refers to the principle that all workers engaged in
              remunerated labor should enjoy equal provision of social security; this provision
              can also be extended to workers’ dependent family members.

        •     Payment of benefits abroad (exportability): The principle provides for any
              acquired right, or right in the course of acquisition, to be guaranteed to a migrant
              worker in one territory even if it has been acquired in another.

        •     Determination of applicable legislation: This principle ensures that the social
              security of a migrant worker is governed at any one time by the legislation of only
              one country. Three basic rules apply:

              o     Employees are covered by the legislation of the contracting country in which
                    they work, even if they reside in the other contracting country.




7
 For an analysis of EU member states’ BSSAs with third countries, including comparison tables of the contents
of these BSSAs, see Spiegel (2010).


                                                     16
               o     Self-employed persons are covered by the legislation of the contracting
                     country in which they perform their economic activity.

               o     Civil servants are covered by the legislation of the contracting country
                     within whose administration they are employed.

         •     Maintenance of benefits in the course of acquisition (totalization): This
               principle provides that when a right is conditional upon the completion of a
               qualifying period, a migrant worker’s periods of employment in each country are
               considered.

         •     Administrative assistance: This principle aims to provide for mutual
               administrative assistance between the social security authorities and institutions
               of participating members.

BSSAs between countries are considered by most or all of the social security profession as the
key instrument to establish portability for mobile workers. Although some call the approach
’state of the art’, no substantiated proof exists for such an assertion. Neither a regional nor a
worldwide inventory of BSSAs has been conducted to describe their basic features in a
comprehensive, analytical way (for example, type of benefits covered, depth and type of
coordination on such benefits, and so on). To the author’s knowledge, no analysis has yet
been undertaken to explore the functioning of BSSAs, to highlight the strengths and weakness
of their operation, or to evaluate them against predefined criteria; 8 this assessment
resonates with a recent review of literature (Taha, Siegmann, and Messkoup 2015). A very
first and incomplete attempt in this direction was undertaken by Holzmann, Koettl, and




8
  A recent analysis by the Organization of American States on the regional functioning of bilateral and
multilateral social security agreements is a useful step (Consejo Interamericana para el Desarrollo Integral 2015).
The study offers an informative description of the history and status of the agreements; yet, the analysis
assesses only the legal content of the agreements without any benchmark.


                                                       17
Chernetsky (2005) based on information gathered for a few migration corridors between
countries. While incomplete, the study showed the potential power of corridor studies.

Corridor studies have some tradition in the analysis of migration flows and integration
issues. 9 Under the World Bank portability project, corridor studies were considered as a
useful tool for reviewing and comparing BSSAs to inform policy makers and social policy
researchers on issues, effectiveness, and areas for improvement. They provide the
opportunity to delve in substantial detail into the functioning of one particular BSSA while
providing a comparative review of the agreement against a common set of criteria. For the
selected corridors, a multinational team of social security and migration experts developed a
standard methodological framework for studying and measuring the extent to which their
BSSAs meet the three criteria introduced in the previous section (individual fairness, fiscal
fairness, and bureaucratic effectiveness).

BSSAs in four corridors with two migrant-sending and four migrant-receiving countries were
chosen for this study—Morocco’s agreements with Belgium and France and Turkey’s with
Austria and Germany. The selection of corridors was guided by considerations of (a) proximity
of migrant-sending country pairs, to allow for better comparability of differences and (b)
diversity with regard to experience. The Austria/Germany-Turkey agreements are considered
mature and advanced, as they included health benefits from the beginning. The
Belgium/France-Morocco agreements included some other short-term benefits from the
beginning but were only recently revised to include/propose comprehensive health care
benefits.

To put the four corridors and their BSSAs into perspective, table 3.1 presents the number of
BSSAs for each country across the corridors. The data for the United States and Japan are
included for comparison. The picture that emerges is straightforward. In addition to other
main industrialized countries in the world—Australia, Canada, Korea, Japan, and the United


9
 See Gsir, Mandin, and Mescoli (2015) for a recent corridor report on Belgium and the immigrants from Morocco
and Turkey.


                                                     18
 States—all European host countries have a focus on the Balkans and northern Africa as
 relevant migration destinations, while those with a colonial past (particularly France) also
 favor Sub-Saharan Africa. The sending countries have BSSAs with other main European
 countries and Canada plus a number of neighboring countries. In contrast, Japan and the
 United States’ BSSAs are only with other highly industrialized countries, with one exception
 each for an emerging economy (Brazil and Chile, respectively). This is particularly surprising
 for the United States, which has main migration corridors with essentially all countries in Latin
 America and the Caribbean and a very strong one with Mexico. For the latter migration
 corridor, a BSSA was drafted in 2004 but has not yet been signed and implemented.

            Table 3.1. Number of Bilateral Social Security Agreements Across Corridor Countries in 2015
                             Number of
        Country                                         Of which, South-North Partner Countries
                             BSSAs a/b/
                                            Bosnia-Herzegovina, Moldavia, Montenegro, Philippines, Serbia,
  Austria                        15
                                            Tunisia, Uruguay
                                            Bosnia-Herzegovina, Kosovo, Macedonia FYR, Morocco,
  Germany                        17
                                            Montenegro, Serbia, Tunisia, Uruguay
                                            Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Luxemburg, Norway,
  Turkey                         22
                                            Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland
                                            Albania, Algeria, Congo, Dem. Rep., Bosnia-Herzegovina, India,
  Belgium                        25
                                            Kosovo, Macedonia, Moldavia, Philippines, Serbia, Tunisia
                                            Algeria, Benin, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Cameroon, Congo, Dem. Rep.,
  France                         41
                                            Gabon, Mali, Niger, Philippines, Tunisia, Turkey
  Morocco                        16         Canada, Germany, Denmark, Spain, Netherlands, Quebec, Sweden

   USA c                        25          Chile
   Japan d                      15          Brazil
Source: National Social Security Institutions.
Note: a. BSSA signed and enacted as of 2015.
b. For EU countries, 31 more corridor arrangements are added resulting from the other 27 member states plus
the other four countries within the European Economic Space that have the same legal status (Iceland,
Lichtenstein, Norway, and Switzerland),
c. All other BSSAs are with European countries, Australia, Japan, and Korea, and no developing or emerging
economy.
d. All other BSSAs are with European countries, Australia, Korea, and the United States, and no developing or
further emerging economy.

 The research focused on each BSSA’s effectiveness in facilitating portability of pensions (old-
 age, survivor’s) and disability and health care benefits, as these are the core (or only) benefits
 typically covered by BSSAs between southern and northern countries. In addition, the analysis




                                                        19
covered family benefits (family allowances), as their history and current status differ
markedly across the corridors. Thus, the selected corridors provide a useful starting point for
understanding the functioning of BSSAs, as their scope of coverage varies somewhat over
time, as do the history and relationships between the signatories, but the principles on which
they are based are largely similar. Furthermore, one of the signatory governments (Morocco)
specifically requested an analysis of the functionality of its BSSAs.

The corridor study approach comprised preparation of three main sets of background
documents before evaluating each BSSA against the three criteria. The first set of documents
concerns country and corridor profiles on relevant topics. The second set relates to
development of a relevant dataset and selection of key performance indicators. The final set
contains the minutes of in-depth interviews with key participants in the BSSA process.

In the first set of documents, the respective researchers established four types of profile
documents relevant to the BSSA for each corridor:

       (a) A migration profile that sketches migration stocks and flows and key labor
            market characteristics for the corridor countries

       (b) Social insurance profiles of each corridor country, with a focus on portability-
            relevant contingencies

       (c) A profile of the BSSA, including benefits covered, rules/instruments applied to
            achieve portability, rules of coordination, motivation for the BSSA, and special
            issues

       (d) A profile of each country’s national social insurance institutions and their
            administrative support for BSSAs, with a focus on administrative arrangements
            and processes (for example, information and communication technology
            support, application, decision, and disbursement), compared to national
            applicants and international best practice



                                               20
Work on the second set of documents started with identification of a wish-list of data
considered desirable and relevant for the analysis, with the intent to develop a results matrix
that would bring together the BSSA’s objectives and outcomes (as measured against the three
criteria) with the related inputs, including the BSSA’s regulations. It soon became apparent
that the desired data were extremely sparse and often simply not available or comparable
across countries, impeding researchers’ ability to implement this approach in full. For
example, some countries’ data do not distinguish whether host country nationals living
abroad (to whom pensions are distributed) are return migrants or temporary residents
(snowbirds). 10 Further, the level of naturalization across all corridors is remarkable, albeit not
identical. All else constant, different levels of naturalization lead to different numbers of
people remaining with a foreign passport, while the number of those born abroad is the
same. As some countries do not allow collection of information about those born abroad,
determining who receives a pension abroad gets complicated. As a result, the initial objective
to develop and use a set of key performance indicators had to be dropped due to lack and/or
comparability of relevant data. 11

The third set of documents consisted of in-depth interviews undertaken with two types of
participants in the BSSA process: (a) representatives from ministries and/or social security
institutions in charge of BSSA design and implementation and (b) nongovernmental
organizations involved in the topic, such as migrants’ associations. This qualitative research
proved very productive to gain major insights into substance, process, and issues around
portability and BSSAs. While the interviews are referred to in the corridor studies, for reasons
of confidentiality they cannot be made public.




10
   The notion of snowbirds is colloquially used to describe people who typically spend the normally harsher
winter months in warmer climate and countries, such as Canadians in Florida, French in Morocco, or Germans
in Spain or Turkey.
11
   A much-better-funded project with a larger number of research staff in each corridor country may, perhaps,
been able to distill some of the relevant corridor data to fill the results framework. However, it is doubtful that
a lot of comparable data across corridors would have resulted even with more resources due to country
idiosyncrasies. This is likely to require an effort by the EU statistical office EUROSTAT.


                                                       21
Based on these country-specific documents and a first joint assessment of BSSAs in the east
corridor (Austria and Germany with Turkey) and in the west corridor (Belgium and France
with Morocco), 12 individual corridor studies were prepared. 13

Despite all the restrictions in the implementation of the methodology, to the author’s
knowledge these were the first studies of their kind, and the data collection and lessons
learned should provide a useful addition to the understanding of BSSAs and benefit
portability.

The resource-constrained focus on the four south-north corridors did not allow for this
research to identify and establish a relevant benchmark, either as a conjectured best-practice
south-north corridor or as an identified best practice north-north corridor within the EU. A
well-functioning north-north corridor is somewhere in the background of the qualitative
assessment. Within the EU, the rules should be such that an individual moving from one
country to the next should not face any obstacle to acquiring and transferring social rights or
payments. At a legal level, this is quite likely broadly achieved for mandated public sector
schemes for pension and health, has still issues when moving between public and private
sector scheme within and between countries, and creates portability issues very often for
private schemes for both pension benefits and health care. However, the private scheme
issues are very little researched.




12
   For the east corridor, see Fuchs and Pacaci-Elitok (2014). For the west corridor, see Legros et al. (2014) and
Wels, Bensaid, and Legros 2015 (in French). For a recent and related corridor experience report for Moroccan
and Turkish migrants in Belgium, see Gsir, Mandin, and Mescoli (2015).
13
   See Holzmann, Fuchs, Pacaci-Elitok and Dale (2015a and 2015b, forthcoming) for the Austria-Turkey and
Germany-Turkey corridors; Holzmann, Wels, and Dale (2015, forthcoming) for the Belgium-Morocco corridor;
and Holzmann, Legros, and Dale (2015, forthcoming) for the French-Morocco corridor. All corridor papers can
be found at the World Bank website www.worldbank.org/en/topic/socialprotectionlabor.


                                                      22
     4. Similarities and Differences of BSSAs across the Four Migration
        Corridors

By design and given the selection process, the four corridors and their BAASs have a number
of similarities. However, the analyses revealed similarities that go well beyond the obvious.
A number of idiosyncratic and systemic differences emerge from some path dependence that
may reflect the political preferences of the respective migrant-receiving and migrant-sending
countries.

To explore and present the BSSAs’ similarities and differences, Section 4 is structured as
follows: Section 4.1 describes the migration history of the four corridors; Section 4.2
highlights the contents of the four corridors’ BSSAs and offers a summary evaluation; Section
4.3 and Section 4.4 offer the details of pension and health care benefits, respectively; and
Section 4.5 briefly presents information on family benefits, as this topic had the most
divergent results of all benefits covered under the BSSAs.

     4.1.   Migration Developments

In all four migration corridors, the BSSAs’ origins are found in the labor migration of the 1960s
and the reaction to post-World War II labor shortages in Austria, Germany, Belgium, and
France. Migration flows have existed between Morocco and France (and to some extent
Belgium) since World War I and World War II, given the participation of Moroccan soldiers on
the side of the allies, but this was mostly war related and temporary. No sizable migration
flows existed between Turkey and Austria/Germany before 1960 except those resulting from
major relocation of civil populations after the two world wars. 14 The relocation of civil
populations between the two wars from and to the former Turkish Empire was one of the
largest government-sponsored relocations in mankind (Manning 2013).



14
  This abstracts from the 500-year military frontier between the Hapsburg Empire and the Turkish Empire
between the fall of Constantinople (1453) and the 19th century and the population movement involved.


                                                  23
Migration from the early/mid-1960s to 1973/74 was a publicly organized labor flow between
participating migrant-sending and migrant-receiving countries. By objective and design, the
flow was temporary, with little concern for family unification or long-term prospects in the
migrant-receiving country. The four corridors’ BSSAs from the 1960s served as instruments
of attraction and competitiveness; similar BSSAs were signed with the former Yugoslavia by
Austria and Germany and by Belgium and France with Algeria and Tunisia.

The first oil price crisis in 1973 changed the migration regime and outlook, as large-scale labor
recruitment was abruptly stopped and never resumed. Furthermore, over the next 10 years
or so, a number of one-off actions were initiated in some countries to induce temporary
migrants to return home voluntarily. For those (and the majority) who decided to stay on,
family unification became important and dominant in the migration flows. In addition, a
constant flow of labor migrants continued on all corridors at a lower scale. The data indicate
larger gross flows of immigration and return migration, with net flows partly negative for
Austria and Germany in recent years.

Estimating the stock of migrants from the two migrant-sending countries in the respective
migrant-receiving countries is complicated due to naturalization—which differs both in
nature and scope between the east and west corridors. In all corridors, the first (and second)
generation has given rise to second and third generations born in the migrant-receiving
country. In Belgium and France, this gives rise to the right of citizenship latest at the age of
majority as the principle of ‘ius solis’ applies; in addition, newcomers may acquire citizenship
according to the rule of time of presence and gainful occupation. In Austria and Germany, the
principle of ‘ius sanguinis’ applies, whereby the right to citizenship depends on at least one
parent having citizenship, while again newcomers may acquire citizenship according to the
rule of time of presence and gainful occupation, although the specific criteria have changed
over time.

As a result, the naturalization rate between Austria-Germany and Belgium-France differs,
while the share of individuals with a migration background does not. Furthermore, the



                                               24
 national data in France and Belgium do not allow differentiation of individuals by their place
 of birth/ethnicity. Hence, a pension sent from France or Belgium to a resident in Morocco can
 be differentiated by the resident’s nationality (assuming s/he has only one), but if it is a
 French or Belgian citizen, no differentiation can be made based on his/her ethnic
 background/country of birth.

 Table 4.1 offers a summary of data and estimates on the number of individuals with a
 migration background in their respective migrant-receiving countries and their significance in
 the respective corridors’ migrant-sending countries.

                    Table 4.1. Population, Migration Background, and Foreign Citizenship
                                                               Of Which, with            Of Which, with
                Population (in       Of Which, with
                                                              Turkey/Morocco            Turkey/Morocco
                 thousands)       Migration Background
                                                            Migration Background           Citizenship
                                                                                          (in
                                  (in thousands)    (%)    (in thousands)     (%)                      (%)
                                                                                      thousands)
  Austria
                    8,452             1,600        17.7         275           3.3          113        1.3
  (2012)
  Germany
                   81,754             15,962       19.5        2,956          3.6          1,607      2.0
  (2011)

  Belgium
                    10,951           2,023 (2005)a    19.3        290a         2.9          80         0.7
  (2011)
  France
                    63,294          11,800 (2008)b 18.6       1,314 (2008)b    2.1      435 (2010)c    0.7
  (2011)
Source: Corridor studies; Poulain and Perrin 2008; Wikipedia: Demographics of Belgium; Demographics in
France; INSEE 2008 and 2010 recensement.
Notes: a. Poulain and Perrin 2008; b.INSEE 2008; c.INSEE 2010.

 Table 4.1 exhibits the similarities and differences between the corridors and countries.
 Overall, the share of population with a migration background is strikingly similar in all four
 migrant-receiving countries, ranging from 17.7 percent to 19.5 percent. These data and the
 notion of individuals with a migration background are relatively well-defined and used in
 Austria and Germany (albeit not comparably even between these countries). Migration
 background is not legally defined in Belgium and France but the concept is used by
 researchers to estimate comparable data. The definition typically comprises individuals born
 abroad or to parents of whom at least one was also born abroad or as foreigner (that is,




                                                     25
second generation). Across the four migrant-receiving corridor countries, almost one person
in five is considered to have a migration background.

For the two migrant-sending countries, the data indicate broad similarities, but Austria and
Germany’s populations have slightly more residents with a Turkish background (3.3 percent
and 3.6 percent, respectively) compared to Belgium and France’s share of the population with
a Moroccan background (2.1 percent and 2.9 percent, respectively). This is consistent with
the somewhat higher prevalence of other nationalities in these countries, particularly
Algerians in France and Turks in Belgium.

The share of those from migrant-sending countries who keep their original citizenship (and
are not yet naturalized) is telling and not surprising. In countries with the principle of ‘ius
solis’, only about 0.7 percent of the total population, or one-third to one-quarter of the
population with the respective background population, live as foreigners in the migrant-
receiving country. Both values are much higher in countries with the principle of ‘ius
sanguinis’: 1.3 percent and 2.0 percent, respectively. As result, less than half of the
population with a Turkish background have German citizenship, and less than 40 percent have
Austrian citizenship. The differences between Germany and Austria also reveal differences in
their naturalization processes.

  4.2.   The BSSAs in the Four Corridors

All four BSSAs date from the mid-/late-1960s and have seen few changes (table 4.2). Austria
and Germany’s BSSAs are essentially unchanged except for corrections in scope (Austria) and
process (Germany). Belgium and France’s BSSAs had an even longer shelf life and were
revised only recently; most importantly, they added an extension in health coverage.




                                              26
                                 Table 4.2. The Origin and Status of the BSSAs
                     Date of
                                                Date of Current BSSA                 Envisaged Revision
                    First BSSA
                                  2000, Unchanged except family allowance 1966
Austria-Turkey         1966                                                        Not at the moment
                                  BSSA terminated in 1996
                                  1984 Suppl. Aide Memoire (AM), 1974 Interim
Germany-Turkey         1964                                                        Not at the moment
                                  AM, 1969 Changing AM
                                  May 2014, with Administrative Agreement,        Partial revision under
Belgium-Morocco        1968
                                  effective as of May 1                           implementation
                                                                                  Revision under
 France-Morocco         1965     May 2011, with Convention as of October 2007
                                                                                  implementation
Source: Holzmann et al. 2015a and 2015b, forthcoming; Holzmann, Wels, and Dale 2015, forthcoming;
Holzmann, Legros, and Dale 2015, forthcoming.

The individual BSSAs’ scopes of coverage are quite different and are aligned by east and west
corridors (table 4.3). The Austria-Turkey and Germany-Turkey BSSAs focus essentially on
pensions and health; health was included from the very beginning, an outlier among the
BSSAs then (and to some extent even now). Family allowances were included initially but
eliminated in the Austria-Turkey BSSA when it was canceled in 1996 (and not included in the
otherwise identical BSSA of 2000); family allowances are included but reduced in the
Germany-Turkey BSSA (and exist as a unilateral benefit that is only paid by Germany).

From the very beginning, the BSSAs for Belgium-Morocco and France-Morocco had a larger
scope of benefits in cash but until their recent revisions did not include portability of health
care benefits for retirees, as mandatory health care insurance coverage was introduced in
Morocco only in 2005.

All four BSSAs studied seem to be based on the same two basic principles of BSSAs. Portability
of social benefits exists only (a) for those based on contributions/acquired rights (that is,
principle of contribution base) and (b) for which a corresponding benefit exists in the other
country (that is, principle of reciprocity). However, the latter principle is violated by the
payment of family benefits, which exists in Germany but not in Turkey.




                                                      27
              Table 4.3. Scope of Benefit Coverage under the Four BSSA Corridors (as of January 2015)
       Austria-Turkey              Germany-Turkey              Belgium-Morocco            France-Morocco
  •    Retirement pension      •    Retirement pension     •    Retirement pension    • Retirement pension
  •    Survivor’s pension      •    Survivor’s pension     •    Survivor’s pension    • Survivor’s pension
  •    Invalidity benefits     •    Invalidity benefits    •    Invalidity benefits   • Invalidity benefits
  •    Health insurance        •    Health insurance       •    Health insurance      • Health insurance
       benefits                     benefits                    benefitsc                 benefits
  •    Occupational            •    Occupational           • Occupational             • Occupational
       diseases                     diseases                    diseases                  diseases
  •    Work injuries           •    Work injuries          • Work injuries            • Work injuries
  •    Family allowancea       •    Family allowancesb     • Family allowances        • Family allowancesd
                                                           • Unemployment             • Unemployment
                                                                benefits                  benefits
                                                           • Sickness benefits        • Sickness benefits
Source: Holzmann et al. 2015a and 2015b, forthcoming; Holzmann, Wels, and Dale 2015, forthcoming;
Holzmann, Legros, and Dale 2015, forthcoming.
Notes: a. Unilaterally cancelled by Austria in 1996; b. Unilaterally covered by Germany and at reduced level for
children abroad; c. Not yet operational; d. Limited to four children if paid abroad.

 The following picture and questions emerge from the initial and summary assessment of the
 BSSAs in these four corridors that are detailed in the subsections below:

          •       The four BSSAs reflect the migration situation of decades ago and the labor
                  market goals of the 1950s and 1960s. Albeit significant changes have occurred in
                  both the migration and labor market situation, relatively few changes have taken
                  place in these BSSAs over the years. Revision of the two BSSAs in the west
                  corridor has proven to be lengthy and difficult.

          •       The four BSSAs are broadly similar but quite different in structure and details,
                  and the BSSAs’ language is much less harmonized than expected with regard to
                  what and who are covered and how coverage is defined and implemented. The
                  source of these differences is unclear (for example, are there major differences
                  in the BSSAs’ underlying institutional set-up and structures) as is whether these
                  differences actually matter for the large majority of those insured or only for a
                  few marginal cases.

          •       For pension benefits in the broad sense (that is, old-age, survivor’s, disability, and
                  work injury and occupational diseases), no significant conceptual and


                                                          28
               operational issues seem to exist, except for the nonexportability of
               noncontributory benefits (top-ups), administrative issues around documentation
               readiness and information, and the taxation of benefits in disbursement.

         •     For health care benefits, more unsolved conceptual and operational issues
               prevail about how best to establish individual and fiscal fairness, albeit the
               systems in place broadly deliver the benefits and services due.

         •     Family benefits and the allowance for children staying in the home country of the
               (foreign and national) worker remain a topic of conceptual and operational
               controversy in the four BSSAs.


  4.3.       Pension Portability

Seven key issues matter for individuals with acquired pension rights across country borders.
Each is discussed in turn in this section.

   4.3.1. Totalization of Insurance Periods

For waiting periods of individual countries (and thus exclusion from eligibility) to not become
effective, totalization of insurance periods is at the core of any BSSA (as far as earnings-
related schemes are concerned) and is a feature of all four reviewed BSSAs. The relevance of
totalization is proportional to the length of the waiting period (5 years in Germany; 15 years
in Austria, as well as in Belgium and France for their first-tier schemes).

   4.3.2. Timely Calculation of Benefits

The timeliness of the benefit calculation depends on how records of insurance periods are
prepared within individual schemes and on the presence or degree of electronic exchange
between schemes. Timely preparation and electronic exchange exist in Austria and Germany,
are absent in Belgium and France and are also lacking in Turkey and Morocco. In the latter
two countries, information is only put on paper when an application arrives and the exchange



                                                29
between the different funds also takes place in paper form. This substantially lengthens the
application process. Turkey plans to apply an electronic format as of 2017. No plans for
electronic exchange exist in Morocco. However, since 2013, Caisse Nationale de Securite
Sociale (CNSS) has developed electronic forms, for instance, for birth and death certificates.
Thus, electronic formats have been partially implemented in Morocco (CNSS) but not to
facilitate portability.

To calculate benefits, according to its BSSAs the east corridor applies only the ‘direct method’;
that is, once eligibility is established, the benefit for each country is calculated according to
national rules. According to its BSSAs, the west corridor applies the ‘European (double)
method’ and calculates the benefits for the totalized insurance period before assigning each
country payments through pro rata apportioning. The result of the pro rata method is
compared to that using the direct method and the better result is selected (see box 4.1 for
an example). While called the European method, it is not consistently applied between all EU
countries (for example, between Austria and Germany). According to interviews with the
social security administration, results differ little between the methods, as recent reforms
have established closer contribution benefit links.




                                               30
 Box 4.1. Example of Portable Pension Benefits Calculated with Direct and Pro Rata Methods
 Benefit background and assumption for State A and State B:
     •    In State A, a full (basic) pension of €800 per month is paid to those who have been insured for 40 years
          (2 percent for each year), provided they have been insured for at least 20 years.
     •    In State B, a pension of 50 percent of the maximum national pension (€1000) plus 1 percent for each year
          is paid to those who have been insured for at least 25 years; the maximum insurance period considered
          is 50 years.
     •    The worker has insurance periods of 18 years in State A and 24 years in State B.
 Direct calculation:
     •    No contracting party can pay a pension under national law solely on the insurance period completed on
          their territory.
     •    The aggregated (totalized) insurance periods, however, are 42 years and satisfy entitlement conditions
          in both states.
     •    State A calculates the pension on 18 years and therefore pays 18 x 2% of €800 = €288. In State B 50% of
          the maximum national pension does not depend on the length of periods completed, so from this part
          only 24/30 would be payable. State B therefore pays a monthly pension of 24/30 of 50% of €1000 + 24 x
          1% of €1000 = €400 + €240 = €640. This gives the worker a total pension of €288 + €640 = €928.
 Pro rata calculation:
     •    Again, no contracting party can pay a pension under national law but under the totalized insurance
          periods of 42 years.
     •    With 42 years of insurance, the theoretical amount for full insurance in State A is €800 and in State B is
          50% and 42 x 1% of €1000 = €920.
     •    Prorating these amounts makes State A pay 18 / 40 x €800 = €360 per month (note that the fraction used
          is not 18/42 as the maximum insurance period in State A is 40 years). The pension to be paid by State B
          is 24 / 42 x €920 = €526 (rounded) per month. This gives the worker a total pension of €360 + €526 =
          €886.
 Source: Author, adjusted from Furat 2011.


   4.3.3. Full Exportability of Acquired Rights

Full exportability of acquired rights (that is, no benefit reduction because of purchasing power
considerations) is typically a basic ingredient for a BSSA and has specific relevance if an
individual country’s legislation imposes reductions when sending the pension benefit abroad.
This was the case for German pensions, which paid only 70 percent of the pension benefit
due if the pension was paid abroad to a country without a BSSA in place (for example, to a
Turkish retiree residing in South Africa with a German pension). This regulation was abolished
on October 1, 2013 (as only a few pensions were concerned).




                                                     31
    4.3.4. Nonexportability of Noncontributory Benefits Due to Lack of Reciprocity

 Nonexportability of noncontributory benefits (pension top-ups) is quite likely the most
 contentious issue in all four corridors. All four investigated EU member countries have some
 form of minimum income guarantee in old age, with means-tested top-ups granted if the own
 pension benefit level plus other income is below the guaranteed income level in old age
 (Ausgleichszulagenrichtsatz fuer Alterspensions in Austria; Garantie de revenus aux personnes
 âgées in Belgium; Allocation de solidarité pour les personnes âgées in France; and
 Grundsicherung im Alter in Germany). Yet, none of these EU member countries allow the
 export of the top-ups to supplement benefits paid abroad.

 Table 4.4 offers the magnitudes of these minimum income guarantees and examples for top-
 ups as of January 1, 2016. The latter are calculated assuming a common net pension level of
 €470 in all countries, an assumed amount of own pension that may be broadly representative
 of potential return migrants. If correct, the top-up would be higher than the own pension and
 the total net pension income (own net pension plus top-up) above the average gross labor
 income in the sending country.

        Table 4.4. Minimum Income Guarantee in Old Age (€ [rounded] Per Month as of January 2016)
                          Max Guarantee           Max Guarantee         Example Transfer
       Country                                                                                    Comments
                               Single                Couple                for Couple a.
   Austria                      883                   1,324                     854           Paid 14 times c
             b
   Germany                      819                   1,143                     673           Paid 12 times
   Belgium                      688                   1,032                     562           Paid 12 times
   France                       800                   1,242                     772           Paid 12 times
Source: Author, based on information provided on the websites of national social security institutions.
Note: a. Assuming uniformity of own income/pension (net of health contributions) of €470 per month in each
country.
b. Calculated on basic consumption need of €404 (728) plus acceptable rental costs (€345) and heating costs (€70)
per month.
c. Austrian salaries and pensions are paid with two extra installments per year (typically for June and December
or a half month addition every quarter) and taxed at a low flat rate of 6 percent (for singles).

 The denial of exportability for these minimum pension guarantees is fully in line with EU
 legislation and the lack of reciprocity, as neither Morocco nor Turkey offers a minimum old-
 age income guarantee to its citizens (they do offer minimum pensions for those eligible for a



                                                       32
pension benefit, as do their EU counterparts). As the own pension benefit levels of Moroccan
and Turkish retirees are typically well below those of their EU counterparts—due to lower
wages as well as shorter insurance periods—the share of retirees with Moroccan and Turkish
migration background that get such top-ups is much higher, typically one-third or more
compared to about 10–15 percent of the indigenous population.

The lack of exportability of top-ups in addition to the loss of other local benefits and services
that old-age residents below the minimum income guarantee typically enjoy (such as for
housing, transportation, television fees, leisure activities, and so on) plus the loss of access to
better health care systems is claimed to contribute to low return migration of retirees
(whether naturalized or with citizenship of the sending country). 15

     4.3.5. Centralized, Efficient Application Processes

Application from the country of residency through a dedicated entry point, direct
administrative contacts between the diverse insurance funds, and centralized information
access and a designated contact person are all conveniences that are not regulated in a BSSA
but are part of a country’s administrative capacity.

The processing of an application from Morocco and Turkey with insurance periods in Europe
only is facilitated by full informatization of insurance records in most of these countries. As a
result, applications to the west corridor countries once received by postal communication
can be responded in normal cases, by Austria and Germany, with a preliminary approval
within days and a definite approval within weeks. If additional written records are required
(as may be the case in the western corridor countries), the weeks will become months. If



15
  The data by social security institution offer information on how many pensions are paid abroad but typically
do not allow individuals to be distinguished by nationality or country of origin. As a result, a pension paid to
Morocco can be paid to a Moroccan with Moroccan nationality, a naturalized Moroccan, or a French snowbird.
Similarly, it is unknown how many pensions paid in EU countries are to naturalized migrants and how many to
foreign passport holders. However, information about migration streams between countries (which may include
migrants from both sending and receiving countries) signals limited return migration shortly before or after
retirement.


                                                      33
insurance periods were acquired in the sending countries before or after returning home,
then their collection and verification can be time-consuming, particularly if the date of birth
or name is unclear. If benefit information from the sending country is required to establish
totalization or the level of top-ups when residing in the host country, the delay can be
substantial as is the loss of benefit disbursement or delayed payment of top-ups.

Turkey envisages moving to full computerization of insurance records by 2017. This may apply
to new and some older records, but full computerization of all records is likely to be decades
away and, thus, so is a quick application process. No information is available about the ICT
plans in Morocco.

   4.3.6. Channels of Pension Payment

The benefit payment from a disbursing pension fund to an individual retiree is made directly
to an indicated bank account. This also occurs in transnational transactions in the east
corridor, whereby a retiree with Turkish residence informs the pension fund of the account
in which she/he wants the transfer made, in either Turkish lira or euros. If the latter, the
money cannot be touched until the 21st of the month to avoid fees. For ease of transfer,
Austria reportedly uses the German Postbank as an intermediary for transfers to Turkey.

In the west corridor, transfers from France are also directly made to a nominated individual
bank account in Morocco; in Belgium, transfers are channeled through the contact institution
in Morocco (CNSS). In case of direct transfer, an annual proof of life is requested; in the case
of CNSS, the proof is processed by the disbursing unit.

   4.3.7. Consistent Taxation of Pensions

Consistent taxation of pension benefits is a further requirement for portable pensions. This
issue is not addressed in BSSAs but left to bilateral double taxation treaties (DTTs) between
countries. The first goal of DTTs is to eliminate international double taxation or to reduce its
effects. Most DTTs were established when portable pensions were not yet an issue; as a



                                              34
 result, BSSAs and DTTs are often not consistent, and no conceptual guidance is available on
 how to make them so. The general rule of DTTs is that pension benefits from social security
 institutions are to be taxed in the country of residency, while those pension benefits from
 public institutions (that is, civil servants’ pensions) are to be taxed by the source country. The
 reality is much more complex and confusing; the solution awaits a better understanding of
 what is happening and conceptual guidance on how best to tax (Holzmann 2015; Genser and
 Holzmann 2016).

 Table 4.5 summarizes the tax treatment between the various BSSA partners. It shows wide
 variation in taxation approaches, even within these four taxation corridors. Two source
 countries (Germany and Belgium) tax pensions while two (Austria and France) do not. Of the
 two receiving countries, Turkey does not tax pensions at all (as pensions are not considered
 taxable income). Morocco taxes pensions but not those from Belgium (which are exempt due
 to a DTT) and offers very generous income tax allowances for pensions from France (which
 are not source-taxed there) if the pensions are paid to a Moroccan bank account and used
 locally.

            Table 4.5. Taxation of Pension Benefits by Origin of Payment and Residency of Recipient
                         German Pension        Austrian Pension     Belgium Pension       French Pension
  Taxation in source
                        Source taxation       No                   Source taxation      No
  country
                        No—all pensions      No—all pensions                           Yes—special
  Taxation in                                                    No—exempt from
                        are tax free in      are tax free in                           regimes, with tax
  residence country                                              taxation through
                        Turkey (not          Turkey (not                               allowance
  (Turkey or                                                     DTT 1972, Article
                        considered taxable considered taxable                          between 40 and
  Morocco)                                                       18
                        income)              income)                                   80%a
Source: Holzmann et al. 2015a and 2015b, forthcoming; Holzmann, Wels, and Dale 2015, forthcoming;
Holzmann, Legros, and Dale 2015, forthcoming.
Notes: a. Le Monde 2013.

 Such differences in the tax treatment of pensions affect the fiscal neutrality of portability
 arrangements well beyond those of BSSAs and are discussed again in Section 5.




                                                      35
  4.4.      Health Care Portability

Portability of health care benefits between countries is well established within the EU
through a network of EU legislation and regulation and special bilateral arrangements.
Portability is either absent or only incompletely addressed in EU countries’ BSSAs with third
countries, however. While BSSAs with European countries outside the EU strive for
completeness, this is not the case for BSSAs with countries in other continents. When the
material scope does cover health or other benefits, the coverage is often limited (Spiegel
2010). As a result, the worldwide experience with portable health care benefits is much more
limited and conceptually and operationally much less streamlined than is the case for
pensions.

In this regard, the four BSSAs under investigation are an exception. Austria and Germany’s
BSSAs with Turkey (and the former Yugoslavia) contained health care coverage from the very
beginning. Belgium and France’s initial BSSAs with Morocco contained very limited health
care elements, as social health care programs were introduced in Morocco only in 2005. The
revised BSSAs of Belgium-Morocco (as of 2011) and France-Morocco (not yet signed but with
an AM as well as an Administrative Agreement for implementation as of 2014) extend health
care benefits to pension benefit recipients in the other country; their introduction is
reportedly under implementation (but little information is available about their operation).

Portability of health care benefits for migrant workers can be exemplified for a variety of
cases and situations:

         (a) A foreign (migrant) worker’s access (and any family residing with him) to a host
              country’s mandated health system is usually but not always the same as that of
              a national worker. For example, waiting periods are typically waived in the BSSA
              to make workers equal from the very first day. In contrast and as an example,
              Australia requires migrant workers (and their family members) to be covered




                                              36
              under a private health insurance contract for the first two years of residence and
              work.

       (b) Reciprocal access of workers from the other country to emergency health care in
              case of travelling.

       (c) Coverage by the home country of the migrant’s family left behind in the home
              country and paid by the host country.

       (d) Coverage of visiting family members left behind in the host country in case of
              emergency.

       (e) Coverage of a pension recipient from one country taking residency in the other
              country.

       (f)    Temporary coverage of such a residing retiree in the country of pension payment
              for emergency or pre-agreed treatment.

While all these (and other) cases may form part of a BSSA, the focus of BSSAs with selected
third countries is typically and increasingly focused on contingencies that can be controlled
by the paying institutions (Spiegel 2010).

   4.4.1. East Corridors’ BSSAs and Health Care Portability

The east corridors’ BSSAs (Austria-Turkey and Germany-Turkey) offer an arrangement similar
to the treatment within the EU that includes immediate health care coverage for foreign
workers; emergency coverage of workers and family members when travelling in the other
country; coverage for pre-agreed treatment in the other country; coverage of nonresident
family members by their home country institution; and coverage in the country of pension
receipt. The last component is typically the most difficult to implement, albeit the issues
around medical claims for visiting migrants and family members may create the most
complaints.



                                               37
With respect to family left behind, under the east corridors’ BSSAs, the spouse, children, and
sometimes other family members (such as parents) are provided benefits in kind by the
partner health insurance organization. The family left behind is officially registered with the
partner insurance and receives the same benefits as other nationals. The insurance fund in
the migrant-sending country receives yearly compensation calculated on real costs or on a
lump-sum basis.

When family members visit the working member in the host country, their access to health
care benefits is covered in case of emergency (as for other covered tourists), subject to
administrative procedures, such as an exchange of the residency health insurance for visitors’
insurance. The costs of such intervention are subtracted from the amounts due, which
typically flow in much higher volume in the other direction—as a lump sum or for real costs.

The standard approach to establishing portable health care for mobile retirees is as follows:
a retiree with a pension from Austria or Germany who establishes residency in Turkey (as a
return migrant or a snowbird, with either nationality) is eligible for the Turkish health care
system upon residency and registration with the Turkish social security scheme, with the
same access to the health care system as any other insured person. The contribution payment
and expenditure responsibility depend on whether the retiree’s Austrian or German pension
is his/her only pension benefit or if s/he also has a Turkish pension benefit. If the latter, s/he
pays (only) the Turkish contribution rate and the Turkish health insurance is fully responsible
for all health care expenditures, however high his/her foreign pension(s). If the retiree has
only an Austrian or German pension, s/he pays the corresponding Austrian or German
contribution rate on his/her pension benefit (deducted at source) while the Turkish health
insurance claims reimbursement from the relevant Austrian or German institution. This
arrangement seems straightforward but has a number of nuances:

       (a) The host institution/country has an incentive to avoid any responsibility for
             pension payment as this triggers full responsibility for health care outlays. This is
             the case in Turkey, where current or former Turkish nationals may cover



                                               38
             insurance periods outside Turkey with an additional voluntary lump-sum
             contribution payment upon return to the social insurance pension scheme.
             Turkey claims that this payment is for life insurance and thus does not trigger
             health care responsibility, but this position is reportedly under consideration.

         (b) On the other hand, taking full responsibility for all health care outlays is
             inequitable if the main share of the retirement (pension) income is from abroad.
             Such an approach jeopardizes financial fairness between countries.16

         (c) Turkish expenditures for retirees by Austrian and German health care institutions
             are reimbursed by applying flat-rate costs (for resident expenditure), while
             health outlays during visits (own or covered family members) are reimbursed
             using actual costs. During a dispute around the flat-rate costs, it emerged that
             Turkey applies different family weights for Austria, France, and Germany in its
             calculation of reimbursement: the weight used for Austria is much higher than
             that for Germany but the weights of both are below that used for France.

         (d) Some uncertainty reportedly remains about the right to health insurance for
             temporary visits by insured members in own or other countries that are party to
             the BSSA. This may lead to underreporting of outlays or to rejection of claims by
             health insurers.

     4.4.2. West Corridors’ BSSAs and Health Care Portability

Belgium and France’s initial BSSAs with Morocco covered only the health care costs of
travelling workers or their family members. The new France-Morocco BSSA of 2011 extends
coverage to all health care contingencies outlined above and for retirees, establishes a



16
  For this reason, countries within the EU have started to charge a health insurance premium on pensions
received from abroad. For example, a retired Austrian academic receiving pension for his/her tenure at a
German university pays a health insurance contribution on the German pension in addition to health care
contributions on the Austrian pension.


                                                  39
coverage and financing process (Article 16) equivalent to that of the east corridors’ BSSA: in
case of eligibility to health care benefits for a retiree from one country who resides in the
other country, the residence country provides the health care services while the pension
benefit disbursement country covers the cost (Article 16/1); in case of eligibility to health care
benefits for retirees in both BSSA countries, the residence country covers both benefit
provision and financing (Article 16/3). The new Belgium-Morocco BSSA is not yet finalized.
However, an administrative arrangement concluded and implemented in 2014 revises some
health care-relevant articles of the old and still valid BSSA but does not yet extend health care
to retirees. Compared to the east corridor, the situation is more complicated as the health
care systems of Belgium, France, and Morocco all follow a two-tier scheme in which basic
health care insurance is supplemented for much of the private sector labor force by
contributions to a mutual health insurance. As the recent BSSA revisions are now being
implemented, no information was available on how the multitier approach is addressed
across these countries.

  4.5.    Portability of Family Benefits

The pension and health care provisions discussed so far have major family provisions that
have not been discussed in detail herein, such as widows’ and orphans’ pensions and access
to health care in home country and host country during visits for family left behind. Their
access to these transfers and services depends—as a necessary condition—critically on the
portability of benefits by the insured. No special issues emerged regarding pensions except
for the handling of repudiation/divorces and widows’ benefits in the west corridor in view of
possible multiple spouses in Morocco (not Turkey) and with regard to access to health care
provisions for visiting family members in the host country.

Regulation of the portability of other family benefits, most importantly in the form of family
or child allowances, is the most diverse and quite likely the most contentious contingency
across the four BSSAs, for many reasons:




                                               40
       (a) Family benefits are not really a social security contingency or social risk but a
             redistributive instrument across individuals/families (from those with no children
             to those with children) and across an individual’s life cycle (from a period without
             children to a period with children).

       (b) They may be financed through earmarked wage contributions but are more often
             financed by general government revenues and thus do not establish an acquired
             right that needs to be protected.

       (c) As a redistributive instrument, it can be argued that migrant workers should not
             profit to the same extent as national workers even if their children reside with
             them; this argument is even stronger if children reside in the home country, away
             from the worker.

       (d) Even if the distributive argument toward migrants’ children holds, the level of
             family benefits sent abroad may be reduced, as differences in purchasing power
             need to be considered.

       (e) As eligibity (for example, number of children abroad) cannot be easily verified,
             the insurance argument for the existence of the benefit gets weaker.

       (f)   If the migrant-receiving country does not provide such family benefits, the
             reciprocity of benefits does not hold, violating a basic principle of BSSAs (for
             example, Turkey does not provide family benefits, but Morocco provides social
             insurance-related family benefits for up to six children).

Some of these considerations have led to changes in the portability rules for family
allowances across the four BSSAs. In 1996, Austria unilaterally canceled the BSSA; the
replacement agreement of 2000 is essentially the same but does not have a family allowance
(‘Familienbeihilfe’). One of the main official arguments was the misuse of the benefit, as the
number of claimants’ children could not be verified in Turkey. Germany faced similar issues



                                               41
and arguments but did not completely cancel the family benefit (‘Kindergeld’). Instead it
substantially reduced the amount transferred to eligible children from Turkish workers in
Turkey compared to those in Germany; it is around one-tenth but varies with the number of
children. 17 Similar discussions took place in Belgium and France but did not result in similar
actions. The France-Morocco BSSA of 2011 restricts the family benefits sent abroad to cover
at most four children (Article 16/6), but discussions were held about lifting the restrictions.
According to the Belgium-Morocco BSSA, benefit eligibility is restricted to the pure family
allowance (‘prestations familiales’) without special benefits or increases (Article 27/2).




17
  German family allowance (‘Kindergeld’) for Turkish workers under BSSA in 2015.
  Family allowance for children residing in Germany          Family allowance for children residing in Turkey
                             (€)                                                     (€)
 For first and second child each                   184      For first child                               5.11
 For third child                                   190      For second child                             12.68
 For each further child                            215      For third and fourth child each              30.68
                                                            For each further child                       35.79
Source: Familienkasse; http://www.arbeitsagentur.de/.; In a recent ruling by the German Federal Fiscal Court of
September 27, 2012 (Decision III R 55/10), an employee with Turkish background but now German citizenship
was denied the family allowance for his three children living with their mother in Turkey. As a Turkish citizen he
would have been eligible for the reduced benefit, but as a German citizen, the regular family allowance is only
paid for children residing in the European Economic Area (that is, EU, Iceland, Norway, and Lichtenstein) but not
Turkey.


                                                       42
     5. Evaluating the BSSAs According to Criteria Fulfillment

This section presents the findings of the BSSAs’ evaluation against the three criteria outlined
at the beginning, covering both equity and efficiency considerations: fairness for individuals,
fiscal fairness for countries, and bureaucratic effectiveness for all involved.

     5.1.   Fairness for Individuals

Section 2 outlined the conceptual framework for portability and defined fairness for
individuals as no benefit disadvantage with regard to pension and health care for migrants
and their dependents. Thus, one’s movements between host countries or back to the home
country should not lead to lower pension benefits or gaps in health coverage than if one
stayed in one country.

Desk reviews of the four BSSAs as well as interviews with the responsible managers in
national security institutions and ministries and representatives from migrants’ organizations
suggest comprehensive and well-working agreements, with very few gaps or issues on the
table.18 In none of the four corridors does the BSSA create a major benefit disadvantage that
affects mobility on a large scale. With the implementation of full health care benefits for
mobile workers between France/Belgium and Morocco, the remaining benefit gaps, which
created some but limited unfairness, are being closed: in the two-tier structure of health care
insurance, mobile retirees now pay additional contributions to get local health care access.

The BSSAs in all four corridors broadly offer the expected pension portability for mobile
workers, with no reported issues around the lack of take-up of benefits. A few important
outstanding issues remain, particularly around the nonportability of noncontributory pension



18
   In the individual corridor studies, references to these interviews are made and included in the list of references
if permission was given by the interviewees. The minutes of all interviews are available for further research
purposes but for confidentiality reasons cannot be made public. The author would again like to thank all those
who made themselves available for interviews; they contributed significantly to the understanding of BSSAs and
their intricacies. All remaining errors are the author’s own.


                                                        43
top-ups, requests for retroactive payment, and (for the west corridors) the handling of
repudiation/divorces and widows’ benefits.

The interviews did not suggest that pension benefits are forfeited at any sizable scale due to
lack of information for eligible return migrants about their pension rights or because enabling
administrative environments do not exist to apply for and get their benefits. The validity of
this statement could potentially be verified by using host countries’ insurance databases—at
least in Austria and Germany where the migration backgrounds of the insured are known.
One issue raised around benefit take-up concerned the more frequent informal labor status
of migrants who moved at the beginning of the labor migration in the 1960s and who do not
have pension rights (or have them at a lower level). One corridor-specific issue concerned
Germany: in the 1970s, return migrants to Turkey were allowed to cash in a lump-sum
payment, an action that many beneficiaries reportedly later regretted.

Nonportability of noncontributory pension top-ups was raised for all four corridors by
migrants’ organizations and migrant-sending countries’ administrations, and the associated
mobility implications are documented in the migration literature. In essence, while
nonportability can be justified on equity and insurance grounds, it risks creating a kink in
potential return migrants’ intertemporal budget constraints, affecting their return decision.
With the top-up and other amenities, migrants are financially better off staying in the host
country than returning to their home country. However, the limited return of migrants to
their former home country seems to be motivated by incentives well beyond mere financial
considerations: access to a more advanced health care system in the host country (albeit
those in Turkey and Morocco have made significant progress); family roots established in the
host country (due to family reunifications in recent decades); or estrangement over decades
from family left behind.

One new contingency not covered under the investigated BSSAs (nor in any BSSA or European
regulation to the author’s knowledge) concerns the lack of portability of mandated long-term
care insurance introduced in Germany in the 1990s. The acquired rights are not portable for



                                              44
individuals when moving abroad and thus the payment of 1 percent of salary forfeited
becomes a tax. This problem, however, does not exist only for the east corridors but also
affects mobility within the EU (as the author of this article can attest; see also Deutsche Welle
2013).

Another concern for individual fairness is the lack of retroactivity for payment of social
security benefits. When pension applications are delayed—because of late submission,
difficulties in verifying data, or any other reason—the pensioner loses access to any benefits
owed up until the application is authorized. Migrants’ organizations are therefore calling for
a provision on retroactivity in revised BSSAs. However, the host countries’ administrations
prefer the alternative approach of reassembling the contributory data well before the
retirement date, which may prove more effective and in line with what other countries have
done or are preparing.

Last but not least, repudiation and distribution of the survivor’s pension may create a fairness
issue in the west corridors. Moroccan civil law (Mudawana) allows two types of dissolution
of marriage: divorce and repudiation. Divorce requires spouses to go to the Tribunal to
formally dissolve the marriage, which can be very costly and time-consuming (Ouali 1992).
Repudiation enables one spouse to unilaterally break the contract, which limits costs and
duration. This is why men—and in a small number of cases, women—use repudiation more
often than divorce. However, repudiation is not always recognized as valid in Belgian civil law
for Moroccans resident in Belgium. This can lead to a risk of polygamy and can also affect
both pension rates and the distribution of the survivor’s pension for spouses.

Both west corridors’ BSSAs foresee the splitting of the survivor’s pension when polygamy
exists: prorated and according to length of marriage in France, with possibility of review after
the death of one spouse (France-Morocco BSSA Article 31/1) and equally and definitely in
Belgium and Morocco (Belgium-Morocco BSSA Article 24/1). The provisions do not provide
clear guidance in relation to spouses’ nationality, however. If both are Moroccan nationals, it
seems evident that Article 24 is applied since the national law permits polygamy. However, if



                                               45
one of the spouses is not a Moroccan national and instead is a national of a country where
both repudiation and polygamy are prohibited (which is the case for Belgian nationals), Article
24 cannot be applied.

  5.2.   Fiscal Fairness for Countries

Evaluating fiscal fairness requires a benchmark against which to assess the impact of a BSSA
and thus portability of benefits. The simple version of such a benchmark states that no
participating country should have a fiscal advantage or be harmed by the agreement, but the
meaning of this needs to be assessed in context. Fiscal neutrality for both countries does not
mean that both do not economically benefit from the agreement compared with the situation
in its absence (for example, through higher labor market formality).

   5.2.1. Financial Fairness - Pension Regulations

Portability of pensions means that income generated in one country is transferred to another
country, not dissimilar to remittances sent from migrant-receiving to migrant-sending
countries; that is, a shift in purchasing power (Jousten 2012). It corresponds to the export of
factor income (labor income for unfunded pensions and capital income for funded pensions)
from the factor-using to the factor-providing country. If the pension benefit design is
actuarially fair, then neither the transfer of acquired rights nor benefits in disbursement
impede fiscal fairness. This may, however, be the case when the benefits contain significant
distributive design components that are also transferred or in case of significant differences
in life expectancy among socioeconomic groups that disadvantage lower-income groups,
such as migrants, that would not be compensated. At the moment, the size of such
unintended transfer components is unknown, as is the extent to which they may cancel out.
The lack of a BSSA and thus portability of pension benefits clearly fiscally profits the host
country—as no benefits are paid to return migrants and prior contributions were cashed—
while the home country is fiscally hurt as it may have to compensate for the lack of portable
old-age pensions through own and locally financed assistance benefits.




                                              46
The pension structure of all countries in the investigated BSSAs follows an earnings-related
design that becomes more actuarially shaped and more fiscally fair with each reform. Major
fiscal unfairness may emerge, however, through the high (and at times increasing) level of
government transfers to cover the increasing imbalance between pension contributions
(from employee and employer) and pension outlays. In all host countries, a significant share
of pension expenditure is paid by budgetary transfers (up to one-third).

A significant and so far little discussed source of fiscal unfairness may come from outside the
pension system, in the treatment of contributions, interest earned, and benefits disbursed in
the tax system. Because tax deductions have been granted to pensions during the
accumulation phase (for example, through nontaxation of contributions and interest earned)
that would be recovered through the taxation of benefits when disbursed, fiscal neutrality
may be hurt but not under all circumstances. Nontaxation of returns on retirement savings
may not be a privilege but merely the taxation principle under a consumption-type tax
treatment. On the other hand, beneficiaries may also be taxed twice: during the accumulation
phase in the working country when contributions are non-tax-deductible and then again at
retirement if pensions are fully taxed in the residency country of retirement. Yet, the taxes
levied in the new recipient country may simply pay for the public goods and services provided.
The tax transfer mechanism may include age-related transfers when beneficiaries are young
(for example, child allowances and housing subsidies) that are recovered when they are older,
including when drawing a pension. Then the pension-sending country would lose and the
pension-receiving country would gain.

As table 4.5 highlighted, the tax treatment of portable pension benefits in the home country
varies tremendously across the four corridors. This heterogeneous tax treatment is bound to
create fiscal unfairness among countries even without spelling out in which direction (this is
done in the individual corridor studies). The amount of tax expenditure in the tax source (and
pension host) country and how the taxation rights of pensions in disbursement should best
be arranged between source and residency country are empirically unknown and




                                              47
conceptually and operationally unclear. This area of international coordination of financial
flows has until now been left largely to the legal profession and to its treatment in DTTs—the
BSSA equivalent for taxation issues. The international taxation of portable pensions and how
best to establish individual and fiscal fairness with minimal bureaucratic hassles is still
unknown territory. Yet, to clarify the concepts and get a better understanding of the flows
involved, some first research steps have been launched.19

     5.2.2. Financial Fairness - Health Care Regulations

Public health care systems are typically designed to give everyone access to a comprehensive
set of services. Contributions are typically flat or a fixed share of income, while expenditures
rise strongly with age. When developing countries send more young net contributors abroad
and receive more elderly net beneficiaries, their public health systems are burdened. On the
other hand, migrant women who give birth to children in the host country burden this health
care system more during this episode relative to the revenues they contribute. Worldwide,
no arrangement is in place to share the savings components of health care provisions of a
migrant who contributed to the public health institutions of various countries (Holzmann,
Koettl, and Chernetsky 2005; Werding and McLennan 2015; Holzmann and Koettl 2015).

Under the BSSAs investigated, two key elements may negatively affect the fiscal position of
the country that provides health care benefits for mobile retirees:

         (a) The full expenditure responsibility of the residence country for all health care
              outlays if the retiree receives a pension from this country, however small
              compared to other (pension) income from abroad. This creates a health cost


19
  To explore and develop the under-researched topic of the taxation of pensions, including the issue of the
taxation of portable benefits, the Center for Economic Studies & Ifo Institute CESifo (Munich) and the Centre of
Excellence In Population Ageing Research CEAPR (Sydney) started a project with workshops in Sydney (held in
November 2014) and Munich (held in September 2015). For details of programs and output, see
http://www.cesifo-group.de/ifoHome/events/Archive/conferences/2015/09/2015-09-03-tag15-
Holzmann.html. The revised papers are all available as CESifo Working Papers at https://www.cesifo-
group.de/ifoHome/publications/working-papers/CESifoWP.html, including the policy issue paper on the
taxation of internationally portable pensions; see Genser and Holzmann (2016).


                                                      48
            disadvantage if return migrants have only a small home and large host pension
            benefit, and health care contributions are only levied on the home pension, as
            currently seems to be the case in the corridors; if contributions are levied on all
            pension income received, contribution revenues may still not be cost covering.
            For the assessment of the latter, age-related (not average) cost coverage should
            matter, which is not the current practice.

       (b) The ‘across-the-board’ compensation from the host country that also pays a
            retiree’s only pension. While three methods are used internationally for health
            cost recovery, Turkey currently uses the across-the-board method for retirees.
            The alternatives are “actual values” (that is, real costs incurred by the insured)
            and ‘average values’ calculated on actual outlays over four quarters of the year.
            Actual values are used for emergency cost recovery for temporary eligible
            visitors. Across-the-board cost recovery is certainly administratively less
            burdensome (albeit private insurers use actual values) but may lead to major
            underpayment for older health care beneficiaries.

Viewed in this context, the current approach of portable health care may be seen as fiscally
unfair to Turkey, but this assumes that cost recovery is based on across-the-board values
related to actual outlays. This may not be the case. During quality checks, fluctuations in the
average health care costs presented by Turkey that could not be explained by real
developments attracted the attention of Austrian authorities. In comparing Turkey’s
calculation bases with those of Germany and France, Turkey was found to be using different
family weights (recall Section 4.4.1). Following negotiations, the same family factor used for
Germany is now also used for Austria (Wieninger 2013).

For Turkey, the main concern related to health care benefits is due to new levies imposed on
pension income by the EU. The EU changed its internal regulations in 2002 and introduced
supplementary premiums from pensions for health services. Turkey has argued that this




                                              49
practice is at odds with the provisions in the BSSA and unfairly affects residents of states that
are not members of the EU’s common social security system.20

In summary, it is not clear whether fiscal neutrality of portable health care is achieved in the
current BSSAs and existing legal environments. This ambiguity may be due less to the lack of
a conceptual framework (Holzmann and Koettl 2015; Werding and McLennan 2015) and more
to a traditional and disputed implementation as well as differences in how countries
themselves finance their health care provisions.

     5.3.   Bureaucratic Effectiveness

Critical elements required to keep the bureaucratic burden low for migrants and social
security institutions include appropriate information for potential beneficiaries; timely
records on insurance periods; and electronic communications and file exchange between
institutions. In all four investigated BSSAs, room for improvement exists in all three elements.

     5.3.1. Available Information Sources for Migrants

Due to the age structure of migrants, their pensions represent a comparatively recent issue,
and not all eligible persons may be aware of the BSSAs’ provisions. Furthermore, migrant
retirees from emerging economies often have a low educational level and are not used to
contact with the social security administration. In addition, they face language barriers and
have often had discriminatory experiences with the administration. These factors can
contribute to retirees’ difficulties in understanding their benefits. Advisory services provided
by both home and host countries can play a part in overcoming these barriers.

Overall, advisory services provided by Austria and Germany are generally viewed favorably
by migrants. In both Austria and Germany, three key actors offer information and support:
(a) social security institutions, which reach out to (Turkish) migrants through a diverse set of


20
   The new regulation also applies to Austrian residents in receipt of an Austrian public pension and health
insurance who also receive a public pension from an EU member state. A health insurance contribution is levied
on the pension from abroad as health care benefits are provided locally.


                                                     50
interventions, including regional information and support sessions; (b) the social attaché of
the Turkish embassy, which advises Turkish citizens on pension and health insurance issues
(Garibagaoglu 2013); and (c) migrants’ organizations, which offer information and facilitate
links between migrants and the social security administration (Ceviz and Kolm 2014).

Three types of interventions are currently used in Belgium, France, and Morocco to inform
potential beneficiaries of the contents and coverage of the BSSA: institutional contact
centers, information sessions, and direct communication with beneficiaries. It is relatively
easy for pensioners to liaise with contact center staff. However, information sessions
organized by Office National des Pensions in the Moroccan cities with the largest population
of returnees often struggle to reach a large number of potential beneficiaries. Privacy
concerns can exacerbate this. For example, past requests by Moroccan institutions to Belgium
to share potential beneficiaries’ contact details available in the Belgian administrative
database have been rejected by Belgium for privacy reasons. In the future, both countries will
need to pursue avenues to ensure migrant retirees’ access to social security rights without
breaches of privacy.

While information provision by the host countries seems to work well overall, local advisory
services provided by public institutions in both Morocco and Turkey are viewed by migrants’
organizations as inadequate, with a lot of room for improvement. The most common
complaint is that administrative staff are not fully informed on the BSSAs’ contents and
administrative processes and thus they cannot provide adequate information to clients. No
information is currently available about information material, visitor statistics, advising
sessions, and so on.

   5.3.2. Delays in the Application Process

It takes longer to process cross-national pension applications than national pensions.
Frequent delays occur during the confirmation of the extent of insurance periods in Morocco
and Turkey, as local institutions must generate individual insurance data from documents



                                              51
provided in paper form by regional offices. The list of insurance periods is collected only at
the time of a pension application, and account clearances with yearly entitlement
announcements do not exist. Thus, for example, the pension application for the Austrian or
German part is processed very quickly as the domestic insurance file is essentially ready at
the time of application, but in Turkey the process may take many months (Doganay 2013;
Wieninger 2013; Hauschild and Hopfe 2013). Similar experiences are also reported for the
west corridors.

Difficult cases of pension application or access to health care are brought to the attention of
periodic bilateral meetings, but the involved parties attempt to handle such cases beforehand
using informal electronic interactions and other communications.

   5.3.3. Electronic Data Exchange and Modernization

The EU corridor countries generally intend to subject older agreements to a collective
revision, as both the EU and national regulations have been further developed (for example,
related to data protection regulations). Electronic data exchange would improve both the
fight against fraud (for example, disclosure of a double submission of bills) and cooperation
between institutions (for example, ascertainment of the actual primary residence of a
pensioner). Austria, for example, envisages starting electronic exchange of information with
Turkey (and other agreement states) by 2016.

The implementation of ITC-based exchanges between EU and neighboring countries can be
inspired by the dedicated ITC system at the core of the multilateral agreement MERCOSUR
between Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay (Consejo Interamericana para el Desarrollo
Integral 2015). This innovative ITC system is reliable and trusted (generating a trace for each
exchange in a trusted institution: Organizacion Iberoamericana de Seguridad Social; is
separate from that of each national participating social institution but can be easily linked to;
has strong data protection and privacy features; enables effective and efficient data exchange
that reduces time requirements between countries from months to days; and is easy to install



                                               52
and use (as it is web-based). The ongoing development includes an automatic payment
management to avoid bank fees; allows for direct transfer in local currency (eliminating the
need to transfer using U.S. dollar transactions); and offers a compensation system to reduce
transfers (Ruggia-Frick 2011, 2015).




                                            53
 6. Conclusions, Reflections, and Recommendations

The overall conclusions from the four investigated corridors are relatively encouraging. The
four investigated BSSAs seem to be broadly working, with only a few areas of contention and
recognized areas for improvement. With some exceptions, this assessment essentially holds
for all three criteria used to evaluate the BSSAs: fairness for individuals, fiscal fairness for
countries, and bureaucratic effectiveness.

Fairness for individuals: BSSAs do not create a major benefit disadvantage that affects
mobility on a large scale in any of the four corridors. Implementation of full health care
benefits for mobile workers between France/Belgium and Morocco closed a remaining
relevant benefit gap. The BSSAs offer the expected pension portability for mobile workers,
with no major issues around the lack of benefit take-up. A few important outstanding issues
remain, particularly the nonportability of noncontributory pension top-ups, requests for
retroactive payment, and (for the West corridor) the handling of repudiation/divorces and
widows’ benefits. Family benefits remain an issue for discussion and different solutions
across the corridors may prevail.

Fiscal fairness for countries: The pension systems’ evaluation yields a mixed picture. For the
four BSSAs considered, their increasingly actuarial pension benefit structure helps in the
pursuit of fairness; high and increasing levels of budgetary transfers to keep pension systems
afloat have a counter effect. For health care systems, it is unclear whether and to what extent
fiscal fairness is or can be achieved under the current responsibility and reimbursement
structure and how important the problem is.

Bureaucratic effectiveness: Stakeholders gave EU host countries’ institutions high marks for
their provision of benefit-related information and services but had a less favorable
assessment for their home countries. A concern for many applicants is the delay in
processing; the advantages of advanced electronic file preparation in some but not all EU
countries are attenuated by the paper-based information collection systems in Morocco and



                                              54
Turkey; the situation is further aggravated by verification issues for names and birth dates.
Electronic file exchange systems across BSSAs are envisaged and may soon take place in some
corridors.

While the four corridor studies offer a lot of useful information and insights, they are not rich
enough to draw firm conclusions to drive policy changes for BSSAs. However, their
comparison and individual evaluations in relation to the three criteria do allow for some
suggestions about next steps, including thoughts about policy developments, and invite some
reflections, as follows:

From a policy perspective, a number of questions are not fully addressed in this paper (if at
all). Some are discussed in this section.

Does portability or its absence matter? If so, is it for labor mobility or social risk
management; for what phase of labor mobility—departing, staying, or returning—and for
what part of risk management—pension, health, and so on? The findings in the corridor
studies are consistent with sparse empirical evidence that departure consideration may be
little influenced by the presence or absence of portability (even if the reviewed BSSAs from
the 1960s were considered an important competitive element); for example, no BSSAs exist
between Mexico and the United States or between Asian and Gulf Cooperation Council
countries, although these have the largest migration corridors globally. This suggests
implications for the risk management of migrants (forcing own provisioning) and home
countries (offering special arrangements such as health care by Mexico and a range of
support programs by the Philippines).

Portability arrangements seem to have some but limited effect on return migration while
some specificity of pension and health care provisions may make many migrants stay on; for
pensions it is top-ups that seem to matter, while for health care it is access to high-quality
care if needed. It would be interesting and relevant to experiment with limited portability of




                                               55
top-ups and/or selective access to health care to former host countries for return migrants
(including visas) to explore the mobility effects.

What are the conclusions, if any, for low-income countries/minimum requirements? For a
BSSA to be worthwhile, a developing country needs to have a sizable migration corridor that
offers its migrants access to receiving countries’ social security systems (not the case in the
Gulf Cooperation Council countries, Malaysia, Singapore, and so on). However, the
developing country should also have a (perhaps small) functioning social security system or
at least one or two well-operating schemes. Similarity between the host and home country
schemes also helps, or the host country will have limited interest in engaging in a BSSA and
no credibility with and interest by its own migrants to participate at home and abroad.
Furthermore, operation of the relevant scheme should be computerized (ideally with a
unique personal identification number), have birth and death certificates, and have an
institutional set-up that takes care of its migrants for departure, during their stay, and upon
return.

What should developing countries pursue: a narrow or an ambitious approach to BSSAs? A
narrow approach with a focus on few benefits, particularly on pensions (old-age, disability,
and survivor’s), work injury, and health care for family members left behind and visiting has
higher chances of early success. Renegotiating the BSSA for broader benefits such as family
allowance and health care in retirement when the migration corridor intensifies and domestic
equivalents are created is possible but requires a more lengthy process. Striving from the very
beginning for a comprehensive BSSA and benefit coverage as within the EU may not be very
promising and would need to build on a very strong migration corridor. Current signals from
the EU indicate a reluctance to include health care in future third country agreements.

Are private sector provisions easier to make portable? Not necessarily, and in any case this
would only be relevant for long-term contingencies—retirement and health care. Private
saving offers a first defense against many financial risks in life and money should be easy to
carry when moving from country to country. However, finding reliable financial institutions



                                               56
at home and abroad to park the money is often a challenge. In addition, private sector
pension arrangements often profit from tax privileges during the accumulation phase that
countries increasingly take back when leaving the country and the exit tax may be sizable.
Private health care insurance is not easily portable between countries (or even within
countries) so that sizable savings elements get lost when moving. Even within the EU, private
provisions (for pension and health care) are much less portable than public and mandated
ones. This has given rise to pan-European or international private programs in health and
preparation of a pan-European fund for supplementary pension benefits.

The recommendations for next steps to better understand BSSAs to offer relevant policy
proposals for redesign and implementation focus on the research agenda, as important data,
relevant concepts, and empirical evidence are still missing. Main research elements include
the following:

       (a) The information base should be broadened with further south-north corridor
            studies for other regions as well as studies for north-north corridors (inside and
            outside the EU) and south-south corridors within and outside multilateral
            agreements.

       (b) Future corridor studies should spend much more resources and time on
            development of a full results framework with the needed micro- and
            macroeconomic data from social security institutions and beyond. This would
            allow for a more rigorous quantitative evaluation of BSSAs according to the
            proposed and other criteria.

       (c) Independent of corridor studies, countries should be encouraged to provide
            much more information about portability-related flows and transactions
            between countries and to offer administrative data (as anonymized files) for
            research purposes.




                                             57
       (d) Future evaluations should profit from progress in the conceptual and empirical
             deepening of fiscal fairness, particularly for pension and health care programs.

       (e) Such conceptual extensions would profit from in-depth empirical analysis of the
             current health care corridors and their financing and reimbursement
             mechanisms.

       (f)   A better analytical foundation is needed to determine which benefits should get
             priority in BSSAs and which should be dropped. While comprehensiveness may
             be laudable, it may come at a price, namely a BSSA’s delayed finalization or
             implementation.

       (g) Regardless of their overall design, future BSSAs will profit enormously from
             having a monitoring and evaluation framework built in from the very beginning.

       (h)   Beyond portability questions, but closely linked with the sensitive issue of
             migration, are more and better studies on the fiscal costs and benefits of
             international migration. This requires estimations within a life cycle framework,
             possibly embedded within a general equilibrium approach, and much better and
             accessible data than are currently available.

It is strongly hoped that this project will motivate further corridor studies in different regional
and economic settings and that its research methodology will be used to test the findings’
resonance and explore their broader applicability or rejection.




                                                58
 7. References

Avato, Johanna, Johannes Koettl, and R. Sabates-Wheeler. 2010. “Social Security Regimes,
       Global Estimates, and Good Practices: The Status of Social Protection for International
       Migrants.” World Development 38: 455–66.
Becker, Gary. 1964. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis. New Work:
       Colombia University Press.
Ceviz, K., and M. Kolm. 2014. Advisor; Head; Terra – Advisory Centre for Elder Migrants,
       SOZIAL GLOBAL Aktiengesellschaft. Personal communication.
CIDI (Consejo Interamericana para el Desarrollo Integral). 2015. Análisis de Convenios
       Bilaterales y Multilaterales de Seguridad Social en Materia de Pensiones. Segunda
       Reunion de los Grupos de Trabajo de la XVIII Conferencia Interamericana de Ministros
       de Trabajo (CIMT), Cartagena, Colombia, 28-30 de april.
Deutsche Welle. 2013. “Germany's pension system tricky for foreigners.” Top Stories, August
      5, 2013. http://www.dw.com/en/germanys-pension-system-tricky-for-foreigners/a-
      16996930
Doganay, M. 2013. AWO Information Centre for Migrants. Personal communication.
Eurostat. 2015. Immigration in the EU. http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/home-affairs/e-
       library/docs/infographics/immigration/migration-in-eu-infographic_en.pdf (accessed
       February 2, 2016)
Fabel, O. 1994. The Economics of Pensions and Variable Retirement Schemes. Chichester:
       Wiley.
Fuchs, M., and S. Pacaci-Elitok. 2014. “Portability of pensions and health care for pensioners
       - Joint Summary Document East Corridor (Austria, Germany vs. Turkey).”
       Commissioned by the World Bank – Study, 5 M Migration MGMT Initiative Phase I
       (P127358). European Centre for Social Welfare Policy and Research, Vienna, April.
Furat, Oemer Faruk. 2011. “The Application of Long-Term Pension Provisions on Bilateral
       Agreements.” SGK, PPT presentation in Zagreb, Croatia, February 16.
Garibagaoglu, A.N. 2013. Labour and Social Law expert, Embassy of Turkey to Germany.
       Personal communication (October 30).
Genser, Bernd, and Robert Holzmann. 2016. "The Taxation of Internationally Portable
      Pensions: Fiscal Issues and Policy Options." CESifo Working Paper No. 5702, January.
      Munich: CESifo.


                                             59
Gsir, Sonia, Jérémy Mandin, and Elsa Mescoli. 2015. “Corridor Report on Belgium: The case
        of Moroccan and Turkish Immigrants.” Turkish Immigrants, INTERACT RR 2015/03,
        Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies, San Domenico di Fiesole (FI): European
        University Institute.
Hauschild, M., and P. Hopfe. 2013. Experts, German Pension Insurance Federal Level, Unit
      EU-law, agreement-law, intrastate law with foreign elements. Personal
      communication.
Himmelreicher, Ralf, and Wolfgang Keck. 2015. “Transnational Ageing as Reflected in Pension
     Insurance.” In Transational Ageing – Current Insights and Future Challenges, ed.
     Vinzent Horn and Cornelia Schweppe, Chapter 5, pp. 107-124. New York and London:
     Routledge.
Holzmann, R., M. Fuchs, S. Pacaci-Elitok, and P. Dale. 2016a. “Assessing Benefit Portability for
      International Migrant Workers: Lessons learned from a review of the Turkey-Austria
      bilateral social security agreement.” Social Protection & Labor Global Practice.
      Washington, DC: The World Bank.
———. 2016b, forthcoming. “Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers:
    Lessons learned from a review of the Turkey-Germany bilateral social security
    agreement.” Social Protection & Labor Global Practice. Washington, DC: The World
    Bank.
Holzmann, R., J. Wels, and P. Dale. 2016. “Assessing Benefit Portability for International
      Migrant Workers: Lessons learned from a review of the Morocco-Belgium bilateral
      social security agreement.” Social Protection & Labor Global Practice. Washington,
      DC: The World Bank.
Holzmann, R., F. Legros, and P. Dale. 2016. “Assessing Benefit Portability for International
      Migrant Workers: Lessons learned from a review of the Morocco-France bilateral
      social security agreement.” Social Protection & Labor Global Practice. Washington,
      DC: The World Bank.
Holzmann, Robert. 2015. “Taxing Pensions of an Internationally Mobile Labor Force:
      Portability Issues and Taxation Option.” CEPAR Working Paper 2105/27. Sydney:
      University of New South Wales.
Holzmann, Robert, and Johannes Koettl. 2015. “Stability of Pension, Health, and other Social
      Benefits: Facts, Concepts, and Issues.“ CESifo Economic Studies, 61(2), 377-415 Munich:
       CESifo. doi:10.1093/cesifo/ift017




                                              60
Holzmann, Robert, and Martin Werding. 2015. “Portability of Social Benefits: Research on a
      Critical Topic in Globalization.” CESifo Economic Studies, 61(2), 1–11; Munich: CESifo. doi:
      10.1093/cesifo/ifv009
Holzmann, Robert, and Yann Pouget. 2012. “Social Protection for Temporary Migrant
      Workers: what programs serve them best?“ In Global Perspectives on Migrant and
      Development: GFMD Puerto Vallerta and Beyond. A Publication by the Global Forum
      on Migration and Development, ed. Irena Omelaniuk, pp. 61-85. New York-
      Heidelberg: Springer.
Holzmann, R., J. Koettl, and T. Chernetsky. 2005. “Portability Regimes of Pension and Health
      Care Benefits for International Migrants: An Analysis of Issues and Good Practices.”
      Social Protection Discussion Paper No. 0519. (also available in French). World Bank,
      Washington, DC.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 2012. “Social security coordination for non-EU
       countries in South and Eastern Europe: A legal analysis.” Geneva: ILO.
INSSE recensement 2008. http://www.insee.fr/
———. 2010. http://www.insee.fr/
Jousten, A. 2012. “The Retirement of the Migrant Labor Force: Pension Portability and
       beyond.” CESifo Working Paper Series No. 3995. Munich: CESifo.
Lazear, Edward. 1979. “Why is there mandatory retirement?” Journal of Political Economy 87:
       1261-1284.
Le Monde. 2013. “Les "paradis fiscaux" des retraités français.” 24.05.2013.
Manning, Peter. 2013. Migration in World History, 2nd edition. New York: Routledge.
Maunu, John. 2014. "Select Digital Resources for Migration in World History." World History
     Connected, October. Available at:
     http://worldhistoryconnected.press.illinois.edu/11.3/maunu.html (5 May 2015).
Ouali, Nouria. 1992. La convention belgo-marocaine de coopération judiciaire en matière
       civile.       L’Année        Sociale,      267–275.       Retrieved        from
       http://difusion.academiewb.be/vufind/Record/ULB-
       DIPOT:oai:dipot.ulb.ac.be:2013/63565/Details
Taha, Nurulsyahirah, Karin Astrid Siegmann, and Mahmood Messkoup. 2015. “How portable
       is social security for migrant workers? A review of literature.” International Social
       Security Review 68 (1): 95-118.
Poulain, Michel, and Nicolas Perrin. 2008. “Measuring International Migration: a Challenge
       for Demographers.” In Demographic challenges for the 21st century - A state of art in




                                               61
       Demography, ed. J. Surkyn et al., pp. 143-173. Liber Amicorum Ron Lesthaeghe
       Brussels: VUB Press.
Ruggia-Frick, Raul. 2011. MERCOSUR social security agreement: ICT implementation. Geneva:
       ISSA.
———. 2015. ISSA Guidelines on Information and Communication Technology: Overview.
    Geneva: ISSA.
Spiegel, Bernhard. 2010. “Analysis of Member State’s Bilateral Agreements on Social Security
       with Third Countries.” Report ordered by the European Commission, Employment,
       Social Affairs, and Equal Opportunity DG, Brussels, December.
Strban, Grega. 2009. “The existing bi-and multilateral social security instruments binding EU
       States and non-EU States.” In The Social Security Co-Ordination Between the EU and
       Non-EU Countries, ed. Pieters, Danny and Paul Schoukens, pp. 85–113. Intersentia,
       Antwerpen – Oxford.
United Nations - Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 2015. “Trends in international
       migration,     2015”     Population    Facts       No.      2015/4,      December
       http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/migration/publications/popul
       ationfacts/docs/MigrationPopFacts20154.pdf (accessed February 2, 2016)
Wels, Jacques, Nawal Bensaid, and Florence Legros. 2015. « La transportabilité des
       prestations de sécurité sociale en matière de retraite, de soins de santé et de
       minimas sociaux, revue « Hommes et Migrations » - « Les migrants vieillissants »,
       1309, mars.

Werding, Martin, and Stuart McLennan. 2015. “International Portability of Health-Cost
      Coverage: Mobility, Insurance, and Redistribution.” CESifo Economic Studies, 61(2): 484-
      519 doi:10.1093/cesifo/ifu022, First published online May 27, 2015.
Wieninger, P. 2013. Head of Department International and European Social Insurance Affairs,
      Umbrella Organisation of the Austrian Social Insurance Institutions; Austrian Liaison
      Agency health insurance, accident insurance, pension insurance. Personal
      communication (September 3).




                                             62
               Social Protection & Labor Discussion Paper Series Titles
                                     2014-2016

No.    Title

1606   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Germany-
       Turkey Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Michael Fuchs, Seçil Paçacı Elitok and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1605   Do Bilateral Social Security Agreements Deliver on the Portability of Pensions and Health Care
       Benefits? A Summary Policy Paper on Four Migration Corridors Between EU and Non-EU Member
       States
       by Robert Holzmann, May 2016

1604   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the France-Morocco
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Florence Legro and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1603   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Belgium-Morocco
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Jacques Wels and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1602   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Austria-Turkey
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Michael Fuchs, Seçil Paçaci Elitok and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1601   The Greek Pension Reform Strategy 2010-2015
       by Georgios Symeonidis, March 2016

1507   Integrating Disaster Response and Climate Resilience in Social Protection Programs in the Pacific
       Island Countries
       by Cecilia Costella and Oleksiy Ivaschenko, September 2015

1506   Effectiveness of Targeting Mechanisms Utilized in Social Protection Programs in Bolivia
       by Ignacio Apella and Gastón Blanco, September 2015

1505   Kyrgyz Republic: Social Sectors at a Glance
       by João Pedro Azevedo, Paula Calvo, Minh Nguyen and Josefina Posadas, August 2015

1504   Entering the City: Emerging Evidence and Practices with Safety Nets in Urban Areas
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2015

1503   Pension Patterns in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Mark Dorfman, July 2015

1502   Social Protection in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries: Trends and Challenges
       by Mirey Ovadiya, Adea Kryeziu, Syeda Masood and Eric Zapatero, April 2015
1501   Defining, Measuring, and Benchmarking Administrative Expenditures of Mandatory Social Security
       Programs
       by Oleksiy Sluchynsky, February 2015

1425   Old-Age Financial Protection in Malaysia: Challenges and Options
       by Robert Holzmann, November 2014

1424   Profiling the Unemployed: A Review of OECD Experiences and Implications for Emerging Economies
       by Artan Loxha and Matteo Morgandi, August 2014

1423   Any Guarantees? An Analysis of China’s Rural Minimum Living Standard Guarantee Program
       by Jennifer Golan, Terry Sicular and Nithin Umapathi, August 2014

1422   World Bank Support for Social Safety Nets 2007-2013: A Review of Financing, Knowledge Services
       and Results
       by Colin Andrews, Adea Kryeziu and Dahye Seo, June 2014

1421   STEP Skills Measurement Surveys: Innovative Tools for Assessing Skills
       by Gaëlle Pierre, Maria Laura Sanchez Puerta, Alexandria Valerio and Tania Rajadel, July 2014

1420   Our Daily Bread: What is the Evidence on Comparing Cash versus Food Transfers?
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2014

1419   Rwanda: Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Alex Kamurase, Emily Wylde, Stephen Hitimana and Anka Kitunzi, July 2012

1418   Niger: Food Security and Safety Nets
       by Jenny C. Aker, Carlo del Ninno, Paul A. Dorosh, Menno Mulder-Sibanda and Setareh Razmara,
       February 2009

1417   Benin: Les Filets Sociaux au Bénin Outil de Réduction de la Pauvreté
       par Andrea Borgarello et Damien Mededji, Mai 2011

1416   Madagascar Three Years into the Crisis: An Assessment of Vulnerability and Social Policies and
       Prospects for the Future
       by Philippe Auffret, May 2012

1415   Sudan Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Annika Kjellgren, Christina Jones-Pauly, Hadyiat El-Tayeb Alyn, Endashaw Tadesse and Andrea
       Vermehren, May 2014

1414   Tanzania Poverty, Growth, and Public Transfers: Options for a National Productive Safety Net
       Program
       by W. James Smith, September 2011

1413   Zambia: Using Social Safety Nets to Accelerate Poverty Reduction and Share Prosperity
       by Cornelia Tesliuc, W. James Smith and Musonda Rosemary Sunkutu, March 2013
1412        Mali Social Safety Nets
            by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1411        Swaziland: Using Public Transfers to Reduce Extreme Poverty
            by Lorraine Blank, Emma Mistiaen and Jeanine Braithwaite, November 2012

1410        Togo: Towards a National Social Protection Policy and Strategy
            by Julie van Domelen, June 2012

1409        Lesotho: A Safety Net to End Extreme Poverty
            by W. James Smith, Emma Mistiaen, Melis Guven and Morabo Morojele, June 2013

1408        Mozambique Social Protection Assessment: Review of Social Assistance Programs and Social
            Protection Expenditures
            by Jose Silveiro Marques, October 2012

1407        Liberia: A Diagnostic of Social Protection
            by Andrea Borgarello, Laura Figazzolo and Emily Weedon, December 2011

1406        Sierra Leone Social Protection Assessment
            by José Silvério Marques, John Van Dyck, Suleiman Namara, Rita Costa and Sybil Bailor, June 2013

1405        Botswana Social Protection
            by Cornelia Tesliuc, José Silvério Marques, Lillian Mookodi, Jeanine Braithwaite, Siddarth Sharma
            and Dolly Ntseane, December 2013

1404        Cameroon Social Safety Nets
            by Carlo del Ninno and Kaleb Tamiru, June 2012

1403        Burkina Faso Social Safety Nets
            by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1402        Social Insurance Reform in Jordan: Awareness and Perceptions of Employment Opportunities for
            Women
            by Stefanie Brodmann, Irene Jillson and Nahla Hassan, June 2014

1401        Social Assistance and Labor Market Programs in Latin America: Methodology and Key Findings from
            the Social Protection Database
            by Paula Cerutti, Anna Fruttero, Margaret Grosh, Silvana Kostenbaum, Maria Laura Oliveri, Claudia
            Rodriguez-Alas, Victoria Strokova, June 2014


To view Social Protection & Labor Discussion papers published prior to 2013, please visit www.worldbank.org/spl.
Abstract

This policy paper summarizes four corridor studies on bilateral social security agreements (BSSAs)
between four European Union (EU) member and two non-member states, draws conclusions on
their results, and offers recommendations. BSSAs between migrant-sending and migrant-receiving
countries are seen as the most important instrument to establish portability of social security
beneﬁts for internationally mobile workers. Yet, only about 23 percent of international migrants
proﬁt from BSSAs and their functioning has been little analyzed and even less assessed. The four
corridors studied (Austria-Turkey, Germany-Turkey, Belgium-Morocco, and France-Morocco) were
selected to allow for comparison of both similarities and differences in experiences. The evaluation
of these corridors BSSAs was undertaken against a methodological framework and three selected
criteria: fairness for individuals, ﬁscal fairness for countries, and bureaucratic effectiveness
for countries and migrant workers. The results suggest that the investigated BSSAs work and
overall deliver reasonably well on individual fairness. The results on ﬁscal fairness are clouded
by conceptual and empirical gaps. Bureaucratic effectiveness would proﬁt from information and
communication technology-based exchanges on both corridors once available.




About this series

Social Protection & Labor Discussion Papers are published to communicate the results of The World Bank’s
work to the development community with the least possible delay. This paper therefore has not been
prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate for formally edited texts.
The ﬁndings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s), and do not
necessarily reﬂect the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank
and its afﬁliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments
they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgement on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.
For more information, please contact the Social Protection Advisory Service, The World Bank, 1818 H Street,
N.W., Room G7-803, Washington, DC 20433 USA. Telephone: (202) 458-5267, Fax: (202) 614-0471, E-mail:
socialprotection@worldbank.org or visit us on-line at www.worldbank.org/spl.

                                  © 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
