 



                       KURDISTAN REGION OF IRAQ
       REFORMING THE ECONOMY FOR SHARED
    PROSPERITY AND PROTECTING THE VULNERABLE

                              EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
May 30, 2016 

1.      The Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI) is a constitutionally recognized semiautonomous
region in northern Iraq. Its government, the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG), based in
Erbil, has the right—under the Iraqi constitution of 2005—to exercise legislative, executive, and
judicial powers according to the constitution, except in what is listed therein as exclusive powers
of the federal authorities. The Iraqi constitution defines the Kurdistan Region as a federal entity of
Iraq. KRG has a parliamentary democracy with a regional assembly that consists of 111 seats.

2.      KRI has been largely immune to the insecurity and conflict witnessed elsewhere in Iraq,
especially following the 2003 Iraq War. This has allowed KRG to promote its burgeoning private
sector and attract foreign investments in both oil and non-oil sectors. However, starting from mid-
2014, the plunging of oil prices coupled with increasing threats to security have intensified
pressure on the overall Iraqi as well KRI’s economies, necessitating a need for action to address
the immediate and medium-term challenges presented in this report. Government of Iraq (GoI)’s
fiscal position has deteriorated and political tensions have increased with widespread
demonstrations demanding reforms across legislative, executive, and judicial branches.

3.       KRG is facing a wide range of immediate and medium to longer-term challenges that
are intrinsically linked to the overall macroeconomic situation of Iraq as well as the regional
and global environment. The immediate challenge consists in coping with (a) the deep fiscal
crisis, and (b) the security and social problems brought about by the conflict with the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) group and the resulting influx of Syrian refugees and Iraqi Internally
Displaced Persons (IDPs). These challenges are clearly immediate priorities for the KRG, and
would bear significant repercussions nationally and internationally if inadequately addressed. The
medium to longer-term challenges pertain to moderating dependence on the oil sector and
transforming the KRI economy into a diversified one that supports private sector-led economic
growth and job creation in a sustainable manner.

4.      Similar to the rest of Iraq, the fiscal crisis and the security challenge posed by the ISIS
insurgency have had a significant adverse impact on economic growth in the KRI. The fiscal
shock is severe. KRG has been dealing with the fall in revenues by a combination of postponing
its investment projects, letting payments fall in arrears including wages and salaries of government
employees, borrowing domestically from private and foreign companies and banks, and borrowing
externally. The impact of reduced investment in infrastructure will be felt in the medium-term
through lowering private sector productivity and crowding out private investment. Also, arrears in
payments to oil companies and contractors create an uncertain business environment. These, in

                                                  1
 


turn, discourage investment both foreign and local. The ISIS insurgency has put significant
pressures on the Government through increased security spending and the influx of refugees and
IDPs.

5.      To address short-term as well as medium- to long-term structural issues, the Government
requested the World Bank support to develop and implement a structural economic reform
roadmap. This work is a response to an official request of the KRG Prime Minister H.E. Nechirvan
Barzani in a letter to the World Bank President Dr. Jim Yong Kim in February 2016 seeking a
partnership for growth and development to address the economic and social challenges. As a
response to the Government request, this report proposes reform options for fiscal adjustment and
for the diversification of the economy in addition to social mitigation measures to protect the
vulnerable from impacts of the external shocks. The proposed economic reform roadmap is
expected to guide policy makers in KRG as they address the immediate and more medium- to
long-term challenges facing the region in the context of increasing vulnerabilities confronting Iraq
as a whole. This work builds upon the World Bank’s extensive analytical and technical
assessments conducted under the Economic Growth Diagnostics Study for the KRI, as well as
technical assistance for social protection reform and modernization of public procurement system.
The report also draws on IFC’s experience with the private sector in KRI over the last few years
to identify the necessary reforms that would help KRG move to the next level of attracting
necessary private sector investments in the context of a challenging domestic and regional
environment. KRG is in need of a structural economic reform roadmap, which is inclusive and
serves as Government’s umbrella framework for reform actions in the short to medium-term. The
Ministry of Planning (MoP) laid out broad objectives as guidelines for policy formulation through
the Kurdistan Region of Iraq 2020: A Vision for the Future, with the diversification of the KRI’s
economy away from the oil sector being at the core of these objectives. The success of these
reforms and the ability to deal with multiple shocks will require support from KRG’s partners.
This report is the first phase of the potential World Bank assistance to the KRG to design and
implement long-standing reforms. The second phase of the technical assistance is expected to
provide implementation support for the Government. The KRG has already started implementing
austerity measures including wage bill and subsidy reforms.

Initial Conditions: Structural Issues and Recent Multiple Crises

Similar to the rest of Iraq, the KRI economy is characterized by severe dependency in four areas:

    I.   High dependency on the oil sector. Either directly or indirectly, KRI’s economy is highly
         dependent on oil sector. Despite a series of negotiations, a dispute with the central
         government about the sharing of oil revenues and the budget transfer has not been resolved.
         Oil export revenues, which had been received from the central government as budgetary
         transfers (recently suspended), constituted about 85 percent of the Government’s fiscal
         revenues. However, the sector’s estimated share is only 1 percent in region’s employment.
         Such a high level of oil sector dependency has become a “Dutch disease” particularly at
         times of high oil prices. Combined with a difficult enabling environment for private sector
         business development, skill formation that is not as advanced as desirable, and strong
         incentives for people to seek jobs in the public sector, it undermines other sectors’
         competitiveness in local and international markets and suppresses private sector
         development and domestic production in tradable sectors and exports.

                                                  2
 


              High oil dependency has created a rentier state, a boom-bust                 business cycle and an
              uncertain business environment. The boom period concealed the                structural problems the
              KRG faces. In the past, flush with oil money the Government                  became complacent to
              identify and address the structural problems. The current bust               period has brought all
              structural problems to the surface.1

     II.      An excessive role of the public sector in the economy. The public sector dominates the KRI
              economy. The KRG public spending to GDP ratio is over 50 percent, compared to 61
              percent for the whole Iraq. The KRG is the main employer with a share of more than 50
              percent in total employment (26 percent in non-military employment). Similar to the rest
              of Iraq, payments for salaries, pensions, social assistance and subsidies (electricity, fuel,
              water supply, and agriculture) comprise over 50 percent of the budget. Taxes constitute
              only 4.7 percent of total revenue. As a result, public expenditure is a primary driver of
              economic growth. A key problem is high volatility of public expenditure, which translates
              into high volatility of growth through the fiscal multiplier.2 Volatility of expenditure
              originates, in turn, from volatility of the KRG revenues, which varies widely reflecting
              fluctuations in oil prices, interruptions in production and transportation of oil driven by
              conflict, and most importantly the dispute with the central government about sharing of oil
              revenues. Despite the strong entrepreneurial spirit and potential, the local private sector in
              KRI is small and under-developed due to the significant crowding out by the public sector.

    III.      Dependency on imports. Due to the relatively undiversified nature of the overall Iraqi
              economy, there is a large gap between demand for and local production of tradable products
              in KRI (hydrocarbon exports account for around 95 percent of the total export basket of
              Iraq—the highest among Upper Middle Income Commodity Exporters). The gap is filled
              by imports, which amount to about 90 percent of non-oil GDP. Local production is
              confined to retailing of imported products, small-scale tradables, and other services
              including bloated public services. Exports of locally produced goods are very limited. This
              is a typical feature of a rentier economy. This is aggravated by weak behind the border
              policies. Under the current policy regime, it is hard for the local businesses to compete with
              imports to diversify and grow.

IV.           Weak financial system and dependency on cash-economy. An inclusive and efficient
              financial system is critical for private sector development. A well-developed financial
              system would fund greater investment for larger numbers of people. KRI has a poorly
              developed financial sector, including weak financial infrastructure and low access to

                                                            
1
  To manage the oil revenue better KRG approved a law that authorizes establishment of a Sovereign Wealth Fund
(The Oil and Gas Revenue Fund Law, approved in April 2015), which could help pursue a dual objective of stabilizing
the economy and saving to optimize the investments. The law identifies five areas where oil revenues may be allocated
for: the Kurdistan Region's annual budget, investment spending, oil infrastructure, environmental protection, and a
“future generation’s” wealth fund. This is a step in the right direction, which will also help with establishing
accountability and transparency in spending the natural resource revenues. However, although the law and a fund
could provide the necessary infrastructure for fiscal management of natural resource revenues, by themselves they are
not sufficient. A carefully designed principle for operating these funds, e.g., a fiscal rule, and the political will to
pursue those principles are equally important.
2
  One would expect a high fiscal multiplier in KRI because income tax rate and marginal propensity to save are very
low although marginal propensity to import is high.

                                                               3
 


              finance, especially for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). There is a strong
              preference for cash in business transactions. Around three percent of companies rely on the
              banking sector for investment and working capital (over 20 percent in the Middle East and
              North Africa). This is explained partly by the pervasive atmosphere of mistrust in the
              banking sector created by frequent financial disruptions and instability in the region.

These structural challenges have been aggravated by a series of recent shocks:

             Conflict with the ISIS group since mid-2014within 13 miles of Erbil;
             Influx of 1.8 million Syrian refugees and Iraqi IDPs increased KRI’s population by 28
              percent;
             A sharp decline in international oil prices, from US$115 a barrel in June 2014 to US$35 in
              December 2015 which means less revenues from direct sales; and
             A sharp fall in revenue transfers from the central government, from US$12 billion in 2013
              about US$1 billion in 2014, which was suspended in June 2015.3

6.       The growing inflow of Syrian refugees and internally displaced Iraqis into the KRI has
imposed additional strains on the budget and service delivery. This major influx severely
constrained the Government’s ability to deliver health, education, and social protection programs
to the increased population. The standard of living of the population has deteriorated, and many
people have fallen into or are vulnerable to falling into poverty. As a result of the multiple crises,
the poverty rate for KRI doubled in host communities—with the largest increase in Dohuk which
experienced the highest influx of IDPs. When the IDP and refugee population is included, the
poverty rate increased even higher: poverty in KRI increased to 12.5 percent in 2014. More than
75 percent of the refugees and IDPs are women and girls who are very vulnerable. KRG is
providing public goods for the entire region and delivering services to this increased population.
The needs of the displaced population are significant and cannot be adequately met under the fiscal
crisis that the KRG is confronted with. According to the joint World Bank and KRG Ministry of
Planning study entitled The Kurdistan Region of Iraq: Assessing the Economic and Social Impact
of the Syrian Conflict and ISIS, the stabilization needs assessment of the IDPs and Syrian refugees
were evaluated at US$1.4 billion in 2015.

Diversifying the KRI Economy: Main Contours of a Structural Economic Reform for the
KRI

7.      Kurdistan Region of Iraq 2020: A Vision for the Future provides the KRG’s
overarching view for its structural reforms. Presented in 2013, the Vision calls for “a Kurdistan
Region of Iraq where all people enjoy the benefits of freedom, health, welfare, and economic
security and opportunity.” It defines policy priorities in four areas: Putting People First (health,

                                                            
3
  In December 2014, a new agreement was reached between KRG and the Central Government to resolve the dispute.
According to this agreement, KRG would export 550,000 bpd through Ceyhan, Turkey (250,000 bpd from its own
fields and 300,000 bpd from federal fields) for the Central Government State Oil Marketing Organization (SOMO).
In return, the Central Government would resume transferring the 17 percent of its budget to KRG. The agreement was
not been fully implemented; KRG did not receive its 17 percent share fully, and has delivered less than 550,000 bpd
to SOMO. Dispute continued. Finally, in June 2015, the Central Government suspended transfers, and KRG stopped
delivering its oil to SOMO and continued exporting independently.

                                                               4
 


education, inclusivity, and labor); Building the Region (infrastructure); Creating an Economically
Prosperous Region (agriculture, the private sector, and environmental protection); and Putting
Government to Work for the People (effectiveness, transparency, fiscal responsibility, and civil
service reform). By producing the Vision, the KRG has established the foundation upon which any
structure economic reform for the KRI must be built.

8.      The KRG is committed to significant structural reforms to secure fiscal consolidation
and achieve sustainable and inclusive growth in the KRI. The region is faced with multiple
challenges but also with an opportunity to move forward with long-standing reforms and
diversification of the economy. The deteriorating fiscal deficit exposes KRG to greater risks and
calls for gradually strengthening fiscal position by containing expenditure growth and improving
revenue generation. KRG will use the opportunity to reform the economy to address continuing
structural issues. The Government is committed to implementing much-needed critical reforms
ranging from subsidies and public employment to financial sector and energy sector reforms.
These will contribute to a higher degree of efficiency in public spending. Furthermore, deepening
economic reforms aimed at diversifying the economy away from oil would help encourage private
sector development and create jobs.

9.      Rebalancing of the public sector is essential to cope with the uncertain and volatile
revenue transfers and to support the private sector-led economic diversification. The strategy
that could bring the region out of the fiscal crisis and gradually put the region’s economy on a
balanced and sustainable growth path needs to have two core pillars and supporting structural
policies. These core pillars are fiscal consolidation for macro-stability and laying the foundations
for sustainable and inclusive growth. The Government should introduce fiscal reforms to
strengthen its fiscal capacity to isolate core expenditures from fluctuations in fiscal revenues, and
enhance its budget credibility and sustainability in the medium and long term.

10.     Fiscal adjustment includes expenditure and revenue-side measures. Expenditure-side
reforms would include rationalization and reprioritization of public expenditures including
targeting subsidies and retrenching excess civil servants while simultaneously preparing them for
the private sector with adequate retraining and other direct labor market policies. These reforms
would increase the productivity of public expenditure and crowd in private investment supporting
diversification. Rebalancing requires redistribution of public expenditure towards infrastructure
(where private investments and financing are not forthcoming or there is no commercial viability
for private investments), education, and health services, which could be achieved by restructuring
subsidies and resizing public sector employment. The Government has already launched an
unprecedented fiscal adjustment equivalent to 37 percent of GDP in less than three years, by
slashing almost half of its expenditures. On the revenue side, revenues collected from regional
sources should be raised to cushion the impact of volatility in oil prices and the central government
budget transfers. There is also a need to underpin fiscal adjustment with strengthening of the public
financial management system, starting with the resumption of annual budgets, and their approval
by the regional legislature (a constitutional requirement), to restore the cycle of accountability, on
which systems of improved financial control and management, reporting, procurement,
accounting, and external audit can be built.




                                                  5
 


11.     Connecting sector strategies to resource allocation is critical. To cope with the volatile
fiscal situation and highly unpredictable budgetary process, the medium-term expenditure
planning should be delinked from the short-term revenue transfer estimates. This would require a
medium term fiscal framework (MTFF) which in turn could be developed into a full medium term
expenditure framework (MTEF) to guide annual budgeting. Such a framework should be based on
identification of essential needs, some agreed upon standards to budget for core expenditures, and
the fiscal capacity of KRG. The MTFF/MTEF would also assure the quality and sustainability of
expenditure levels by ensuring that capital projects are properly budgeted and completed as
planned, rather than their completion being contingent on the fluctuations of oil revenues and
transfers.

12.     In the medium-term, spurring private sector activities in non-oil sectors is a core
objective of the Government. To achieve this objective, an enabling business environment coupled
with entrepreneurship support (particularly for the youth labor force) and firm-level support to
improve productivity, quality, innovation, and local and global market access would be critical.
Policies and programs to enable SMEs to grow would be critical to create jobs. At the same time,
encouraging larger companies to become competitive both in the local and global market,
preferably in partnership with Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and/or public sector, would be also
important. Building a strong, diversified, and competitive private sector is a critical economic
objective as discussed in the Vision 2020. A large number of complementary policy tools in a
variety of areas could be used in conformity for an extended period to achieve this goal. A
prioritized and sequenced program would include (i) reforming laws and regulations that make it
difficult to start, run and close a business; (ii) piloting and scaling up interventions to promote
entrepreneurship, especially among the youth; (iii) scaling up firm-level interventions related to
product and service quality upgrade and innovation by becoming a part of local or global value
chain; (iv) building a strong advocacy and lobbying organization for the private sector
development; (v) making the borders more efficient so that transit trade can grow; (vi) putting in
place an effective technical and vocational education and training program; (vii) increasing access
to finance, especially for SMEs; and (viii) improving infrastructure services (especially power).

13.     KRI’s financial sector needs to be strengthened to contribute to private sector
development. Despite a large number of banks operating in KRI, its banking sector remains
underdeveloped. It does not serve its basic function of channeling financial resources to the private
sector to support its development. Banks are not engaged in their core function of providing loans
to KRI’s real-sector economy or financing long-term investment projects. As a simple yardstick,
to bring the ratio of private credit to GDP from a current 2 percent to the MENA region average
of 50 percent, banks would need to provide credit to the KRI private sector of ID 15 trillion (US$13
billion). Presently, banks in KRI are facing a severe liquidity crisis, which has crippled their
operations and has had negative effects on KRI’s economy. The current situation is exacerbated
by weak banking-sector supervision as functions of the Central Bank have been subordinated to
the direct control by the KRG Ministry of Finance and Economy (MoFE).

Prospects for Growth and Development of the KRI

14.     Services could play an important role in economic diversification efforts. Services are
essential inputs in any form of production, as well as a major component of the regional


                                                 6
 


connectivity, hence a key determinant of KRI’s competitiveness and ability to join and move up
regional and global value chains. Services could also become an important source of exports
outside the oil and gas sector, along models in the region, and provide jobs outside the public
sector. Being landlocked, the KRI is even more relying on services; this situation could be turned
into an opportunity, and KRI could become a platform for transit and services provision in the
region, given it is sharing borders with large potential markets. In particular, the KRI could become
a gateway for the provision of a large array of services in other areas of Iraq. Therefore, this is a
win-win situation for overall Iraq. This will require, however, that the KRI first removes a number
of barriers to services trade that remain, given that services trade mainly takes place at the
intermediary level and within global networks. It will also require restoring some legal certainty,
adapting modern laws and regulations, and building capacity (skills, standards, and infrastructure).
Beyond the economic dimension, the reform of the regulatory framework and the improvement of
the services offered in the KRI will first and foremost benefit the local population, given that major
gaps exist, for example in the health or education sectors.

15.     Regional connectivity can be improved through ICT and transport services. There are
complementarities to be realized from trade in IT services in addition to the benefits of enhanced
ICT services as an enabling platform for trade. In addition to being an important sector of the
economy, ICT, and broadband in particular, is a powerful enabler of trade development. The
transformative role of digital technologies in the KRI resides in its ability to create jobs, diversify
the economy and increase the overall competitiveness and efficiency of the private sector. To
harness this potential, the KRG, in coordination with the central government authorities, needs to
foster the development of high-speed Internet connectivity and the IT market through a set of
actions and regulatory reforms. These include i) opening the market to competition through new
licenses, open access policies, new supply models such as PPPs, and sharing of infrastructure; ii)
strengthening the monitoring capabilities and regulatory powers of the Ministry of Transport and
Communications; iii) leveraging the geopolitical location to establish KRI and the rest of Iraq as a
hub for international connectivity that serves the regional and international Internet markets; iv)
devising an IT strategy to address the weaknesses in supply and demand of IT services; and v)
stimulating innovation in content development in the Kurdish language. Based on good
geostrategic location, in addition to ICT services, transport network plays a very important role for
the economic development of the region. Transport sectors in KRI is mainly dependent on roads
as the most developed transport sector, but it is neither well-connected nor maintained at the proper
level. Besides this sector, air transport needs significant upgrade. Railway sector and logistic hubs
are not developed which is a constraint for KRI to benefit from regional economic opportunities.
Furthermore, the legislation for the transport sector is outdated. It is necessary to carry out customs
and trade facilitation reforms to strengthen cooperation among neighboring counties. Therefore,
with improved transport and ICT services, KRI has a significant potential to become a transport
and logistics hub for the whole region based on its proximity to major markets and relatively safe
geopolitical position.

16.     Electricity sector reforms can reduce fiscal burden, enhance energy trade, and improve
electricity service delivery. Although power generation capacity in KRI has expanded manifold
over the last decade due to private sector investments, the sector continues to be characterized by
heavy fiscal burden of subsidies, dependence on costly liquid fuels to address natural gas
shortages, transmission bottlenecks, high technical and commercial losses, low tariffs, poor


                                                  7
 


institutional capacity, and poor quality of supply. A strategy based on three pillars is proposed to
address the immediate as well as longer term challenges in the KRI’s power sector: (i) Adopt an
enabling legal, policy and regulatory framework based on clear roles and mandates for different
entities. The framework would include a new electricity law, an independent sector regulator,
unbundling of the vertically integrated sector, corporatization of sector entities, and their eventual
privatization. (ii) Undertake crucial infrastructure investments to ensure adequate power
availability, reliability, reduction of losses, and trade of surplus electricity with neighboring areas
of Iraq as well as Turkey. Given the constrained fiscal situation, it is imminent that private sector
resource induction would be required. However, private sector investments need to be undertaken
carefully to ensure that current sector performance attracts adequate private sector interest, as well
as sufficient ramp-up in institutional capacity and legal-policy-regulatory framework to manage a
complex ecosystem. (3) Undertake measures to support performance improvements and
accountability. This would include a systematic rationalization of electricity tariffs as well as a
focused program for loss reduction and revenue enhancement. While full privatization of the
distribution business is a complex undertaking, loss reduction and revenue enhancement can be
achieved through a well-structured contract with the private sector to manage billing and collection
services. In addition, a clear policy framework and robust program for energy efficiency, energy
conservation, and renewable energy can help contain the growing electricity demand.

17.     Agriculture presents an opportunity for the KRI, and the sector’s development will be
associated with divergent needs for investment and labor. KRI’s agricultural sector has been
subjected to numerous shocks during the past 30 years, including low priced food imports under
the oil-for-food program, the oil boom (which moved resources out of agriculture to the public
sector and construction), and high cereal subsidies (which moved resources out of non-wheat
commodities). To restart the sector, in addition to required agricultural investment projects, KRG
must work on the following fronts: i) data improvement should start including a launch of an
agricultural survey, price collection, creation of soil and water maps as well as a land registry; ii)
all subsidies, taxes, import bans, and licensing fees should be reconsidered; and iii) an effective
research and extension mechanism should be put in place, which should be undertaken in
coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources, the existing Research Stations,
and the Colleges of Agriculture. Furthermore, a significant agricultural rehabilitation program can
generate localized economic activity and employment.

18.     Investments in the water sector are required to reach a more sustainable use of water.
Water shortages are becoming increasingly common. The sector is faced with dwindling supplies
due to smaller inflows into KRI and deteriorating water quality. Yet, the demand for water from
agriculture, households and industry (including for oil sector) is increasing rapidly. In addition,
water is needed for hydropower and environmental flows. The increasing water shortages are
likely to increase over time as upstream riparians are planning to develop more water
infrastructure, making KRI increasingly vulnerable. The policy mix for addressing gaps between
supply and demand will depend on a range of social, environmental, economic, and technical
factors. Closing the gaps is within KRG’s reach if it makes the necessary adjustments to include
supply management strategies into an integrated approach that also addresses demand-side issues.
To reap benefits of the large investments that have been made in developing water resources, it is
recommended that the Government introduces broad and poverty-targeted interventions affecting
not only water resources development and management but also water service delivery. Priority


                                                  8
 


areas would be: (i) water security planning and management; (ii) improving service delivery; and
(iii) strengthening governance mechanisms and water users associations.

Strengths of the Region and the Way Forward

19.      The KRI has strengths and opportunities to get the economy out of the fiscal crisis and
on a balanced sustainable growth path. These include: (i) large oil and gas resources; (ii) fertile
agricultural land; (iii) young population; (iv) central location at crossroads of trade routes; (v) a
government that is determined to implement reforms; (vi) a donor community that is eager to help;
(vii) the entrepreneurial spirit of its population; and (viii) a relatively stable location as of now to
do business in comparison to the rest of the country. If these strengths and opportunities are used
effectively in a supportive policy environment, the KRI economy has a good chance to overcome
the current difficulties and have a more diversified economy and sustainable high growth in the
medium to longer term.

20.    The acceleration of economic growth and diversification of the KRI economy requires
simultaneous effort in the main sectors of the economy. The Government could begin the reform
process which should involve sectoral restructuring and further developing the legal and regulatory
framework needed for a market economy. Sectoral reforms should be implemented in tandem and
in a well sequenced manner. This is because the effectiveness of reform in one sector is often
dependent on the success of reform in other sectors of the economy. In KRI, these linkages will be
accounted for by sequencing and coordinating reform in and among the various sectors. This
roadmap brings together concrete sectoral policy reforms for Government’s implementation.

Mitigating the Adverse Social Impact and Building a Robust Social Protection System

21.     The most immediate priority is to stabilize the economy without further increasing socio-
political fragility. Strengthening and retooling social protection mechanisms to deal with the
emergency are critical priorities for the Government. In light of the emergency, social protection
should be a top short-term priority. Existing social protection mechanisms should be strengthened
and to extent possible retooled to handle the ongoing social and humanitarian crisis. The
Government has recently developed a robust social protection framework to protect the poor and
the vulnerable. Furthermore, the reform program proposes a range of actions, which should be
carefully assessed to identify the vulnerable population groups likely to be affected, and to estimate
the size of the adverse welfare impact. In particular, actions related to changes and increases in
income taxes; phasing out and lowering subsidies on petroleum, electricity, wheat, and on
agricultural inputs have the potential to adversely impact less-well off households. In addition,
given the size of the public sector, which employs individuals of varying education levels, some
of the proposed reforms to the civil service, such as rationalization of public sector employment,
could adversely affect the less-well off.

22.     The poor and the vulnerable will need to be protected. The proposed reforms affect
different groups of the population in a heterogeneous manner. A poverty and social impact analysis
exercise should be undertaken to understand the size and nature of the impacts of the reform
program as a whole. This exercise will help estimate the size of the compensating transfer needed
to protect the poor and vulnerable in a fiscally sustainable way. For social safety nets, targeting is


                                                   9
 


the main challenge. The categorical targeting used in KRI does not consider the poverty line or the
size of the household leading to high leakage. The transfer of ID 150,000 is allocated to beneficiary
household regardless of size of the household nor its status, as defined relative to the poverty line
or consumption level. Cash transfers use broad social categories instead of more effective targeting
mechanisms to determine eligibility which explains why the majority of the poor do not benefit
from this program. As such, only 11 percent of the bottom quintile currently are receiving the cash
transfer. Currently, a proxy means test (PMT) to determine eligibility under such a poverty-
targeted safety net program is being developed, and discussions are underway about transitioning
the Social Security Network (SSN) from a categorically targeted program to one where eligibility
is determined based on the PMT. This targeted safety net system will be underpinned by a unified
registry, and transparent and fair governance and grievance mechanisms.

23.     Even prior to the crisis, KRI had been faced with the challenge of reforming its social
protection system. KRI faces the daunting task to increase the size and dynamism of the private
sector where most future employment growth is expected to come. The employment challenge
comes from the small size of the private sector, a fast growing labor force due to natural population
growth and geopolitical events. The employment-to-population rate in KRG stands at 22 percent
and is similar to the average for the non-GCC Middle East. The employment rate is very much
affected by the very low labor force participation rate of working age (15-64) women at 14 percent
that nevertheless rises to 17 percent if students are excluded.

24.     The pensions and social insurance system in KRI is not sustainable, suffers from low
coverage, and is inefficient. In 2014, the total pension spending in KRG was estimated to be
around ID 1.3 trillion (or 2.8 percent of GDP), which is high compared to other economies at a
similar stage of demographic ageing. More than 50 percent of the labor force in KRI is covered by
the social insurance system. However, most of them are employees in the public sector. In the
private sector, around 84 percent of the labor force is not covered. Also, only around 50 percent of
people above the age of 65 in KRG are currently receiving a benefit from the pensions system
(mostly retired public sector employees). The rest of the elderly have to rely on informal care, or
public transfers as social assistance (non-contributory social safety nets). The main challenges of
the social insurance system in KRI can be summarized in four points: (i) administrative capacity
is low; (ii) schemes are inequitable and financially non-sustainable; (iii) the system is fragmented,
leading to distortions in the labor market between the public and the private sector; and (iv) the
system suffers from low coverage in the private sector.

25.     To address the above challenges, KRG has outlined an ambitious strategic framework
for reforming social protection in KRI. The KRG Social Protection Strategic Framework supports
implementation of this reform through an integrated package of strategies, legislation, institutions,
and programs. The proposed strategies align well with, and provide the mechanisms for
implementation of, the Vision 2020 policy priorities. The strategies are as follows: (i) KRG will
create an effective labor supply of well-equipped job seekers and skilled workers through the
education and training systems and market driven incentives; (ii) KRG will take measures to
reduce the duality between employment in the public sector and private sector and thus contribute
to a more dynamic private sector; (iii) KRG will develop regulatory and institutional frameworks
based on timely data analysis, well-designed employment policies, and constructive dialogue
among the social partners; (iv) KRG will implement parametric reforms to the current schemes to


                                                 10
 


ensure financial sustainability and will move towards integrating public, private and other
(occupational) pension schemes; (v) KRG will design and implement conventional and alternative
mechanisms to expand pensions and social insurance coverage; (vi) KRG will design and
implement an Unemployment Insurance Program; (vii) KRG will use poverty as a main
determinant of eligibility for its social safety net programs (including the PDS) and provide
effective social care for vulnerable and disadvantaged groups; and (viii) KRG will protect its
human capital by providing incentives for better health and education.

Risks to the Reform Program

26.     There are substantial risks that could jeopardize the success of the reform program,
which is ambitious and far-reaching in its implications. The risks range from security threats to
political and economic challenges. Political tensions between the KRG and the Central
Government could continue to persist. Furthermore, political tensions between the main political
parties in the KRG could endure. In parallel, security risks remain significant. ISIS could continue
to pose a security threat to the KRI. The potential for a takeover of Mosul by the Iraqi military
force may increase the influx of IDPs to the KRI. Moreover, oil prices could remain depressed for
a protracted period of time, thereby limiting the scope for higher fiscal revenues and economic
growth. Should any of these risks materialize, their impact on the progress of the reform program
may be disruptive.

The Lay-Out of the Report

27.     The detailed action plan presented in this reform roadmap is prepared in light of the
strategic objectives discussed above. This work builds on an ongoing productive engagement of
World Bank Group teams with line ministries, private sector, academia and the international
partners which resulted in development of in-depth technical assessments and analytical work in
all sectors of the economy, as well as IFC’s growing footprint in the region across diverse sectors.
The findings and policy recommendations of these evidence-based analytical work are based on
comprehensive consultations with all stakeholders in KRI. The report covers economy-wide issues
such as private sector development, trade and investment regime, labor market as well as sectoral
issues. The first chapter provides a macroeconomic background while second and third chapters
introduce proposed short-term reform actions in the form of fiscal consolidation measures and
medium-term targets to lay the foundations for diversified, sustainable and inclusive economic
growth. The fourth chapter discusses upcoming social sector reform actions to address ongoing
major social and humanitarian crisis in KRI. The fifth and sixth chapters focus on the governance
issues and reform actions including accountability, institutional framework, and judicial oversight.
The final chapter presents proposed implementation modalities of the three-year structural
economic reform roadmap.




                                                11
