                          Working Paper:

Private Sector Delivery of Rural Piped Water Services in Bangladesh
                   A Review of Experience, 2003-2015



                             August 2015
Abbreviations and Acronyms

ADB               Asian Development Bank
BAMWSP            Bangladesh Arsenic Mitigation Water Supply Project
BMDA              Barind Multipurpose Development Authority
BOT               Build-Operate Transfer
BRWSSP            Bangladesh Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project
BWSPP             Bangladesh Water Supply Program Project
CAPEX             Capital Expenditure
CBO               Community Based Organization
DANIDA            Danish International Development Agency
DPHE              Department of Public Health Engineering
DTW               Deep Tube Well
GOB               Government of Bangladesh
GPOBA             Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid
HYSAWA            Hygiene Sanitation and Water Supply Project
IBRD              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICR               Implementation Completion Report
IDA               International Development Association
IRC               International Water and Sanitation Centre
JICA              Japan International Cooperation Agency
M&E               Monitoring and Evaluation
MDG               Millennium Development Goals
MOF               Ministry of Finance
MOU               Memorandum of Understanding
MTR               Mid-term Review
NGO               Non-government Organization
O&M               Operation and Maintenance
OBA               Output Based Aid
OPEX              Operational Expenditure
PAD               Project Appraisal Document
PID               Project Information Document
PMU               Project Management Unit
PPIAF             Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
PPP               Public Private Partnership
RDA               Rural Development Academy
RWSN              Rural Water Supply Network
SDF               Social Development Foundation
SME               Small and Medium Enterprise
SIPP              Social Investment Program Project
UNICEF            United Nations Children’s Fund
UP                Union Parishad
WBG               World Bank Group
WSP               Water and Sanitation Program
WTP               Willingness to Pay
                                                         Table of Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................... 1
Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 5
1. Overview of the Issues .......................................................................................................... 6
   1.1.    Bangladesh’s Arsenic Crisis ................................................................................... 6
   1.2.    Preferred Technology – Deep Tubewells and Piped Networks ............................. 6
   1.3.    Community Management Models as the Default Approach .................................. 7
   1.4.    The PPP Alternative ............................................................................................... 8
   1.5.    The Rationale for PPPs in Bangladesh ................................................................... 9
   1.6.    International Experience - The Role of Subsidies in PPPs .................................. 10
   1.7.    Assessing the Willingness to Pay ......................................................................... 11
2. Piloting the Community Management Model .................................................................... 13
   2.1       Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE) Projects ............................... 13
   2.2       Rural Development Academy (RDA) and Barind Multipurpose Development
   Authority (BMDA) .............................................................................................................. 14
3. Designing and Testing the BOT Model – Early Studies and Pilot Projects ....................... 17
   3.1     The 2003 Willingness-to-Pay Study..................................................................... 17
   3.2     Bangladesh Arsenic Mitigation Water Supply Project (BAMWSP).................... 18
   3.3     Social Investment Program Project (SIPP-1) ....................................................... 19
4. The First Attempt to Scale-Up the BOT Model ................................................................. 21
   4.1      Bangladesh Water Supply Program Project (BWSPP) ........................................ 21
   4.2      BWSPP Aftermath – Assessing the Lessons Learned.......................................... 22
5. Subsequent Efforts to Scale Up and Evaluate the BOT Model .......................................... 26
   5.1     Bangladesh Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (BRWSSP) ................... 26
   5.2     Reviewing the BOT model in Bangladesh: BWSPP Monitoring Report ............ 30
6. The International Experience ............................................................................................... 33
   6.1      Kleemeier (2010) .................................................................................................. 33
   6.2      Foster (2012) ........................................................................................................ 33
   6.3      Sy and Warner (2014) .......................................................................................... 34
   6.4      Research on Community Management ................................................................ 35
   6.5      Other Research ..................................................................................................... 35
   6.6      Lessons from the International Literature Review ............................................... 37
7. Conclusions ......................................................................................................................... 39
   7.1     Lessons Learned About Implementing the BOT Model ...................................... 39
   7.2     Non-BOT Options Going Forward....................................................................... 44
   7.3     Two Longer-term Knowledge Objectives ............................................................ 47
References ................................................................................................................................ 50
Interviews................................................................................................................................. 53

Boxes: 1. Standard Types of Public-Private Partnerships in the Water Sector ........................9
       2. GOB-WB Efforts to Roll-Out the BOT Model.......................................................11
       3. Key Elements in a Sustainable Scaling Up of the BOT Model ..............................22
       4. Making the BOTs Work – Essential Program Elements ........................................40
       5. Cost Components of Water Services ......................................................................48
Table: 1. BOT Project Track Record .....................................................................................44
                                   Executive Summary
Introduction
For the last 13 years, the Government of Bangladesh (GOB) and the World Bank have
worked together to roll out a BOT model for rural piped water supply in the country. But the
results of this collaboration have been disappointing. While the rationale for the PPP model
was appropriate and warranted, except for a handful of schemes the model has generally not
worked as expected, and efforts to scale up its use across large regions of the country have not
been successful. This paper examines what occurred over the life of these projects, what
lessons can be learned from this experience, and how these lessons should be used to guide
the future interventions in respect of the provision of rural water supply in Bangladesh.
Background
The BOT model was originally employed as a way to deal with the widespread arsenic
contamination of groundwater discovered in several locations across Bangladesh in the early
1990s. It was thought that a private operator model could cope with the costs and technical
issues associated with the need to construct and operate the deep tubewells and piped
distribution systems that could provide safe water to rural households.
Prior to the discovery of arsenic, most rural water supply schemes had been undertaken by
communities with limited roles for government. The BOT model was seen as a mechanism
to address the arsenic issue. It involved a limited role for government while expediting
delivery through an enhanced role for the private sector. Given the limited success of
community management models in rural water supply at that time, the BOT approach
appeared to be perhaps the best option for mitigating the impact of arsenic at scale.
After a 2003 WSP willingness-to-pay (WTP) study found that customers might be willing
and able to pay for such services if safe water could be delivered, two WB-supported projects
tested a BOT design that covered capital costs with 40% private equity contributions, 10%
community contributions, and 50% OBA subsidies. User tariffs were expected to fully cover
O&M costs and allow private operators to recover their investments in 15 years. These
projects were the Bangladesh Arsenic Mitigation Water Supply Project (BAMWSP), from
1998-2006, and the Social Investment Program Project (SIPP-1), from 2003-2007.
Because arsenic contamination affected huge areas of the country, the real value of the model
was expected to be its capacity for scaling up service delivery. Two larger Bank-funded
projects attempted to use the model in setting up hundreds of private operator schemes.
These projects were the Bangladesh Water Supply Program Project (BWSPP), from 2005-
2009, and the Bangladesh rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (BRWSSP), from
20012-2017. Both projects carried out a variety of activities in the water sector beyond piped
water supply which did deliver improved services. These have included efforts to improve
non-piped water systems. But the efforts to roll out the BOT model in support of piped water
supply were less successful, leading to significant funding and target reductions after mid-
term project reviews (MTRs). BWSPP reduced its BOT target from 300 schemes to 21. And
while BRWSSP is still being implemented, after the MTR the BOT target was reduced from
125 schemes to 35.

                                               1
A 2015 WSP monitoring report on the 21 schemes set up under BWSSP found ten to be non-
functioning or badly mismanaged, and only four of the functioning schemes with any
likelihood of recovering private investment by the end of their contract terms.
Conclusions
This review leads to three important questions. The first is what do we know now as a result
of the experiences in utilizing the BOT model for the provision of safe water in rural areas in
Bangladesh? In other words, what are the important lessons learned from these programs?
The second question is what non-BOT options might be examined in the future? Finally, a
third question is what additional analysis is needed to make informed decisions to address
rural water supply constraints in Bangladesh in the future?
Lessons Learned About Implementing the BOT Model. The GOB-World Bank collaboration
has shown that the BOT model has not been able to scale up the delivery of clean water to
hundreds of localities to deal with widespread arsenic contamination of ground water. To
better understand these results it might be helpful to identify the four essential,
interdependent program elements necessary to achieve such a scale up.
      Program management. The overall management of the BOT roll-out processes was
       never robust enough to handle the hundreds of schemes planned for development. The
       GOB and the World Bank struggled to find an effective delivery model for setting up
       and staffing a project PMU to manage the complicated process of designing or
       evaluating schemes, and procuring sponsors for projects. Going forward with a BOT
       program, the capacity of a government implementing agency would have to be
       strengthened considerably before the project tries to start rolling out projects (rather
       than as part of the roll-out).
      Projects. Several characteristics of the schemes made them appear to be unattractive
       to potential sponsors. The costs associated with the delivery of water were also higher
       than expected and the need to pre-finance the capital costs of the schemes may have
       made the prospect of taking them on seem even less prudent to sponsors. Going
       forward with BOTs, it seems worth examining whether capital subsidies should be
       higher and whether some kind of operating subsidy is needed to facilitate the
       sustainability of schemes and attract competent sponsors.
      Private Operators. To date, the professional and entrepreneurial capacity of most of
       the selected private sponsors has not meet expectations. Individual entrepreneurs and
       private commercial enterprises have been far less attracted to the BOT schemes than
       NGOs, although this appears to be evolving in the latest round of sponsors under
       BRWSSP. NGOs have frequently agreed to act as sponsors, but have not been able to
       apply a commercial approach to their schemes. Poor management of the schemes has
       led to customer dissatisfaction, disconnections, and insufficient revenues, which in
       turn have led to further reduced service quality. Going forward, more upfront
       engagement is needed with potential private operators in order to better understand
       their interests and concerns related to managing water schemes.



                                              2
      Customers. Many prospective customers refused to connect to the networks, while
       existing customers were disconnected over time (either voluntarily or involuntarily).
       This was a complex and frustrating problem. An assessment of total family incomes
       demonstrated that most households could afford to pay for these water services. But
       their willingness to pay seems to have had the potential to sharply decrease as they
       weighed the costs involved against the quality of the water, the reliability and
       convenience of service, and the availability of alternative water sources. Going
       forward with BOTs, arsenic awareness in rural areas needs to be improved although
       this needs to be linked to service level improvements. It is also worth noting that
       programs like this tend to be more successful using a demand-responsive approach,
       meaning that end-users have a say in system designs, project siting, service levels, etc.
Non-BOT Options Going Forward. If alternative delivery models are to be explored, what
other kinds of options might be available for providing safe water in Bangladesh’s rural
areas?
     Program Management. Whatever service delivery model is adopted, some kind of
      program management entity must administer the roll-out of schemes. As mentioned
      above, this might be dealt with via more and earlier technical assistance for
      government agencies or the use of non-governmental entities like RDA.
     Projects & Operators. Another option in rural areas could be less ambitious kinds of
      PPPs, or schemes that combine subsidized community ownership and supervision with
      outsourced private management. A variety of stakeholders have recommended capital
      subsidies of 90% (or higher) for rural piped water schemes, as well as operating
      subsidies. Types of private operator contracts that would be supported by such
      subsidies could include the following:
       o Management contracts. Government could build schemes and contract them out to
         private managers who would operate and maintain the systems, but be paid
         directly by government instead of via user fees. Several variations of this
         approach have been recommended in Bangladesh, including design-build-lease
         contracts and design-build-operate contracts.
       o Clustering schemes. In order to achieve economies of scale, diversify operator
         risks, and possibly attract more professional sponsors like local engineering firms
         (or even international operators in partnerships or as sub-contractors with local
         firms), schemes could be clustered together to form much bigger projects. In
         effect, this would simply be using management contracts at scale with projects
         clustered to make them more attractive to private operators.
       o RDA-style contracts. RDA has had some success in implementing its own version
         of PPP-type contracts, involving heavily subsidized schemes operated by local
         families or entrepreneurs on behalf of water user associations. Despite challenges,
         the RDA approach has demonstrated modest success in Bangladesh, especially
         when compared with the water delivery performance of alternative models.



                                              3
       o Hybrid models. The emerging service delivery model in this subsector, which is
         most responsive to user demands and government mandates and constraints, may
         lie somewhere between BOT-type approaches and traditional community
         management schemes. In many cases this means fully outsourcing most service
         provision tasks to private operators, with asset ownership and final decisions on
         service levels and tariffs remaining with communities or local government.
       o Professionalization contracts. In rural areas perhaps the first step should focus on
         existing schemes rather than new ones, regardless of how they have been
         structured. Professionalization contracts involve private firms contracted to help
         municipal water utilities implement Standard Operating Procedures for each
         functional area of the utility -- actual management control of the utility would not
         change hands.
     Customers. Perhaps rural areas in Bangladesh should be left to an enhanced
      community management model that builds on existing efforts undertaken by the
      government and other development agencies, with more emphasis on
      professionalization of services, contracting out operations, and long-term
      sustainability. The management of rural piped water schemes using more enhanced
      PPP-like approaches could be reserved for reasonably well capacitated local
      governments (UPs) in rural areas. But whatever service delivery model is chosen, if
      households better understood the risks of drinking water contaminated with arsenic,
      the willingness to pay for piped delivery of safe water could be much more robust.
Two Longer-term Knowledge Objectives. At least two additional issues need clarification in
the Bangladesh context, regardless of which delivery model is chosen in rural areas.
     The first issue involves gaining a better understanding of how water pricing is done
      across Bangladesh, and the extent to which subsidies are available to supplement user
      fees. There are apparently no standardized methods for pricing or subsidy provision.
      Policies to regulate the sector and review and adjust tariffs are under development, but
      implementation modalities and capacity support are still in the early stages of review.
     The second issue involves the need for a compelling recommendation regarding the
       most cost-effective model for the delivery of safe water in rural areas, which the
       government ultimately can support with limited outside assistance. Ultimately this
       analysis would identify a sustainable, affordable model to deliver clean water, at scale,
       in rural areas. More specifically, this involves comparing the total life-cycle costs and
       benefits of the BOT model with various other delivery models promoted in rural areas
       by the government and other development agencies, or with delivery models used in
       other countries (such as the hybrid schemes emerging in West Africa). On the basis of
       a life-cycle analysis of this kind, the government can take its own informed decision
       about service delivery models, and can begin to take more ownership of the identified
       solutions.




                                              4
                                       Introduction
This note explores the Bangladesh experience in implementing the widespread use of a
‘private operator’ model for building and operating rural piped water schemes. Since the
early 1990s, the World Bank has, through a series of development projects, designed, piloted,
and attempted to scale up use of the model as a mechanisms to address the very real issues of
arsenic contamination and delivery at scale. The latest of these projects is still in
implementation. The experience with these projects to date has been disappointing, and
while a limited number of schemes are still in operation, the model has not been replicated in
a large number of communities as intended and has not proved to be particularly sustainable.
Over this same period, the government and other development partners also have been using
alternative methods to deliver the same kinds of services in rural areas. Some of these efforts
seem to have been modestly successful. However, much of the evidence about the
performance of these other models is anecdotal and there has been little rigorous analysis to
compare the performance of these different models with the private sponsor approach.
As a consequence, not much clarity exists regarding which of the models works best in
respect of rural piped water service delivery in Bangladesh. For this and other reasons, it
would be premature to attempt to derive any authoritative conclusions about the success or
failure of the private operator model versus other models.
However, it seems appropriate now to attempt a stock-taking exercise of what has been
achieved since 2000 using the private operator model, so as to analyze and isolate the lessons
learned to date. This paper attempts to do this on the basis of a desk review of existing World
Bank literature, including project documents and research reports, coupled with interviews
with key stakeholders and World Bank staff. It also makes use of non-Bank reports and
studies, as well as research on attempts in other countries to implement this kind of approach
for rural piped water schemes.
The first section of the paper provides an overview of the rationale and key issues associated
with efforts to scale up a private operator model in Bangladesh. The second section reviews
government efforts and those of its other development partners, to use a more traditional
mode of service provision, involving community management. The third, fourth, and fifth
sections review efforts by the government and the World Bank to design, test, and scale up a
private operator model for service provision. A sixth section reviews some of the
international research that provides insights into the use of such models in other countries and
sectors. The paper ends with tentative conclusions about the experience in Bangladesh,
lessons learned, and several options for further analysis.




                                               5
                                 1. Overview of the Issues
1.1.   Bangladesh’s Arsenic Crisis
By the early1990s, Bangladesh had achieved remarkable success in increasing rural access to
‘safe’ water for domestic use, in ways that involved various forms of private sector
participation. Over 90% of the rural population in Bangladesh was accessing the country’s
vast shallow water table using privately-owned hand pumps on shallow tubewells, 30-50
meters deep. The government had worked effectively with donors like UNICEF to build the
capacity of the private sector to carry out the inexpensive drilling of such wells and the
manufacture and distribution of suction pumps. Use of affordable products and services
became widespread, and millions of rural households accessed water via house or yard
connections that they installed and maintained. In all, over 75% of all tubewells have been
privately constructed, making the Bangladesh program one of the world’s largest and most
successful in small-scale private provision of household water.
However, the country’s apparent success with rural access to safe water ended abruptly in
late 1993 with the findings by the Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE) that vast
stretches of the shallow water table were in fact heavily contaminated by naturally-occurring
arsenic. Since then, the nature and extent of the contamination has been mapped in various
ways. A number of studies have been undertaken to determine the extent of the
contamination and the population impacted. For example, a 2010 epidemiological study
found that as many as 77 million people, roughly half the country’s total population at the
time, had been exposed to toxic levels of arsenic, and that for the population sample studied
over a ten-year period, more than 20% of the deaths were caused by arsenic (Argos, et al.,
2010). The World Health Organization has notably called this arsenic contamination “the
largest mass poisoning of a population in history? (WHO, 2002).

1.2.   Preferred Technology – Deep Tubewells and Piped Networks
By the mid-1990s it was clear that Bangladesh faced a crisis over levels of arsenic
contamination, which was putting millions of its people at risk. Even before the extent of the
pollution was fully understood, the government began working with development partners to
address the challenges associated with arsenic. Different technologies considered for arsenic-
safe water sources focused on two fundamental approaches: (i) treatment to reduce arsenic
levels, including various kinds of filtration; and (ii) technologies that facilitate access to safe
water sources, such as deep tube wells, typically over 150 meters deep. The former is
generally seen to be effective, but expensive. The latter, deep wells, connected to piped water
supply networks and sometimes combined with treatment facilities, offered a relatively safe
and convenient option, although still at higher costs than shallow wells. Such wells began
growing in popularity as alternatives to other forms of water treatment in rural areas. One
reason for the popularity of the piped schemes was that they could mimic the service
standards of the shallow tubewells, with which rural populations had become comfortable.
This meant that in order to ensure public acceptance wells had to be located in close
proximity to a limited number of households. So wells had to be installed at a rate of one for



                                                6
every 10-15 households instead of for every 150-200 households, requiring more wells and
greater costs than if the number of households per well were maximized.
Some rural pipe water schemes already existed in Bangladesh. By the early 2000s, about 90
such schemes had been established in rural areas, mainly by government agencies like DPHE.
Most were operated by community water and sanitation committees. At least two regional
government agencies, mainly focusing on rural agricultural development, were also already
experimenting with community management systems for rural piped water schemes. The
original focus of these agencies, the Rural Development Academy (RDA) in Bogra District
and the Barind Multipurpose Development Authority (BMDA) in Rajshahi District, had been
on deep tubewells for irrigation purposes in remote areas. In order to sustain these irrigation
schemes financially, RDA and BMDA experimented with ways of using the irrigation water
for domestic household use, via storage tanks and piped networks. As arsenic contamination
problems emerged, both agencies saw the demand for domestic drinking water from such
schemes increase dramatically. Water user committees were formed with the intention of
managing operations and maintenance costs using tariff revenues.

1.3.   Community Management Models as the Default Approach
Since the 1980s, the default model for water delivery in rural areas has been community
management, which emerged with the help of donors largely in reaction to the challenges of
centralized government to provide rural water services in many developing countries.
Compared with government systems, community management has had some success, and the
early accounts of its use by RDA and BMDA were positive (Bilu, 2009). But in the early
2000s, RDA and BMDA had not established many of these schemes, and the long-term
sustainability of the schemes and their potential for scaling up was not yet clear. The major
question at that time was whether or not community management could really handle the
challenges associated with piped water schemes. Compared to the single point systems
already widely used in Bangladesh, the deep wells and piped water systems were more
complicated and expensive. They required more investment, reasonably good quality
construction, operations and maintenance planning and expenditure, as well as general
management expertise. None of these characteristics were prevalent in the existing system of
rural water provision in the country because of the widespread focus on individual household
hand pump schemes.
Additionally, from the global experience, it was already clear that community management
schemes had shortcomings, some of which might cause serious problems if the GOB were to
rely too heavily on this model for rolling out a major response to the arsenic pollution
problem. Some of the identified shortcomings of the community management model include
the following (WSP, 2010):
      Funding. Community management typically depends exclusively on public funding,
       which is often insufficient to meet demand. Because public funding is scarce, some
       communities are excluded from programs, or public funding is only available to
       initiate water activities and pay for construction, but is inadequate for later operations
       and maintenance, where funding is crucial.


                                               7
      Design and construction. Community-managed schemes can be designed and
       constructed by government agencies, community organizations, NGOs, or private
       contractors. However, the work and the installed equipment may not be of
       particularly good quality due to poor design, poorly managed construction work, or
       construction that leaves behind facilities that are too large, complex, or costly for
       communities to manage and maintain.
      Local commitment. Community management frequently declines in quality over time
       as the local population loses interest in managing, much less paying for, the
       operations and maintenance of the schemes. This is especially true for piped schemes
       that are too costly for community volunteers to sustainably manage on a non-profit
       basis. Some of the key assumptions underlying the community management model
       have been described as “myths,? including notions about community cohesion, shared
       sense of ownership, willingness to form local organizations, and readiness to
       volunteer services (RWSN, 2010).
      Technical expertise. Community water managers almost always eventually need
       technical support, particularly for piped schemes. They usually cannot carry out
       rehabilitation of the facilities or anything beyond basic repairs. Furthermore, they
       often cannot adequately manage or oversee such activities carried out by others.
       Governments have usually been unable or unwilling to establish and sustain technical
       support services for communities.
      Sustained operation. The developing world appears to have a remarkably high number
       of cases of non-functioning rural water facilities, most of which were set up to be
       managed by communities.

1.4.   The PPP Alternative
A good deal of effort has been spent on finding ways of improving community management
models to minimize these kinds of problems (Moriarty, et al., 2013). Public-private
partnerships (PPPs) are being piloted in some countries as one alternative to the community
management of rural water schemes. Box 1 presents a standard typology of the types of
private participation models that are most common in the water sector.




                                             8
                              Box 1: Standard Types of PPPs in the Water Sector
1. Brownfield concessions – a private entity takes over the management of an existing government-owned
   system and also assumes significant risk for investments needed to extend, complete, or rehabilitate the
   facilities. Compensation comes via user fees or government payments.
          Rehabilitate, operate, and transfer (ROT)
          Rehabilitate, lease or rent, and transfer (RLT)
          Build, rehabilitate, operate, and transfer (BROT)
2. Greenfield concessions – a private entity builds and operates a new facility for a period, and under
   conditions, specified in a contract. Compensation comes via user fees or government payments.
           Build, lease, and transfer (BLT)
          Build, operate, and transfer (BOT)
          Build, own, and operate (BOO)
3. Management and Lease Contracts – a private entity takes over the management of a government-owned
   system for a fixed period while ownership and investment decisions remain with the government.
           Management contract - The government pays a private operator to manage the facility. The
            revenue/ commercial risk remains with the government.
           Lease contract - The government leases the assets to a private operator for a fee. The private
            operator takes on the revenue/ commercial risk.
Source: Adapted from the World Bank and PPIAF, PPI Project Database



The expected advantages of the BOT model were summarized in the last of the World Bank
project design documents advocating the use of the model for rural water provision in
Bangladesh (World Bank, 2012):
          BOTs can bring some measure of private investment to the schemes, thereby easing
           financial pressures on governments;
          They can make possible commercial management of the schemes, which in turn can
           increase the ability of the schemes to cover operating costs and recover investments;
          They can help to ensure good quality design, realistic sizing, and construction by the
           same firm that will subsequently operate the system;
          BOTs can prevent disputes after construction about the quality of the infrastructure,
           which often occur when the company responsible for operating the system is not the
           same as the one responsible for construction;
          They can ensure complete operator familiarity with the system;
          They can save time in the contracting process; and
          Compared with typical community management approaches, BOT contracts can help
           ensure a more professional approach to operations and maintenance after construction
           is completed.

1.5.       The Rationale for PPPs in Bangladesh
Given the growing realization of the severity of the arsenic issue by the late-1990s, coupled
with challenges of public sector delivery at scale, the option of enhanced private sector
participation appeared to be the best option for delivering safe water to large numbers of rural
communities. At the time there was significant interest in private sector participation in

                                                              9
public service delivery and PPPs were expected to multiply across infrastructure sectors
around the globe. A large body of research was accumulating, which argued that private
expertise and resources could help overcome delivery and service level challenges. In many
countries, work was also being undertaken to develop domestic capital markets to attract
local financing to infrastructure, particularly from pension funds and insurance companies
who were seeking long term assets. Simultaneously there were efforts to expand the role of
regulators to oversee private investment and management of infrastructure. And perhaps
most significantly, private operators, primarily from Europe, were looking beyond their
traditional borders and seeking opportunities in emerging markets.
All this was occurring at the same time existing delivery models in Bangladesh were being
assessed to determine whether they could be used to scale up and address the arsenic
challenge. The traditional model of shallow tubewells offered no protection from arsenic,
deep tubewells were seen as prohibitively expensive for many rural households, and rural
piped schemes development by NGOs and the public sector were not yet delivering at scale.
These factors, combined with public sector capacity constraints and limited financing,
indicated that PPPs were a viable option to deliver arsenic free water relatively quickly and at
scale in rural communities in Bangladesh.

1.6.   International Experience - The Role of Subsidies in PPPs
At the same time it was also becoming clear from global experience that for many kinds of
infrastructure PPPs, some type of subsidization would be required on a longer-term, if not
permanent, basis. The recognition of the need for subsidies in the water sector has since
become widespread. Rural water provision involves poor end-users and in most developing
countries is already dominated by grant funding from governments and donors. In this
situation, ‘partial commercialization’ – involving a combination of public and private
investment – is generally considered a realistic approach.
Partial commercialization would realize several objectives: (i) help borrowers establish credit
track records, thereby helping them become more familiar with lender requirements and
expectations; (ii) help lenders better understand the subsector and the mechanics of project
finance (loans secured purely by revenue flows); and (iii) demonstrate to governments (and
development partners) that some commercial finance can and should become a normal
complementary component of financing in the subsector, in order to introduce financial
discipline to the subsector, reduce the market distortions created by indiscriminate grant
funding, and release some of the existing grant flows for more targeted purposes.
In Bangladesh in the early 2000s it seemed that partial commercialization might be achieved
with subsidized BOT projects. In other words, the provision of partial subsidies to cover
project capital costs might be able to leverage some equity contributions by private operators
as well as by users, with ongoing O&M costs covered by user fees.
The development community was already aware of project experiences in other countries that
seemed to suggest that this model might work, particularly if subsidies could be paid out over
time, as construction and service delivery outputs were achieved, rather than all upfront as in
the case of many government subsidy programs (which shifted project non-performance risk

                                              10
to the government and away from sponsors/operators). By the early 2000s, performance-
based approaches to subsidies were already being piloted by the WBG’s newly established
Global Partnership on Output-based Aid (GPOBA). Numerous OBA projects had been
identified, and were well known to the development community.
One notable example, cited in project appraisal documents for the World Bank’s first piped
water BOT projects in Bangladesh, involved the use in Paraguay of performance-based
subsidy payments to pilot small-scale water systems in some of its towns (World Bank,
2003). The project was noteworthy because not only did it involve private operators, it also
required them to contribute investment funding – both rare elements of water projects in
developing countries. Operators signed BOT contracts for projects financed through a
combination of private financing and public subsidies that reimbursed operators only after
they had connected households to the water system. Early evaluations suggested that the use
of private operators facilitated more efficient operations, improved tariff collection levels
(with revenues helping to pay off project debts), and helped keep government subsidies at
minimum levels.

1.7.   Assessing the Willingness to Pay
The possibility of using such an approach in Bangladesh – involving partial matching capital
grants to mobilize community financing, partial performance-based capital grants to mobilize
private financing and management, with O&M costs covered by user fees – received a major
boost with the publication in 2003 of a willingness to pay study, focused on the rural areas of
the country.
The study, by the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), concluded that rural people were
willing to pay for piped water supplies of arsenic-free water. The research indicated that rural
consumers were willing to pay a tariff that would both cover operation and maintenance, and
contribute at least 10% toward capital costs. This study seemed to confirm claims by RDA
and BMDA that community investment contributions needed for rural piped water projects
were realistic. It also suggested that BOT models of private sector participation as
implemented in countries like Paraguay might be sustainable and capable of being scaled up.
The study played a major role in promoting a series of development projects undertaken by
the GOB in collaboration with the World Bank to pilot and develop BOT financing and
implementation modalities for the delivery of arsenic-free water in rural areas of Bangladesh
(Box 2).

                        Box 2: GOB-WB Efforts to Roll-Out the BOT Model
         1. Designing and testing the model – early studies and pilot projects:
              The 2003 Willingness-to-Pay Study
              Bangladesh Arsenic Mitigation Water Supply Project (BAMWSP) – 1998-2006
              Social Investment Program Project (SIPP-1) – 2003-2007
         2. The first attempt to scale-up the model:
              Bangladesh Water Supply Program Project (BWSPP) – 2005-2009
         3. Subsequent efforts to scale up and evaluate the model:
              Bangladesh Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (BRWSSP) – 20012-2017
              The BWSSP Monitoring Report – 2015


                                               11
The lessons learned about the BOT model in these various projects are assessed at the
beginning of Section 3 below, following a preliminary review in the next section of some of
the efforts made to pilot community management schemes in Bangladesh.




                                            12
                    2. Piloting the Community Management Model
2.1       Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE) Projects
As experiments with the private sponsor model were being initiated in the early 2000s in
Bangladesh, a number of other approaches were already underway, mostly involving
government- or donor-funded construction of the facilities, with small community
contributions, and community management of the schemes. Approximately 90 of these of
schemes were constructed by DPHE using its own resources. Typically, prior to
construction, some community mobilization took place, and user committees were formed to
take over operations and maintenance after commissioning. DPHE’s original intention was
for communities to contribute 5-20% of the capital costs, but early reports indicate that
communities on average contributed only 3-4% (Ibrahim, 2004).
Similar models were used in piped water supply programs implemented with DPHE
involvement and support from various donors. The efforts seem to have involved a broad
collection of different stakeholders:
         UNICEF supported a small piped water program, for which implementation was
          delegated by DPHE to non-governmental organization BRAC (formerly known as the
          Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee). The program involved community
          mobilization and the formation of user committees to carry out operations and
          maintenance, with ongoing support from BRAC, and a micro-credit program to help
          finance household water connections.
         DANIDA assisted with a DPHE piped water program designed to supply safe water to
          arsenic affected villages in coastal belt areas. This was a component of the Hygiene,
          Sanitation and Water Supply (HYSAWA) Project. Again, community involvement
          was a key part of the program, beginning with village needs assessments. User
          groups were formed and the community was expected to contribute 10 percent of the
          capital costs. A DANIDA project document noted that the World Bank was
          experimenting with a BOT model for rural piped water, but added that the experience
          with the PPP model would have to be evaluated, and if necessary modified, before it
          could be a part of the DANIDA-funded program (DANIDA, 2005, 10).
         In 2007, DANIDA created the HYSAWA Fund to act as a conduit for donor funding
          intended to support water, sanitation, and hygiene improvements implemented by
          local governments (Union Parishads) in rural and peri-urban communities. The Fund
          later used a combination of DANIDA and AusAid funding to build 237 rural piped
          water schemes, the ownership and operation of which was turned over to local
          governments.
         UNDP’s Sustainable Environment Management Program (SEMP) supported a DPHE
          sub-project called the Community Water Supply and Sanitation Program (CWSSP).
          The program used a gradual approach to community involvement, beginning with a
          demonstration phase involving fully-funded schemes constructed by DPHE to create
          local demand. No contributions from the communities were collected during the
          demonstration phase, but in a follow-up phase communities were expected to pay

                                               13
       10% of capital costs. Down payments were to be made by communities for two-thirds
       of the capital contributions, with the balance to be paid in installments over a year.
       Operations and maintenance were the responsibility of the communities.

2.2   Rural Development Academy (RDA) and Barind Multipurpose
Development Authority (BMDA)
As noted earlier, government-funded rural development research and training institutions like
the RDA and BMDA had also implemented piped water supply schemes by the mid-2000s.
Unlike the DPHE schemes, these were multipurpose projects designed to supply water for
rice field irrigation, domestic water use, and other small-scale commercial activities such as
livestock and nurseries.
The Barind area is located in Bangladesh’s Rajshahi and Rangpur Divisions and is
characterized by recurring water shortages. To address this issue, BMDA started sinking deep
tubewells for irrigation purposes in 1985. Over time, nearby villages used the system for
drinking purposes and the BMDA model has grown along these lines. The GOB, UNDP, and
DANIDA have all supported the model, which includes management by a local farmers’
cooperative. All costs are borne by the government and donors and there is no community
contribution for capital expenditures. Pre-paid meters are used for both irrigation and
drinking water charges and the fees are very low. No further contribution for O&M is sought
from the community and, in effect, there is no private participation in the BMDA schemes.
An important departure from BMDA’s approach is RDA’s effort to recover the capital costs.
In the 1980s, RDA had begun investigating how to make deep tubewell irrigation schemes
affordable in rural farming areas. They developed less expensive drilling and construction
methods, buried pipelines to reduce water losses, initiated micro-credit programs to help
households pay for water, and supplied training and technical assistance to help them develop
commercial uses for water. They also made the schemes multipurpose so that they could
generate revenue during periods when water from deep wells was not needed for irrigation.
When the arsenic problem became apparent, RDA was already well advanced in its work on a
potentially affordable technical solution.
The original RDA model used government funding to construct relatively small schemes,
typically involving 30,000 litre storage tanks and 2-3 kilometres of pipe – sufficient for
perhaps 400 household connections. Once local operators (referred to as village-based water
user associations) made a down payment of 10% of the investment costs RDA contractors
would install the system. The operator agreed to repay the outstanding capital costs within 10
years, presumably from the scheme’s revenues, which were expected to also cover operations
and maintenance. A WSP survey of piped water projects in Bangladesh (WSP, 2010)
identified three types of operators involved in these schemes: (i) genuine village-level
cooperatives, often organized as water committees by local civic leaders; (ii) regional, mid-
sized NGOs, which often worked in multiple villages; and (iii) private entrepreneurs who
operated the schemes for profit, often working through local cooperatives or committees as
the schemes’ real managers behind the scenes.



                                             14
By the time RDA presented its model at the World Bank’s Water Week in February 2009,
RDA described how it had used the approach in hundreds of villages in 55 districts, and
added that the model was being replicated throughout the country by entities such as The
Local Government Engineering Department (under the Ministry of Local Government, Rural
Development and Cooperatives) and the Bangladesh Agriculture Development Corporation
(under the Ministry of Agriculture).1
RDA’s work with these rural schemes continues today. But by the late 2000s it had dropped
the requirement that scheme owners be community groups or farmer cooperatives, acceding
to the reality that many if not most of the schemes were owned and operated by affluent local
families or entrepreneurs. (In RDA’s view, their model should now be considered a PPP
approach rather than a community management one.)
The schemes have had success in attracting private operators because the systems tend to be
small and relatively inexpensive. WSP (2010) found that the total cost of the RDA schemes
serving 300-400 households ranged from US$13,000 to US$30,000. (The BOT schemes
aimed at serving twice as many households, often included treatment systems and meters, and
could cost US$100,000 to US$150,000.) Plus, the financing terms have been attractive to
operators, who must commit only 10% of the scheme costs before construction is completed
and the scheme begins generating revenue, and then have 10 years to repay the balance (no
interest is charged). (As subsequent sections of this paper indicate, BOT sponsors must pre-
finance all of the capital costs.) The RDA schemes have also been relatively successful in
convincing households to connect to the systems and have generally kept operating costs low.
But shortcomings in the schemes have been acknowledged by RDA and documented by WSP
(2010). The RDA schemes have not generally been successful in getting users to repay the
capital costs of these schemes. As of 2011, none of the completed schemes had made a loan
repayment beyond the initial 10% (RDA notes that scheme owners generally stop repaying
after the first year or two). Although the scheme operators cannot become legal owners of
the schemes until they repay 100% of the capital costs, this seems not to have incentivized
them to keep paying. RDA says that most of the schemes cover their operating costs and
about half of the 200 existing schemes are well maintained, but most of the schemes
apparently do not generate profits. Tariffs have been too low to generate surpluses and
consumers often resist efforts to increase prices beyond coverage of operating costs. RDA
does not seem to have yet addressed the issue of poorly maintained schemes, even though
most of these remain RDA assets.
A study of a small sample of RDA schemes published in 2010 confirmed that for most of the
schemes reviewed no capital repayments were being made beyond the initial down payments.
This was despite the fact that RDA reduced the money owed from 90% to 50% for some of
the schemes. The schemes were generally not profitable, but also not affordable for all of the
members of local communities, with poor residents relying on the charity of scheme

1
 At about the same time, BMDA claimed in press releases that it had developed more than 300 piped water
systems across the country. These schemes also combined irrigation with drinking water provision, but were
usually developed in collaboration with farmer cooperatives and typically involved 100% capital subsidies with
no attempts at recovering capital costs.

                                                     15
operators. The schemes were often operated by powerful local families who tightly
controlled access to water, but sometimes lacked the professional skills necessary to
adequately manage and maintain the systems (Fontein, et al., 2010).




                                         16
 3. Designing and Testing the BOT Model – Early Studies and Pilot Projects
3.1    The 2003 Willingness-to-Pay Study
The effort to roll out BOT projects for the provision of rural pipe water really began with the
“willingness-to-pay? study published by WSP in 2003. Because of its apparent positive
endorsement of consumer readiness to pay cost-reflective tariffs, the study played a central
role in facilitating a long process of BOT experimentation. When many of those experiments
were not successful because of what turned out to be an unwillingness of households to
connect or stay connected to the schemes, some observers looked back at the 2003 study and
identified it as the beginning of problems. A 2010 WSP report noted that because the
discrepancies between the study findings and actual demand were “so great,? two conclusions
were inescapable: “...willingness to pay studies should be viewed with some scepticism; and
more study should be carried out on how rural consumers behave when faced with actual, not
hypothetical choices? (WSP, 2010, p.13).
It is true that many economists have identified potential weaknesses of contingent valuation
techniques, like those used in the 2003 study, in determining the willingness of consumers to
pay for goods and services. Contingent valuation is often referred to as a stated preference
model – people are asked how much they would be willing to pay for a particular non-market
good or service. Many economists prefer to rely on revealed preferences expressed via
binding transactions. The authors of the 2003 study were, however, well aware of these
possible shortcomings, noting that it had not yet been established that “stated? willingness to
pay would translate into actual willingness to pay and that institutional arrangements for
service delivery would be critical in moving from principle to practice. The study pointed out
that a contingent valuation survey was only one source of information for policy makers –
pilot projects demonstrating revealed preferences would be “equally important? (Ahmad, et
al., 2003, xvii).
In fact, the study’s conclusions regarding the connection between the desire for piped water
and the desire for arsenic-free water revealed a somewhat more fragile willingness to pay
than some later accounts suggest. Most of the respondents in the willingness to pay survey
were not aware of the serious health implications of consuming arsenic-contaminated water
(xi). Only about 35% of households in the sample had directly encountered arsenic
contamination, and of those 41% were still using arsenic-contaminated shallow tubewells
(xi). Of all the water supply technologies asked about in the survey, the respondents’
overwhelming preference was for deep tubewells and piped systems (89%). But the main
reason for the preference was convenience rather than arsenic-free water.
About 70% of respondents perceived convenience to be the main advantage of these systems,
presumably because piped systems most closely matched the desirable service levels of
shallow tubewells and hand pumps. Respondents in the sample area expressed a willingness
to pay about 1.9% of their monthly income for O&M charges associated with domestic piped
water connections, and about 3.2% of their annual incomes for the connections. But the
desire for arsenic-free water was only a minute share of the overall desire for piped water.
The study calculated that respondents were willing to pay only 0.2% – 0.3% of their income
for arsenic-free water.

                                              17
But the study was ultimately encouraging about the willingness to pay for piped water in the
sense that the average willingness to pay was a small percentage of mean household income,
and seemed adequate to cover the recurring operational costs of such schemes, as well as a
reasonable share of capital costs.2 Based on these findings, the study concluded that piped
water supply systems might well be affordable in many rural areas in Bangladesh. But the
demand was based on an overwhelming desire for convenience rather than desire for arsenic-
free water. In other words, the lack of alternative water sources was not a strong driver of
willingness to pay in this case. Demand (and willingness to pay) would likely remain strong
as long as piped systems came close to matching the reliability, convenience, and water
quality (smell, taste, and appearance) of shallow tubewell hand pump systems. But if piped
systems did not actually perform in that manner, many households were willing to seek other
sources of safe water or even return to unsafe shallow wells, because they did not fully
understand or recognize the health risks of arsenic-contaminated water.
A 2006 survey conducted in one of the country’s arsenic-prone areas found that adoption of
arsenic avoidance measures correlated with higher education levels, but not with exposure to
information campaigns about the dangers of arsenic. So efforts by donors and development
partners over the years to communicate warnings about the hazards of arsenic exposure have
had little effect, at least through the mid-2000s, suggesting that such campaigns may have
been poorly designed or under-resourced. The survey concluded that among poorly educated
rural households, if access to safe drinking water seemed inconvenient or water quality
(smell, appearance) seemed poor, households would drink arsenic-contaminated water
instead (Aziz, et al, 2006).

3.2     Bangladesh Arsenic Mitigation Water Supply Project (BAMWSP)
The first World Bank-funded project that attempted to test the findings of the willingness-to-
pay study was the Bangladesh Arsenic Mitigation Water Supply Project (BAMWSP), which
was implemented over the 1998-2006 period.
Project summary. The project involved a US$44 million credit, focused mainly on providing
arsenic-free water to severely affected villages and municipalities, and raising public
awareness of the arsenic problem. BAMWSP concluded that deep tubewells provided the
most reliable technology for delivering safe water, but also confirmed that the option
remained popular only if its use could approximate the convenience of shallow tubewells.
Most of the wells installed by the project involved local consultants (mostly NGOs) advising
specially-formed local user groups (“Ward Arsenic Mitigation Water User Groups?) to plan
and carry out construction of the wells.
To test the willingness to pay for safe water in rural areas, BAMWSP began a pilot activity to
construct 13 rural piped schemes using a BOT model. Local private sponsors were engaged
to build, partially finance, and operate the schemes (management would later be turned over

2
  The study noted that beneficiaries of water supply projects in developing countries were often asked to
contribute 10% to capital costs and meet the entire O&M costs. In the early 2000s, India was using these
guidelines to implement a rural drinking water program targeting about 70 million people. The Bangladesh
WTP study indicated that poor households were willing to pay 13% of the capital costs for a domestic piped
water connection; non-poor households were willing to pay 22% (Ahmad, 2003, xiv).

                                                   18
to the communities after a 15-year operating period). This BAMWSP model required
investor-operators (referred to as “sponsors? because most were NGOs rather than private
companies or individual entrepreneurs) to provide 40% of the investment costs. The
investment would be recouped over 15 years of operations through tariff collections that
would also pay for O&M costs. The community would make an upfront 10% capital cost
contribution, and BAMWSP would provide the remaining 50% as a subsidy paid out on a
performance basis, using GPOBA funding, with sponsors reimbursed for outputs achieved
and confirmed.
Results. Implementation of the BAMWSP project however experienced severe delays caused
by project management problems. As a consequence of earlier management issues on
previous projects, the BAMWSP’s project management unit (PMU) had been set up
separately from the Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE), which with the
exception of the three largest urban areas was the main agency charged with planning,
designing, and implementing water supply and sanitation throughout the country. DPHE had
implemented 90 or so active rural piped water schemes, and had traditionally been the default
government location for all PMUs established to manage rural water projects funded by
development partners. This was because DPHE was the main government implementing
agency for rural water projects and had an extensive regional network of offices that could
assist with water project implementation virtually anywhere in the country.
Without DPHE’s regional support, BAMWSP made very slow progress under its project
management arrangement, leading eventually to a US$5 million grant cancellation and
reintegration of the PMU into DPHE. As a result of these project management problems, by
the end of the project in 2006 (which had been extended by one year), only one of the pilot
schemes, for 1,100 households, was largely completed and the others were not yet under
construction. So, while at the end of BAMWSP, the BOT approach still looked promising, it
had not yet been thoroughly tested.

3.3    Social Investment Program Project (SIPP-1)
A second early Bank-supported project that also focused some of its resources on testing the
BOT model for rural piped water supply was the Social Investment Program Project, which
was implemented over the 2003-07 period, later extended to 2011 to help cope with the
aftermath of the floods and cyclone of 2007.
Project summary. SIPP-1 was intended to use an IDA credit of US$18.4 million to develop
financial and institutional arrangements for improving access to local infrastructure services
and implement small community-driven projects and social assistance programs. Project
implementation was to take place in Jamalpur and Gaibandha, two of the poorest districts of
Bangladesh at the time. The project would be managed by the newly created Social
Development Foundation (SDF), a community development organization established under
the Ministry of Finance.
Six rural piped water schemes were implemented in the two districts, using the BOT model.
The target number of total households was about 3,600. SDF signed contracts with six
sponsors (all NGOs) requiring them to contribute 40% of project costs and source 10% from

                                             19
local communities. SDF would contribute 50% of total costs using project funds. Tariff
revenues would cover all O&M costs. Sponsors were expected to build, design, and
construct the systems, then operate them for15 years in order to recover their costs.
Sponsors were allowed to select their project sites (usually villages or growth centers). They
then conducted pre-feasibility studies, feasibility studies, and prepared final project
proposals/business plans that analyzed technical, social, and environmental aspects of the
proposed schemes. Financial aspects of the plans included analyses of construction and
operation phases, financing plans, necessary tariff levels, tariff setting procedures, and tariff
affordability analysis. Household surveys were conducted to gauge the willingness and
ability of households to pay for their capital contributions and monthly tariff fees.
Most of these schemes also involved the creation of community-based organizations (CBOs)
to work as voluntary representatives of the local user communities. The CBOs did not have
equity stakes in the schemes, but worked with sponsors to carry out O&M services and
collect water bills. Above all, the CBOs were expected to monitor sponsor performance.
Results. As with the BAMWSP project, SIPP-I also experienced very slow implementation.
The requirement to carefully evaluate sponsors and their proposed projects led to a design
and approval process that was long and complicated. Construction was expected to begin
immediately on contract signing, but in practice was delayed by issues relating to land
acquisition, the routing of pipelines, and the collection of the 10% community contributions
for capital investment. Schemes were scheduled to be completed within 12 months, but
project data shows that completion times actually varied between 14 - 60 months, with an
average of 36 months (Kamruzzaman, et al., 2012). The long completion periods subjected
the schemes to cost escalations and as a consequence, discouraged households from
connecting
The latter issue was a serious setback because when most of the systems were completed,
relatively few households were connected. A 2014 review of the six projects completed by
SDF showed that the schemes never achieved more than 66% of their targeted connections.
This of course had a knock-on effect in terms of scheme viability. A basic assumption of the
BOT approach (common also to the RDA model), was that water tariffs would be sufficient
to cover O&M costs, electricity bills, operator wages, sponsor service charges, and also meet
equity return requirements. But project data shows that of the six schemes completed, only
two were successful in generating adequate revenues to cover operating costs (one scheme
stopped operation in 2010). The remaining schemes struggled to cover O&M expenses, much
less service charges, investment returns, or depreciation expenses. Poor revenue collection
efficiency (averaging 88%) exacerbated problems with revenues (SDF, 2014).




                                               20
                    4. The First Attempt to Scale-Up the BOT Model
4.1       Bangladesh Water Supply Program Project (BWSPP)
BAMWSP’s unfinished schemes were transferred to the Bangladesh Water Supply Program
Project (BWSPP), which began with an IDA grant of $40 million for work over the period
2005-2009. The project was later extended to 2010.
Project summary. Planning for BWSPP reflected the government’s sense of urgency
regarding the need to address the arsenic problem, as well as its willingness to consider
innovative approaches to safe water provision. BWSPP had been in planning as a way to
dramatically scale-up the BOT model ever since the start of the BAMWSP pilots in 2003, and
was already under implementation before BAMWSP actually reached completion. As a
consequence, relatively little was known about the strengths and weaknesses of the BOT
model. Clearly it worked in some pilot situations, but scaling-up the model in hundreds of
villages at the same time was a vastly different and resource-intensive type of exercise.
In addition to components focusing on non-piped water supply and ways of improving the
response to natural disasters, BWSPP’s original design called for it to adjust and rapidly
scale-up the BAMWSP BOT model by using it to construct piped water schemes in 300
villages. The project would provide technical assistance and 50% capital grants to support
private sponsors (entrepreneurs, co-ops, NGOs, etc.) to design, construct, and operate piped
schemes for 15 years. (After this period a community organization was supposed to take over
management from the private sector sponsor.)
Sponsors would provide 40% of the investment as equity and would collect an additional
10% from the local community. A performance-based OBA approach was to be used in
paying out the 50% subsidy, with sponsors reimbursed for outputs achieved. Because the
OBA approach required sponsors to pre-finance investments for which subsidies would
ultimately be paid, as well as raise their own equity contributions for the schemes, the project
also intended to develop some kind of financing mechanism, such as a partial credit
guarantee, to interest local banks in making long-term loans to sponsors to help cover these
pre-financing costs.
As with the SIPP project, BWSPP developed and used a very thorough process for evaluating
and recruiting sponsors to carry out the planning, implementation, and operation of the rural
piped schemes. The key steps included the following:
         Request Expressions of Interest,
         Prequalify interested respondents,
         Sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU),
         Approve an Inception Report (proposed village, socioeconomic characteristics,
          proposed team, water quality report, etc.),
         Approve a feasibility study,
         Approve a design study,
         Sign a grant agreement, and
         Authorize construction to begin.


                                               21
Results. By the time the mid-term review of BWSPP began in 2007 its implementation had
come to a standstill due mostly to poor project management. Unlike the two earlier projects
involving BOTs, BWSPP’s PMU had been moved back into DPHE at the start of the project.
But as the ICR later acknowledged, this had not helped. The PMU still lacked the personnel
and skills needed to manage the project, and did not have the capability to drive the above
listed activities for evaluating and recruiting sponsors. The project was restructured, the
original $40 million credit was reduced to $18.5 million, and many of the original
performance targets were cut back or removed. Activity on rural piped water supply was
trimmed from the initial target of 300 villages to 21 villages (13 of which were the original
BAMWSP schemes). The number of targeted household beneficiaries was decreased from
100,000 to 25,000. Sponsor equity requirements per scheme were lowered from 40% to 20%
and the total subsidy per scheme was increased to 70%. (The requirement that communities
contribute 10% was retained.) The process of developing a financing mechanism for system
sponsors never really began and was dropped at the time of project restructuring.
When the project ended, the revised target of 21 piped schemes had been met, with NGOs
making up most of the sponsors contracted to construct and operate the schemes. Each
scheme comprised two production tubewells, one pump house, a pump and pumping
equipment, storage tank (either ground or overhead), piped distribution network, and
consumer connections. Most schemes also included treatment works, and by the end of the
BWSPP project, several of the schemes had begun adding household meters. Construction on
all the schemes had started, several had also begun operations, but only two had track records
of longer than three years. For those in operation, the duration of service delivery was about
six hours a day. Approximately 10,000 households ultimately benefitted from this project
component, as against the revised target of 25,000.

4.2       BWSPP Aftermath – Assessing the Lessons Learned
By the time planning for a BWSPP successor project began in 2010, some important lessons
had been learned about scaling up BOT models for rural piped water supply. Box 3 below
draws from Bank documents some of the key elements recognized as necessary for
successfully scaling up a model of this kind.

                      Box 3: Key Elements for a Sustainable Scaling Up of the BOT Model
 1.    Program Management: A cost-effective and timely process needs to be in place for identifying, evaluating, and
       contracting with multiple sponsors. For the GOB-WB BOT projects, this role would be played by a PMU using
       WB-approved procurement rules.
 2.    Sponsors: These are the “private partners? in the BOT subprojects, selected via the PMU’s procurement process,
       who must be capable of selecting appropriate sites, preparing viable projects, and ultimately supplying water
       services on a cost-reflective basis.
 3.    Projects: These are the BOT subprojects selected and developed by the sponsors. They must be commercially
       viable within the financial structure requirements and subsidy support arrangements proposed by the program and
       administered by the PMU.
 4.    Customers: Potential project customers must be willing and able to pay for reasonable quality water at acceptable
       service levels.
 5.    Regulation: Contract compliance must be monitored by or on behalf of the “public partner? in the BOT
       arrangement. Rules for tariff setting and service quality should be clear and authoritative.
 6.    Technical Support: Various actors in a BOT program typically need technical support and capacity building – the
       actors can include sponsors, community groups, government managers, private sector financers, etc.
The
 7.    Evaluation: are
      following      Datakey    findings
                           gathering        relatedprocesses
                                      and evaluation           should be inof
                                                     to the elements           the
                                                                            place toprogram      described
                                                                                     aid regulators,         in Box 3:
                                                                                                     program managers, as
       well as to channel lessons learned back into the overall program design.
 Source: Author’s compilation.
                                                            22
Program management. The BWSPP project approach had been complex and ambitious. The
design taxed the ability of the PMU to manage key activities. Because the previous
BAMWSP project had never fully tested this model, and the urgency of addressing the
arsenic problem was so great, BWSPP was forced to both pilot test it and at the same time
attempt to rapidly scale up its use. This ambitious objective was arguably justified given the
urgency of the arsenic crisis, but it was especially ambitious given the level of difficulty in
the approach, which included an arduous procurement responsibility (the overall project had
hundreds of procurement packages pending at any given time) and a large collection of
institutional partners. Multiple innovative project design components also contributed to the
intricacy of BWSPP, including largely untested features such as (i) using private entities to
construct and operate water facilities; (ii) attempting this in poor, rural areas; (iii) using
performance-based (OBA) subsidy payments; and (iv) requiring small sponsors to find ways
of pre-financing investments that would be covered by subsidy reimbursements only after
outputs were certified as complete. One lesson learned from BWSPP was that if the BOT
model was going to be rapidly scaled up, the approach needed to be simpler and more easily
managed.
Nothing better demonstrated the overly complex character of the approach than the long and
onerous scheme development process required before construction could begin. After the
initial prequalification period, the number of months required to go from a signed MoU to a
grant agreement required a median of three years for the 21 schemes (with one scheme taking
4½ years). The process was often delayed by factors such as: (i) poor project management of
the process by the PMU; (ii) sponsors’ difficulties in making capital contributions or in
paying for various aspects of the process; (iii) problems in procuring land; (iv) the need for
additional test drilling; and (v) price escalation.
Sponsors. While the initial interest by potential sponsors in the schemes seemed enthusiastic,
according to the ICR at the time of bidding most private businesses and entrepreneurs
concluded that full cost recovery was not possible and they did not participate. This left most
of the schemes to NGOs, many of which were actively engaged in seeking shares of the
considerable amounts of donor funding available in the early 2000s for arsenic-related
activities. Many of the NGOs involved in the early BOTs may have misunderstood the
difference between typical donor-funded arsenic mitigation work and the commercial
intention behind the BOTs. Whatever their understanding, most of these NGOs demonstrated
a more philanthropic approach to their operations than a commercial one. They focused
primarily on providing a community service, rather than recovering their capital investment.
This mind-set was reflected in the fact that monthly O&M estimates by the scheme managers
covered only routine costs, and did not include reserves for replacements and repairs, much
less capital investment.
Projects. The projects also tended to be unattractive to entrepreneurs or businesses because of
the way in which subsidy support was structured. Sponsors were required to pre-finance 90%
of the project capital costs and collect the other 10% from communities. Of this amount,
50% would eventually be reimbursed, based certified achievement of construction
milestones. The project’s planned credit facility, which was intended to help secure
financing for the entrepreneurs, was never established. Moreover, sponsors struggled to get

                                              23
households to make good on their commitment to contribute 10% of the scheme capital costs.
Even when it was paid, the household share was almost never contributed upfront, adding to
the financing pressure affecting sponsors.
Customers. Instead of the required 12 hours, services across the operating schemes were
never extended for more than about six hours per day. This reduction in service was done to
cut back on costs, in line with lower revenue collections. The tariffs charged for water
services seemed affordable as a percentage of average income, but not enough households
were connecting to the systems so total scheme revenues typically could not reach cost-
recovery levels. When customers did connect, they often lobbied successfully to have tariffs
lowered from originally agreed rates. By the end of the project there was still no compelling
evidence to confirm expectations regarding the willingness and ability of rural households to
cover O&M costs of the schemes, much less meet a significant share of capital costs.
Regulation. There was no government regulator for rural piped water supply and no formal
mechanism for regulating BOT contract compliance except via the contracts themselves.
However, this approach (known as “regulation by contract?) works best when the contracting
parties are clearly identified and contractual relationships straightforward. But in
Bangladesh’s rural water sector this is still not the case. By the early 2000s, the government
was developing a policy to decentralize service delivery to the local level in order to ensure a
more demand-driven, cost-effective, and sustainable approach in the water sector. The policy
was formalized with the Union Parishad Act of 2009, which assigned responsibility for the
provision and maintenance of rural water supplies to the Union Parishads (or UPs), the lowest
level of elected rural local councils. If fully implemented, this policy would have established
local level “public? partners for these piped water BOTs in rural areas. But even after the Act
was passed, the national-level water agency – DPHE – remained the sole governmental entity
with the technical capacity and authority in the rural water supply sector, because the UPs
continued to lack the technical capacity to lead this sector. This meant that a national agency
would continue to play the key role in designing, supervising, and contracting out rural water
supply schemes until such time as the UPs were able to fully assume that function. In effect,
this left a regulatory void within which the BOTs would have to operate. Community groups
were expected to monitor BOT contract compliance, but they typically lacked the skills and
resources to do this effectively and received little assistance from DPHE.
Technical support. BWSPP provided some capacity building and technical support to various
project actors, but by the end of the project it was clear that more assistance was required
than had been initially planned for under the project. Sponsors generally lacked the capacity
to prepare their bids, design their projects, or do water quality assessments. In many cases it
was apparent that they needed help understanding how to operate their schemes
commercially. The PMU also lacked capacity in many of these areas. Local communities
needed more help in dealing with sponsors and monitoring contracts. Higher level officials
in DPHE were willing to explore innovative solutions, but DPHE was still far from a
consensus view that the BOT model was more than one option among several under
consideration. (One manifestation of this lack of commitment to the model was the absence
of efforts by the government to play more of a role in providing the kind of support needed


                                              24
by rural private operators, local governments, and community organizations.) A stronger
effort would be needed to help senior counterparts understand the model and its potential
benefits, and play a more active role in attempts to roll it out.
Evaluation. As BWSPP concluded there were still aspects of BOT implementation that were
not well understood. This was partly a result of the fact that by the time BWSPP was
restructured in 2008, the project’s monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework had not yet
been developed. With the cutback in activity levels, plans for the framework were also
scaled back. Normal project performance information was not collected by the system, and
key design features associated with the rural piped water schemes were not evaluated. These
features included issues such as the effectiveness of output-based aid approaches to subsidy
payments, the project’s focus on single water schemes rather than clusters, and how water
quality could be more consistently monitored and regulated.




                                            25
           5. Subsequent Efforts to Scale Up and Evaluate the BOT Model
5.1       Bangladesh Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (BRWSSP)
In 2012 DPHE and the World Bank collaborated once again to implement a follow-up to
BWSPP (completed in 2010). The new effort was expected to build on the lessons learned
from BWSSP and recent global experiences. The focus remained on rural areas and included
three components including rural sanitation, non-piped water, and piped water schemes. The
latter was focused on a refined version of the BOT model. The result was the Bangladesh
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (BRWSSP), a US$75 million IDA credit for work
to be undertaken over the 2012-2017 period.
Project summary. Under BRWSSP, piped water projects were initially to be implemented in
approximately 125 areas where shallow tubewells were significantly affected by a
combination of problems, including arsenic contamination, salinity, iron contamination, and a
low water table. The plan was to address these problems by scaling up the BOT model that
had been developed under BWSPP.
Each scheme was expected to achieve between 600-1,200 domestic connections. As long as
the schemes proved to be technically and financially viable (using a minimum number of
consumers as the threshold for viability) each would cover single or multiple villages
depending on the density and number of households. Private sponsors (i.e., private
entrepreneurs, NGOs, contractors, and cooperatives) would be selected competitively to
construct and operate the schemes on behalf of the local government (UP), which would own
the assets. The sponsors would receive OBA subsidies based on performance (measured via
certified achievement of project milestones) for most of the project costs, but would still be
responsible for significant levels of investment and long-term operation and maintenance of
the facilities, all of which would have to be recovered from revenues.
In various ways, the BRWSSP approach incorporated modifications to the private sponsor
model pioneered on earlier projects. Perhaps the biggest adjustment was a stronger focus on
capacity building and technical support. This and other key differences included the
following:
         Program management. Because it was now clear that DPHE did not have sufficient
          technical staff to adequately oversee its existing water supply programs, the
          department would receive a considerable amount of technical assistance to support its
          various project-related responsibilities. Part of this assistance would come in the form
          of a capacity building and training program. DPHE would also engage a private
          engineering consultancy firm to assist with various aspects of managing the selection
          and development of rural piped water schemes. The procurement of private sponsors
          was strengthened and simplified, with schemes batched into clusters of multiple
          villages in an effort to achieve economies of scale on the part of the sponsors, and
          reduce the number of procurement actions needed by the project.
         Sponsors. Tougher bidding requirements were adopted in order to increase the
          involvement of commercially-oriented enterprises and entrepreneurs as private
          sponsors, rather than NGOs. Prospective private sponsors would also receive training

                                                26
    prior to bid submission so that they could comply fully with tougher submission
    requirements designed to make sure that sponsors were competent and commercially
    oriented.
   Projects. Due to a perceived shortage of sponsor technical skills, resulting in past
    problems with poorly designed, non-viable projects, it was decided that sponsors
    would no longer handle some key project selection and preparation tasks. DPHE,
    with support from their engineering consultancy firm, would now be responsible for
    feasibility studies and for the design and supervision of construction, as well as for
    scheme site selection. This meant in effect a partial abandonment of the classic BOT
    model that depended on sponsor involvement in design and construction to help
    facilitate operational efficiencies and sustainability during implementation. But
    improved site selection and scheme design were seen as acceptable trade-offs for
    diluting the BOT concept in this way. To make the schemes more attractive to private
    sponsors, the subsidy level per scheme was increased to 70% from BWSPP’s original
    level of 50%. Although still output-based, the subsidies were mostly to be provided
    on achievement of construction milestones rather than service delivery ones, so
    sponsors would be reimbursed for capital investment earlier in the process than had
    been the case on earlier projects. Finally, in recognition of the difficulty in
    connecting households to these systems, the project was designed to allow sponsors
    full subsidy payment disbursements for achieving 70% of system connections rather
    than 100% as in BWSPP.
   Customers. The project continued to depend on the assumption that potential
    customers were willing and able to pay for services, as long as the schemes met
    expectations regarding quality and service levels. By more carefully designing and
    siting schemes, and implementing a more rigorous sponsor selection process, it was
    assumed that service quality and reliability would be higher and as a consequence
    customers would connect and pay their bills. By ensuring that the schemes installed
    metered connections, the sponsors could more accurately measure usage and allow
    customers to manage their own demand.
   Regulation. As asset owners, and in the absence of a formal regulator of rural water
    supply services, UPs were now expected to perform various regulatory functions. A
    technical assistance component introduced into the project would therefore (i) develop
    an institutional and regulatory framework to cover private sector participation in rural
    water supply, (ii) support increased delegation of responsibility to the UPs so that they
    could carry out their regulatory responsibilities, and (iii) facilitate the benchmarking
    of scheme operations to introduce accountability.
   Technical Support. As noted above, technical support to DPHE’s PMU was to be
    significantly upgraded in order to capacitate DPHE, but also to ensure that DPHE
    could provide technical support to other actors in the process. To monitor service
    capacity and quality, the UPs would receive technical support from DPHE and its
    consultants.


                                           27
      Evaluation. The project’s M&E system was designed in specific detail, including
       plans to monitor sponsors’ service and performance through annual audits and
       community surveys. The surveys would be conducted by external evaluators to obtain
       information about the performance, progress, outcomes, and impacts of project
       activities, including the piped schemes. Financial audits would confirm sponsor
       compliance with the terms of the service agreements. Annual or semi-annual
       benchmarking would be done to compare performance across sponsors. (Notably, the
       previous BWSPP project had conducted only one performance audit, which took
       place when the project ended.)
Results. The February 2015 Mid-Term Review showed that, as with the forerunner projects,
BRWSSP had also encountered significant problems. After 34 months (just over half of the
project period) only 7.4% of the funding had been disbursed. Of the 125 targeted BOT
contracts, none had been completed. Eight schemes had been awarded and of those, only one
– developed with grant support prior to the project – was 70% complete. With the exception
of the latter, the Mid-Term Review estimated that no schemes would be completed before the
end of 2016 – roughly six months before the project’s planned closing date.
As a consequence of this lack of progress, the project was restructured to reduce the targeted
number of schemes from 125 to 35, and the beneficiaries of piped schemes from 550,000 to
154,000. At least 90 schemes would have to be cancelled. DPHE estimated that 75 of these
had already been discussed with and approved by local communities. In addition, the IDA
allocation for the piped water component was reduced by US$20 million.
While civil/political unrest in the country was partially responsible for the implementation
delays, project-specific problems were also identified:
      Program management. Several stumbling blocks held up implementation of the plan
       to strengthen the DPHE and its PMU, including the following:
           o Slow departmental decision making prior to sponsor recruitment meant that it
             took roughly two years to contract and mobilize DPHE’s key technical
             assistance support team that was supposed to build internal capacity and carry
             out crucial project preparation activities.
           o Once the technical assistance support team started to prepare pre-feasibility
             and feasibility studies they realized that the process was more complicated and
             time-consuming than anticipated. In addition, there were still problems with
             site selection and scheme design, which tended to compromise project
             sustainability. In some cases, needed treatment plants were left out of scheme
             designs to reduce capital and operating costs.
           o Part of the extra time required for scheme preparation was due to difficulties
             experienced in “batching? schemes into village clusters. The batching, or
             packaging of multiple schemes, was supposed to make procurement easier and
             attract bidders with economies of scale. But batching was not allowed by the
             PMU. “Socio-political reasons? were cited, presumably meaning that the
             PMU did not want to give the impression that they were favouring certain

                                             28
           regions over others. Whatever the reason, the inability to package multiple
           schemes for development complicated the due diligence carried out by the
           technical assistance teams and increased project preparation costs.
   Sponsors. Prospective sponsors continued to be unenthusiastic about project offerings,
    with many of the schemes failing to attract bidders. The PMU seems not to have done
    as much as expected in terms of market sounding or in promoting the schemes once
    target areas were selected, much less encouraging the participation of more technical
    and commercial bidders. Taking away sponsor responsibilities for decisions on
    scheme location and design may have improved the technical viability of the schemes,
    but may also have made them less attractive to bidders and probably increased the
    involvement of sponsors who were less knowledgeable about, and well known to,
    local communities. Sponsors who actually bid for schemes tended not to be from the
    class of larger commercial enterprises or the smaller, competent private entrepreneurs
    that the project was hoping to attract. The Mid-Term Review therefore recommended
    that pre-bid market surveys be conducted in each district to determine if there was
    enough interest among potential private sponsors to warrant a bid process. In other
    words, it was no longer assumed that all the schemes identified and developed by the
    PMU would automatically attract private sector interest.
   Projects. DPHE suggested in their input to the Mid-Term Review that the projects
    were not particularly commercial. This was due to the need for a 20% equity stake
    and the challenges associated with recouping this investment over the 12-year project
    period. DPHE thus requested that the OBA grant contribution be increased to 90%
    per project, which would have been more consistent with prevailing government
    policy and similar to the subsidy levels of the RDA projects. In essence, DPHE
    believed that the additional subsidy would make it easier to attract operators. DPHE
    also noted that the cost recovery potential of the schemes was further undermined by
    the need for them to pay for electricity at commercial rates, which were three times
    the level of irrigation rates. As electricity costs could be as much as 60% of total
    scheme operation costs, particularly if water treatment was involved, these higher
    rates were particularly damaging to the commercial viability of the schemes. The
    Mid-Term Review however did not change the cost-sharing structures of the schemes
    because bidding for 29 schemes had already started.
   Customers. With no schemes in operation at the time of the Mid-Term Review, it was
    impossible to judge customer willingness or ability to pay for water distributed by the
    schemes. However, based on all of the attempts to roll out the BOT model to date, it
    was becoming clear that even when communities agreed to the 10% equity
    contribution they were expected to make, that amount was almost never fully paid up
    front. While the experience in BRWSSP may improve as implementation continues, it
    appears that community contributions in the range of 5% may be more achievable.
   Regulation. The work on the regulatory and institutional framework had not yet started
    by the time of the Mid-Term Review and it was subsequently cancelled. (By the time


                                          29
           of the MTR, the Asian Development Bank was supporting a policy reform activity
           covering the entire water sector in Bangladesh.)
          Technical support. During the first half of the project, the DPHE/PMU had not
           provided either the support or the regulatory oversight needed for the sustainable roll-
           out of the BOTs. And because most of the training and capacity building for DPHE’s
           PMU had not started by the time of the Mid-Term Review, 44% of this funding was
           subsequently cancelled, essentially guaranteeing a continuation of DPHE under-
           performance in this regard.
          Evaluation. With none of the schemes likely to be in operation before the end of 2016,
           the plans for financial audits, community surveys, and sponsor performance
           benchmarking were also cancelled.

5.2        Reviewing the BOT model in Bangladesh: BWSPP Monitoring Report
Because in 2005 BWSSP had been the first project to attempt a scale-up of the BOT model,
WSP eventually initiated a monitoring program to assess progress of the 21 schemes set up
by the project (13 of which had actually been developed under the earlier project,
BAMWSP). In January 2015, WSP issued a monitoring report on the 21 BWSPP private
sponsor schemes.3 All 21 schemes were under construction or in operation when the BWSPP
project ended in 2010. But at that stage the majority of the schemes had not yet established a
substantial track record. In addition, BWSPP’s own M&E system had never really started
functioning. This meant that when planning for a renewed scale-up of the model under
BRWSSP was initiated in 2012, there was limited knowledge about the actual performance of
these schemes.
Accordingly, the 2015 WSP monitoring report represents one of the first comprehensive,
published accounts of performance by these early BOTs. The report drew the following
conclusions:
          Sustainability. Six of the 21 schemes were not operating for various reasons including
           equipment breakdowns and theft, iron contamination (in cases where no treatment
           unit had been installed), and non-payment of water bills by users. Of the six, three
           schemes had never started operation because of technical design problems.
          Management quality. Of the 15 operational schemes, the WSP report concluded that
           four were poorly managed.
               o One scheme lost its treatment plant because of flood damage, but continued to
                 sell untreated water to community customers, who in turn did not pay bills
                 regularly due to the poor quality of service.
               o A second scheme also had water quality problems. In addition, weak system
                 pressure meant that more distant households often did not receive water.




3
    Two earlier reviews had been conducted, but the reports had not been formally issued.

                                                        30
       o A third scheme similarly had water quality problems and many households
         had started using their own tubewell water or water treated and sold by local
         venders.
       o A fourth scheme had pipeline design problems – many users could not access
         water because of poor system pressure. Tariff collection was also poorly
         managed. After a dispute over tariffs with the local CBO water committee,
         the sponsor abandoned the scheme, leaving it under the management of the
         local government (the UP), which struggled to keep the system operating.
   Service levels. Supply hours typically ranged from three to six hours per day rather
    than the original target of 12 hours. This was because connection coverage of most
    schemes was limited to 50% - 60%, resulting in lower than anticipated demand and
    lower than expected revenues. Many potential customers expressed the view that
    because so much grant funding had supported the capital costs of the schemes, grants
    should also pay for household connections. Others were unhappy with the water
    quality and poor service standards.
   Network expansion. Connections declined in eight of the 15 functional schemes,
    mainly because customers either voluntarily disconnected due to inferior services
    (pressure failures in the supply lines or poor water quality), or were disconnected for
    non-payment of water bills (again, frequently due to dissatisfaction over weak water
    pressure or poor water quality). The WSP report established that no marketing or
    motivational programs had been undertaken to increase household connections by
    sponsors in any of these 15 schemes. Some of the sponsors attempted to access SME
    funding from commercial banks in order to finance system expansion, but found that
    local banks did not recognize small water operators as acceptable borrowers.
   Metering. While a number of household meters had been installed when the schemes
    were first constructed, most of them had stopped working or had been stolen in the
    years since. Metered bills had never been produced by any scheme. None of the
    sponsors had ever attempted to install new household meters to manage demand and
    increase income.
   Capital investment. No additional capital investments for system expansion or
    installation of additional facilities were ever made by any sponsor. Only three
    schemes maintained funds for major repairs or equipment replacement. Most sponsors
    lacked the technical capacity to rehabilitate or repair their own schemes, and generally
    were reluctant to make any further investments for repairs or to meet rehabilitation
    costs. Typically this unwillingness to invest additional funds was a contributory
    factor in the closing of those schemes that were no longer operational.
   Tariff rates and collections. As a consequence of increased operating costs (including
    electricity charges that were much higher than anticipated), tariffs increased for
    almost all of the schemes. Electricity charges typically represented 40-50% of total
    operational expenses, and even more if treatment plants had been added to the
    schemes. But none of the tariff increases were sufficient to meet capital investment

                                          31
    requirements. Substandard service and poor water quality were cited as the main
    reasons for low collection rates. As a result the average collection rate across the
    operational schemes was unpredictable, with the FY 2012-13 rates at 84.3%, jumping
    to 92.1% the following year.
   Profitability. Of the 15 functioning schemes, seven were operating at a loss, mainly
    because of low tariffs, poor collections, high electricity costs, and/or high water
    treatment costs. The average return on sponsor equity was only 2.75%. WSP
    projected that only four schemes would be able to recover their original 30% sponsor
    investments over the 18-year contract period. But the report noted that the NGO
    sponsors operating most of these operational schemes were not doing so with
    commercial intentions.
   Other commitments. As per the BOT agreements, the sponsors were supposed to
    maintain proper accounting systems, including separate depreciation accounts, but
    none of the schemes were found to be in compliance with these agreements. DPHE
    had not conducted any of the agreed-on performance or financial audits of the scheme
    accounts. Only two of the 15 schemes had met their commitments to regularly test
    water quality.




                                         32
                            6. The International Experience
Across the developing world the private sector plays less of a role in water distribution
than in other infrastructure sectors. This is generally because the water sector is
considered less commercial than sectors such as transport, power, or ICT. Everyone
needs access to water, but not everyone is willing or able to pay the full costs
associated with water provision. In industrialized countries, full cost recovery from
user fees has rarely been achieved for water provision (Foster and Yepes, 2006). And
of course it is even less common in developing countries. So some level of public
funding in the sector is considered essential. All of this is particularly true for water
provision in rural areas, where low population densities and lower than average
incomes make water networks difficult and even more expensive to build and
maintain.
This section reviews a series of international research studies in an attempt to
determine if there is any compelling evidence to suggest that modestly subsidized
BOT contracts for rural piped water delivery can solve the problems associated with
community management models, and do so in a sustainable, scaled up fashion.

6.1    Kleemeier (2010)
This was a desk-top study which reviewed 24 piped water projects, about half in Africa, and
examined the experience of private water supply management in very small rural settlements.
The review found that the projects often had problems finding competent private operators,
and frequently could not generate sufficient revenues even after a private operator had
become involved. In addition, governments and their development partners failed to provide
professional support to local communities to enable them to interact with and regulate these
private operators. Accordingly, a flaw in the design of these projects was the assumption that
rural private operator initiatives could make competent government institutions unnecessary.
Instead it was clear that government would need to play an ongoing role in the regulation,
training, and professional support required by these schemes if they were to have a chance of
succeeding.
However Kleemeier found that evidence was lacking on the financial sustainability of
privately managed rural piped water schemes. Record-keeping on these projects was
typically not adequate enough to support that kind of analysis. Evaluations were not carried
out to collect and analyze data, and the studies that were done were not widely disseminated.
While Kleemeier found cases of profitable BOT contracts in Burkina Faso and Paraguay, and
both community and profitable private management schemes in Niger and Senegal, she
concluded that even if the private operator approach appeared promising, the sustainability of
the model was “not yet proven? (28).

6.2    Foster (2012)
Most of Kleemeier’s findings were supported several years later in a second desk-top study
by Foster, who established that over a quarter of rural piped schemes in Benin, Burkina Faso,
Mali, Niger, Rwanda, and Senegal were privately operated. But Foster’s review
                                             33
demonstrated that only a few isolated cases existed of private operators who invested their
own money in schemes with the expectation of recouping full capital costs via user fees.
While he saw potential value in using BOT contracts to make possible the sustainable
operation of rural water facilities, he noted that some kind of substantial subsidy would be
essential to attract private involvement. He also agreed with Kleemeier that even if a vibrant
rural water market could be established in a country, there would still be a need for
competent government institutions to be involved in monitoring and regulating these projects,
setting tariffs, managing contracts, and administering subsidies.
Finally, Foster concluded that little real evidence existed regarding the financial or technical
performance of private operators, and he questioned “the viability of rural water businesses?
(4).

6.3       Sy and Warner (2014)
In their 2014 study, Sy and Warner reviewed data and reports from three countries:
Bangladesh, Benin, and Cambodia, and arrived at conclusions about the potential
opportunities for domestic investments in water and sanitation in poor countries. The authors
found that by 2025, about 20 million people in the three countries would need to access water
from rural piped water schemes, i.e., ten times the current number. But the authors also
found a mix of commercial and policy factors which would constrain the expansion of private
schemes, including the following:
         Weak demand. Demand for water by poor households is currently not high enough
          for private operators to expand their system capacity, or even make full use of existing
          capacity. According to international health guidelines, poor households in these
          countries should be consuming more water, but because of tariffs and connection fees
          that they perceive to be high they are discouraged from doing so, especially given the
          quality of water being sold when compared to alternatives (e.g., rainwater, wells,
          springs, and boreholes). If operators can supply water that seems to be of good
          quality, it may help to increase the demand for piped water.
         Lack of viable business models. For privately managed schemes to be viable they
          must achieve ‘size’ economies of scale, with levels of sales and prices that are
          adequate to cover all of the system’s costs. But governments and development
          partners have struggled to find business models that can achieve this kind of scale.
         Investment philosophies. In Bangladesh and Benin, where system designs are
          determined in a top-down fashion by the governments and their development partners,
          most of the investments that private operators were supposed to make were expected
          to cover repairs or maintenance. However, many firms are not profitable, and
          sponsors are reluctant to invest in the systems that they are operating. This is
          apparently due to doubts about the cost-recovery potential of their businesses. In
          Cambodia, most enterprises were planning investments in network and water
          production expansion, with half of them contemplating investments in new schemes.
          Their biggest concern however, was access to finance. In all three countries, firms


                                                34
          interviewed by the authors said they believed that water was too expensive for poor
          people and that few incentives existed to increase access by the poor.
         Unsupportive policies and institutions. Government policies in all three countries limit
          access to investment in the water sector. In Bangladesh, tariff levels are not high
          enough to allow cost recovery, much less ensure a return on investment. Investment
          is therefore dependent on access to government or donor financing. In Benin,
          government design of overly-large systems has been a barrier to system expansion. In
          Cambodia the legal framework for semi-urban water supply may be limiting the types
          of investments that firms are willing to make.
Sy and Warner’s study concludes with recommendations for action mostly by governments
and development partners in three key areas: (i) stimulating the demand for network services
by the poor; (ii) improving business viability and business models by removing policy and
other impediments to efficient behavior by private firms; and (iii) improving the investment
climate and the incentives to invest in challenging markets.

6.4       Research on Community Management
In addition to the studies referred to above, there is a vast research literature on community
management of rural water schemes of all kinds. These schemes constitute the dominant
service delivery model for water services in rural areas. The most relevant theme emerging
from the literature (pertinent to this discussion on BOT service delivery models) is the
increasing realization that the community management model has reached the limits of what
can realistically be achieved through informality and voluntarism. This is one of the
messages of a recent special issue of the journal, Water Alternatives (October 2013), which
focused on new trends in rural water supply. The guest editors noted that behind the apparent
success of the model in constructing assets and achieving first-time access to water supply is
a combination of growing challenges: poor performance of service providers, high rates of
sustained system failure, and very low levels of service. The editors and other contributors
argue that the main actions needed to shift community management away from the
limitations of its traditional model are already becoming apparent. The first and most
significant action involves making the model more professional, with some modest forms of
sector regulation to hold operators accountable for performance and provide capacity
building for communities to instill good business practices. Thus they contend that, “in some
cases, professionalization may go as far as fully outsourcing some or most service provision
to private operators? (336). Above all, they make the case that professionalization will
require external technical support, and that structured support programs have proven to be
more effective than ad hoc support, especially when it comes to improving O&M and
administrative functions.

6.5       Other Research
Finally, various other studies suggest that the potential for private participation in the water
sector, even in urban settings, has often been over-estimated when it comes to profits and
investment. A comprehensive review of this literature is beyond the scope of this paper, but
several research papers are worth considering:

                                                35
      The first is a study by Sirtaine, et al. (2004), which used a sample of both brownfield
       and greenfield projects and included water projects along with those in other sectors,
       to assess the profitability of PPP projects in Latin America during the late 1990s. The
       study found that on average, projects demonstrated profitability only after about 10
       years of operation. Prior to that point, project shareholders earned negative returns on
       their investments, even when adding in things like management fees, estimated
       accumulated capital gains, and potential investment markups. But this same study
       also found that 40% of the concessions in the sample did not have the potential to ever
       become profitable, with water concessions being the type of project that was least
       attractive to private operators.
      A second study, by Gassner, et al. (2009), looked at whether privately operated water
       and electricity utilities outperformed those run by governments. The study used a
       data set of more than 1,200 utilities in 71 developing countries. For the water
       projects, the study found significant gains in performance and labor productivity, but
       no evidence of increased investment generated by private participation.
      A third study, by Marin (2009), undertook a global review of public-private
       partnerships for urban water utilities in developing countries. The study focused on
       65 large urban water PPPs in operation for at least five years. Marin concluded that
       the principal benefit of these projects was operational efficiency and service quality
       rather than the ability to supply private sector finance. He acknowledged that private
       investment was the main attraction of PPPs in the water sector in the 1990s, but added
       that “experience has shown that this was largely the wrong focus? (7). He noted that
       in the case of poor households, subsidies are often required for consumption as well
       as to increase access (135).
      Finally, Estache and Philippe (2012) reviewed research literature since 2007 on the
       impact of private participation in infrastructure in developing countries. They noted
       that water deals were the most difficult to do among infrastructure sectors, and that a
       resurgence of interest in management contracts in the sector “can be seen as an
       explicit recognition that this sector cannot be expanded without public financing? (3).
       Evidence of increased efficiency in water projects due to private sector participation
       “is at best mixed in all developing regions,? because of the importance of the
       legal/regulatory environment in which such projects are implemented (5).
These four research studies focused on large, mostly urban water PPPs that were not set up
initially with large amounts of subsidy funding. So at first glance they may seem irrelevant
to a discussion of highly subsidized, rural water projects. But the studies demonstrate that
neither the large projects that stimulated interest in water PPPs in the 1990s, nor the smaller
rural projects, were as profitable as assumed at the time. These projects also did not generate
the kind of private investment that was frequently cited as their principal benefit. If the larger
urban PPPs could not meet these expectations, it is not so surprising that smaller rural
projects would have difficulties consistently demonstrating profitability and increased private
investment, even with partial capital subsidies.


                                               36
6.6     Lessons from the International Literature Review
This review considers only a few of the important studies that have looked at private
participation in rural water supply in poor countries. Nevertheless these studies do present
some common themes which are summarized below:

   1. Water schemes involving private operation continue to show promise but particularly
      when there are critical elements such as strong private partners, capacitated local
      partners, and clear regulatory regimes in place. In many instances, interest in private
      sector participation has grown as the shortcomings of traditional community
      management schemes have become increasingly evident. But the rural water sector is
      rapidly moving beyond a debate about the merits of classic PPP operations versus
      traditional community management schemes. Many kinds of hybrid schemes are
      appearing, particularly in countries like Rwanda, Senegal, and Benin, involving
      operations owned and supervised by community groups, but operated by private
      contractors. Yet this model is in its infancy and more experience and analysis is
      required before determining that the hybrid model can deliver at scale.
   2. It is still assumed that schemes involving private operation tend to perform better than
      community operated schemes in terms of system maintenance, revenue management,
      water service delivery, etc. While this may be accurate, there are relatively few
      private operator schemes that have been successfully set up and sustained. And the
      results ultimately need to be reviewed in comparison to public sector delivery models
      which varied widely, not only between regions and countries, but also by sub-national
      service provides. Further analysis and research is needed to fully assess the impact of
      private operators, particularly when compared to local public service providers.
   3. As noted above, countries like Senegal and Benin have had some success with private
      operator models in rural areas and those efforts are now moving to scale.
      Nevertheless, there has not yet been a model that has successfully scaled up private
      operator models in hundreds of schemes simultaneously.
   4. It is now widely accepted that private operators can only deliver rural piped water
      services with some form of capital subsidy. The idea that user fees can cover O&M
      expenses, while still commonly accepted, is less established in many developing
      countries as policy makers hesitate to establish tariffs which cover the full
      maintenance and rehabilitation costs. Whether the policies support water as a human
      right or an economic commodity, either the public sector, consumers, or some
      combination of the two must find models to cover O&M costs.
   5. Access to affordable finance by small operators seems to be essential for the BOT
      model to work, but beyond a few isolated success stories, such access is still a
      challenge in many countries. The combination of short tenors and high interest rates
      has inhibited the access to capital to support water projects.
   6. Most researchers argue that private participation in rural piped water supply must be
      augmented by capable government officials and institutions. For private participation
      to be sustainable, governments must maintain some functions to support private sector

                                             37
involvement. Such functions include things like setting appropriate policies, applying
regulatory frameworks including tariff setting, developing sector strategies, providing
support for community engagement programs, and supplying technical support to
small scale private operators.




                                      38
                                       7. Conclusions
This review leads to three important questions. The first is what do we know now as a result
of the experiences in utilizing the BOT model for the provision of safe water to large numbers
of households in rural areas of Bangladesh? In other words, what are the important lessons
learned from these programs? The second question is what non-BOT options might be
considered in the future? Finally, the third question is what additional analysis is needed to
make informed decisions to address rural water supply constraints in Bangladesh? These
three questions are addressed in the following sections.

7.1    Lessons Learned About Implementing the BOT Model
The results of the GOB-World Bank collaboration to scale up the use BOT models for water
provision in rural areas in order to deal with widespread arsenic contamination of ground
water has been disappointing. To better understand this it might be helpful to identify what
seem to be the essential program elements necessary to achieve such a scale up. Box 4
presents a stylized description of these elements, condensing earlier lists of such elements
(e.g., in Box 3) from seven to four, and highlighting their interdependence. They are
interdependent in the sense that each leads to the next: viable, commercial BOTs depend on
the ability of the program management entity to design such projects and indentify competent
private operators. Private operators are attracted to the projects only if they are well designed
and clearly viable, with transparent subsidies and tariff levels set to adequately generate
profits. Customer are willing to pay for water and make the projects viable only if operators
are supplying a product that is convenient and of desirable quality. Unfortunately, as
summarized in the following sections, few of these program elements were achieved, and the
chain of interdependent results or outputs was never linked together.




                                              39
              Box 4: Making the BOTs Work -- Essential Program Elements
   Program Elements            Essential Characteristics               Expected Outputs/Results
    1. Program           A motivated, high capacity, team
  Management Entity      responsive to deadlines
                         Willing/able to identify and procure
                         competent operators                         Large numbers of commercially
                         Willing/able to monitor contract          viable projects designed and bid out
                         compliance
                         Willing/able to provide on-going
                         technical support
   2. BOT Projects       Manageable size & technology given
                         skills and financing ability of operators
                         Costs are accurately estimated and
                                                                   Large numbers of projects that are
                         controllable
                                                                    attractive to commercial operators
                         Revenues are sufficiently subsidized
                                                                               and customers
                         to achieve profitability
                         Tariff setting process ensures stable,
                         cost-reflective pricing
  3. Private operators   Willing/able to manage commercial
                         projects
                         Willing/able to monitor/ maintain/
                                                                      Large numbers of sustainable,
                         rehabilitate assets
                                                                        commercial water delivery
                         Willing/able to interact effectively
                                                                                 businesses
                         with customers
                         Access to finance needed for initial
                         investments and maintenance
     4. Customers        Desire water that is safe as well as
                         convenient and good quality
                         Little or no access to cheaper
                         alternative water sources                 Large numbers of rural households
                         Willing/able to pay tariffs at O&M            accessing safe drinking water
                         levels
                         Willing/able to pay a share of capital
                         costs as project begins

Program management. A competent program management entity is the foundation for a
program of this kind due to the critical functions it must carry out. Its most important
functions are to design viable BOTs and find competent private operators. With any kind of
PPP it is essential to ensure that the private partner is capable of fulfilling its project
obligations over the life of the contract because the public partner faces a variety of
contingent liabilities that can materialize if the deal collapses. The need to thoroughly
evaluate private partners was recognized in the design of the different Bank-funded BOT
support projects.
But the overall management of the BOT roll-out processes was never robust enough to handle
the hundreds of schemes planned for development. The GOB and the World Bank struggled

                                                 40
to find an effective delivery model for setting up and staffing a project PMU to manage the
complicated process of designing or evaluating schemes, and procuring sponsors for projects.
The risks associated with weak program management were well understood in the early
2000s, but solutions to the problem proved to be elusive.
The absence of a strong program management entity had knock-on effects across the program.
All of the key actors in the BOT roll-out needed technical support and capacity building at the
same time. DPHE was required to play a key role in providing this support to sponsors and
the UPs, but it too had strained capabilities. The delays experienced in building DPHE’s
capacity added to this complexity. How and where to start such a capacity building process,
how to sequence it, and how to manage it, are all challenges that undermined the roll-out of
BOTs.
Going forward with a BOT program, the capacity of a government implementing agency
would have to be strengthened considerably before the project tries to start rolling out BOT
schemes (rather than as part of the roll-out). The search for local institutional partners to host
and staff a PMU should also continue, perhaps considering entities such as RDA.4
Projects. Several characteristics of the schemes made them appear to be risky and unattractive
to potential sponsors. For example, the BOT schemes were larger, more complex, and more
expensive than RDA schemes, which was probably a reason why the latter program was so
much more successful in attracting operators.5 The costs associated with the delivery of water
were also higher than expected, with schemes being charged for electricity at commercial
rates (rather than at residential or irrigation rates) and relatively expensive treatment facilities
needed more frequently to deal with the arsenic issue. The need to pre-finance the capital
costs of the schemes may have made the prospect of taking them on seem even less prudent to
sponsors. Finally, the full disbursement of subsidies proved difficult in cases where
achievement of outputs was limited by other shortcomings of the schemes, such as the failure
of communities to contribute their full 10% share of capital costs. Because subsidy payments
were subject to taxes and VAT, sponsors automatically received 10% less than some of them
expected.
The regulatory environment within which these BOT schemes had to operate also contributed
to their lack of viability. Currently there is no regulator for rural water projects in Bangladesh,
which means there are no authoritative service delivery standards or procedures for setting

4
  In the mid-2000s RDA and the World Bank apparently discussed collaboration on rural piped water projects.
But for a number of reasons the relationship was not pursued. One problem at the time was that RDA is a
research and training institute and not classified as an “implementing agency? of government. That particular
problem was solved with the creation by RDA of the Centre for Irrigation and Water Management, which does
qualify to implement projects. Another problem may have been the fact that RDA projects are multipurpose and
depend on revenue from both irrigation activities as well as household use. This might create problems for
development agencies that normally employ separate divisions to fund and manage these two kinds of activities.
5
  The RDA schemes are roughly half the size of the BOT schemes, largely because they serve smaller user
populations, and therefore use smaller overhead tanks and more limited piped distribution networks, and
typically do not include treatment plants. This makes the 10% down payment less burdensome for sponsors. The
fact that RDA fully constructs the schemes before handing them over the sponsors eliminates construction risks,
and substantially reduces pre-financing risks. In addition, RDA provides technical support to the schemes as
well as access to a micro-credit revolving fund, which helps sponsors promote water-related income generating/
SME activities in the scheme area.

                                                      41
and raising tariffs. As a result, tariffs for many schemes were not ultimately set at the cost-
recovery levels called for by the BOT feasibility studies, and therefore revenues could not
cover of O&M costs. Under such conditions, tariff-setting became a matter of negotiation
between sponsors and user groups. The effort to have UPs act as local regulators was largely
unsuccessful because of capacity shortcomings. ADB is currently assisting with the
development of a regulatory framework for rural water supply so some of these problems may
diminish in the future.
Finally, both Kleemeier (2010) and the BWSPP ICR (World Bank, 2011a) raised concerns
about the effectiveness of output-based aid in respect of supporting BOT project outcomes.
In some instances, OBA subsidy programs can involve high transaction costs and can be
complex, with multiple payments contingent on the certified achievement of multiple outputs.
This cost and complexity, when combined with the need for service providers to pre-finance
investments (for which OBA reimburses them only after output achievement) sometimes
makes OBA schemes less than effective at attracting private investment. Local commercial
lenders typically refuse to treat OBA subsidies as collateral or any other kind of security for
loans (Kumar, et al., 2010).6
Going forward with BOTs, further analysis would be helpful to better understand how OBA-
style subsidies impact small BOT projects, how OBA compares with the subsidy approach
used by RDA, and whether there other types of subsidies, such as up-front capital grants (e.g.,
“viability gap funding?), which might be more productive. It also seems worth examining
whether capital subsidies should be higher and whether some kind of operating subsidy is
needed to facilitate the sustainability of schemes and attract competent sponsors. Finally a
solution needs to be found to the high electricity rates charged to the BOT schemes. With
government backing in light of the arsenic crisis, it is difficult to believe that these schemes
could not be charged at residential or irrigation levels, rather than full commercial rates.
Private Operators. To date, the professional and entrepreneurial capacity of most of the
selected private sponsors has not meet expectations. Individual entrepreneurs and private
commercial enterprises have been far less attracted to the BOT schemes than NGOs, although
this appears to be evolving in the latest round of sponsors under BRWSSP. NGOs have
frequently agreed to act as sponsors, but have not able to apply a commercial approach to
their schemes. Many have not had sufficient financial and technical expertise to do so. As a
result a significant number of the BOT sponsors have not been particularly careful about
covering costs, maintaining assets, or sustaining service quality. Poor management of the
schemes has led to customer dissatisfaction, disconnections, and insufficient revenues, which
in turn have led to further reduced service quality.
More traditional PPP private partners such as engineering firms or entrepreneurs have yet to
demonstrate interest in these schemes although this appears to be evolving under BRWSSP
where are number of joint ventures have prepared bids. In retrospect, it appears that
competent, commercial sponsors either assessed these BOT projects as being incapable of
generating profits or were unwilling to wait 12-15 years to realize those profits. It also
6
 These kinds of problems have been cited in the past as reasons why OBA does not seem to have scaled-up as
much as would be expected based on its various performance reviews (Trémolet, et al., 2009).

                                                   42
appears that some of this has to do with the relatively high levels of pre-financing required
under the schemes.
Going forward with BOTs, engagement is needed with potential private operators in order to
better understand their interests and concerns related to managing water schemes. This means
better market sounding, as well as greater effort to promote project opportunities among
desirable kinds of private operators. Government implementing agencies must be convinced
that professional private participation can contribute to more cost-effective service delivery
and need to be motivated to help make such participation a reality.
Customers. Many prospective customers refused to connect to the networks, while existing
customers were disconnected over time (either voluntarily or involuntarily). This was a
complex and frustrating problem. An assessment of total family incomes demonstrated that
most households could afford to pay for these water services. But their willingness to pay
seems to have had the potential to sharply decrease as they weighed the costs involved against
the quality of the water, the reliability and convenience of service, and the availability of
alternative water sources. The 2003 willingness to pay study demonstrated that concern over
arsenic contamination was not the main reason for preferring piped water schemes, and was
not a deterrent that would keep households from accessing unsafe sources of water if the
convenience and quality (meaning taste and appearance) of piped water were deemed
unsatisfactory. In addition, the government and other development partners have continued to
install fully subsidized tubewells across the country, so residents in BOT service areas
frequently had other, cheaper options for safe water.
Going forward with BOTs, public awareness of arsenic contamination in rural areas needs to
be improved although this needs to be linked to service level improvements (this is discussed
in more detail in the next section). It is also worth noting that programs like this tend to be
more successful using a demand-responsive approach, meaning that end-users have a say in
system designs, project siting, service levels, etc. This tends to improve their sense of scheme
ownership and willingness to pay for services. Because these BOT schemes involved
significant community financial contributions, efforts were made early on to engage local
communities in the schemes, conduct willingness to pay surveys, etc. The need to do this was
clearly identified in project appraisal documents. But some of the early NGO operators now
admit that surveys were not done thoroughly or at all. System design and site selection
responsibilities were originally allocated to bidders in the hope that they would make an effort
to engage with local communities about the projects. But those responsibilities were later
taken away from bidders and handled by DPHE in a top-down fashion, in order to improve
the overall technical sustainability of schemes. Unfortunately, because of the need to address
the arsenic problem, simpler and less expensive service delivery alternatives like shallow
wells and hand pumps could not be entertained. However it seems likely that this shift to
more of a top-down approach probably weakened community ownership of the schemes.
Ultimately the BOT programs were based on the expectation of community support in
response to the provision of arsenic-free water. It is now clear that safe water was not enough
by itself to guarantee community support.



                                              43
7.2 Non-BOT Options Going Forward
Should another attempt be made to scale up the BOT model for rural piped water provision in
Bangladesh? Previous efforts were driven by the urgent need to deal with the health
predicament the country faced as a consequence of groundwater arsenic contamination. Most
of the non-piped water schemes supported by the World Bank in these projects did expand
access to safe water and these efforts have not been evaluated as part of this review.
However, in the case of BOT projects, the efforts to scale up the BOT model have been
disappointing. In fact, efforts to scale up the use of the model were initiated before it was
clear that the model had performed well in the early pilot projects like SIPP-1 and BAMWSP
(Table 1).
                       Table 1: BOT Project Track Records as at Project Close
                                                       Initial Revised      Results at
          WB-supported Projects            Dates                                                         Comments
                                                      Targets Targets      Project Close
Designing and testing the model:
                                                                               1 under
      Bangladesh Arsenic Mitigation                                                            The 13 schemes later included in
 1.                                       1998-2006   13 BOTs       -     construction; none
      Water Supply Project (BAMWSP)                                                            BWSPP's revised target of 21
                                                                             operational
                                                                               5 under
      Social Investment Program Project                                                        By 2014, 1 BOT cancelled; only 2
 2.                                       2003-2011   6 BOTs       -        construction;
      (SIPP-I)                                                                                 covering operating costs
                                                                            1 operational
The first attempt to scale up the model:
                                                                            Most still under
      Bangladesh Water Supply Program                                                         By 2015, 6 BOTs cancelled; only
 3.                                   2005-2009 300 BOTs 21 BOTs             construction;
      Project (BWSPP)                                                                         4 likely to recover investment
                                                                          several operational
The second attempt to scale up the model:
                                                                       At mid-term, 8
      Bangladesh Rural Water Supply &                                                    At mid-term, cancellation of 90
 4.                                       2012-2017 125 BOTs 35 BOTs under construction;
      Sanitation Project (BRWSSP)                                                        schemes already planned
                                                                      none operational
Source: World Bank Project Documents

Other development partners active in Bangladesh remain unconvinced that the model is
capable of being scaled up at this point in time. They continue to support more conventional
models of water service delivery, including community management approaches. As a result,
the government has been faced with conflicting recommendations from its development
partners. For example, as the WBG’s first attempt at scaling up the BOT model under
BWSPP was concluding in 2009, the Asian Development Bank’s Ind ependent Evaluation
Department concluded the following about the water sector in Bangladesh:
        Support for reforms has not been coordinated well enough, and was sometimes
        misguided (support for private sector-based solutions in rural water supply,
        which in the context of Bangladesh are premature). (ADB, 2009, 45)
If alternative delivery models are to be explored, what kinds are available for providing safe
water in Bangladesh’s rural areas? The M&E systems for the two large Bank-funded projects
designed to scale up the model were never operationalised so data on the performance of the


                                                            44
schemes is limited. And much of the information on the performance of other kinds of
schemes in Bangladesh appears to be anecdotal and sometimes inconsistent. Nevertheless,
some observations are possible regarding alternatives to the BOT model.
Program Management. Whatever service delivery model is adopted, some kind of program
management entity must administer the roll-out of schemes. As mentioned above, this might
be dealt with via more and earlier technical assistance for government agencies, or the use of
non-governmental entities like RDA. In fact, abandoning the BOT model might improve the
willingness of government officials to support the approach, especially if total subsidy levels
could be increased to bring them in line with current government policy.
Projects & Operators. Another option in rural areas could be less ambitious kinds of PPPs, or
schemes that combine subsidized community ownership and supervision with outsourced
private management. A variety of stakeholders have recommended capital subsidies of 90%
(or higher) for rural piped water schemes, as well as operating subsidies. The introduction of
such subsidies for BOT projects in Bangladesh would be a major shift in the long-standing
BOT approach, but is perhaps unavoidable in light of the past performance of these schemes
and the associated challenges of getting public sector delivery to scale. Stakeholders such as
DPHE, RDA, BMDA, the Social Development Fund (SDF), and the HYSAWA Fund all
advocate or use larger subsidies. Types of operator contracts that would be supported by such
subsidies could include the following:
   Management contracts. Government could build schemes and contract them out to
    private managers who would operate and maintain the systems, but be paid directly by
    government instead of via user fees.7 However, private operators might be reluctant to
    take on the risks of operating schemes designed and built by government, so several
    variations of this approach, involving private design and construction, have been
    recommended in Bangladesh, including design-build-lease contracts and design-build-
    operate contracts (Hydroconseil and DevCon, 2013). Lease or affermage contracts, like
    those used in several West African countries, might also be an option in Bangladesh. 8 But
    management and lease contracts also have uneven track records in developing countries,
    which might put off prospective private sponsors. Even when contractors meet
    performance targets, they are often blamed for sector-wide problems over which they
    have little control. As a result, such contracts demonstrate high rates of renegotiation and
    premature termination.
   Clustering schemes. In order to achieve economies of scale, diversify operator risks, and
    possibly attract more professional sponsors like local engineering firms (or even
    international operators in partnerships or as sub-contractors with local firms), schemes
    could be clustered together to form much bigger projects for management contractors.
    Clustering would depend to some extent on the geographical proximity of schemes and
7
  Management contracts have been recommended as an alternative to BOT schemes by the Social Development
Fund, which implemented six pilot BOT schemes with Bank support beginning in 2003 under the SIPP-1
project.
8
  In the most common form of affermage, the operator takes its fee from customer receipts, but also charges
customers a surcharge covering additional asset investments. Unlike management contracts lease or affermage
contracts leave demand risk with the operators so are somewhat more risky from a private sector point of view.

                                                     45
      the use of clustering would also have to be based on a thorough understanding of domestic
      and international operator interests and tolerances regarding rural water supply systems.
     RDA-style contracts. RDA has had some success in implementing its own version of
      PPP-type contracts, involving heavily subsidized schemes operated by local families or
      entrepreneurs on behalf of water user associations. RDA claims over 200 schemes in
      operation and relatively little difficulty in attracting operators (see Sect. 2.2 above). The
      model is far from perfect: (i) RDA admits that only about half of the existing schemes are
      reasonably well maintained, (ii) subsidy levels are high (90%), and (iii) risks are low for
      private sponsor/operators (the subsidy is not performance-based). Many of the schemes
      seem capable of covering costs, but profit generation is not robust. Despite these
      challenges, the RDA approach has demonstrated modest success in Bangladesh, especially
      when compared with the water delivery performance of alternative models.
     Hybrid models. Recent research by groups like the International Water and Sanitation
      Centre (Moriarty, et al., 2013) suggests that the emerging service delivery model in this
      subsector, which is most responsive to user demands and government mandates and
      constraints, may lie somewhere between BOT-type approaches and traditional community
      management schemes. This emerging hybrid combines characteristic of both approaches.
      It results from the realization that the community management model is reaching the
      limits of what can be realistically achieved using an approach based on informality and
      voluntarism, and that sustainable achievement of desirable levels of service delivery do
      not always result from this approach. The hybrid involves a continuation of community
      management principles, but with a stronger degree of professionalism and external
      support to community owners of schemes. In many cases this means fully outsourcing
      most service provision tasks to private operators, with asset ownership and final decisions
      on service levels and tariffs remaining with communities or local government. In effect,
      private participation is carried out on the basis of management or service contracts. But
      as with those forms of private involvement, if costs are not estimated on a fully life-cycle
      basis, financing is not provided, and some kind of tariff-setting regulation is not in place,
      private operators may be blamed for service delivery shortcomings that are not fully
      under their control.
     Professionalization contracts. In rural areas perhaps the first step should focus on
      existing schemes rather than new ones, regardless of how they have been structured.
      Professionalization contracts have been developed in India for mid-sized urban utilities,
      but might be adaptable for smaller schemes in a country like Bangladesh, which have
      been developed by RDA, DPHE, donors, or MDBs. In India, these contracts involve
      private firms contracted to help municipal water utilities implement Standard Operating
      Procedures for each functional area of the utility, such as network management,
      commercial functions, administration and finance, and capital planning and management.
      The contractor would also advise on billing systems, asset management, leak detection,
      and maintenance. The contractor would then provide training and on-going management
      advice. Actual management control of the utility would not change hands.9 These are not

9
    See Ehrhardt, Mugabi, and Kingdom, 2015.

                                                 46
       PPP arrangements, so private contracts cannot be expected to cover any of these costs –
       funding for these contracts, and for any needed capital investments, must be sought
       elsewhere.
Customers. Perhaps rural areas in Bangladesh should be left to an enhanced community
management model that builds on existing efforts undertaken by the government and other
development agencies, with more emphasis on professionalization of services, contracting out
operations, and long-term sustainability. The management of rural piped water schemes
using PPP-like approaches could be reserved for reasonably well capacitated local
governments (UPs) in rural areas, like the 37 schemes developed by the HYSAWA Fund. 10
Experience in Bangladesh suggests that private participation in infrastructure services might
be much more sustainable in peri-urban environments due to higher population densities,
better informed and more affluent customers, and more interested, competent small local
businessmen acting as operators.
But whatever service delivery model is chosen, if households better understood the risks of
drinking water contaminated with arsenic, and if dangerously contaminated boreholes were
more frequently identified and shut down, the willingness to pay for piped delivery of safe
water could be much more robust. But if anything, the public outcry over the arsenic threat
seems to have diminished since the early 2000s, despite recent research showing that the
problem may be larger and more dangerous than previously thought (Argos, et al., 2010).
New awareness campaigns could generate multiple benefits if they were better designed and
resourced than past efforts. But any such awareness campaign would only be effective if it
was linked to some kind of comprehensive solution to the arsenic problem, including the
provision of clean water. As a next step, there is a need for a better understanding of the social
and economic costs of arsenic contamination, as well as the costs of effectively addressing it
using different options.

7.3 Two Longer-term Knowledge Objectives
At least two additional set of issues need clarification in the Bangladesh context, regardless of
which service delivery model is selected to deal with the arsenic problem. Ideally, efforts to
clarify these issues would already have started. But in the haste to find solutions, not enough
in depth analysis was undertaken to address these issues. These are multi-facet matters and
resolving them will require significant resources as well as close collaboration between
development agencies and the government.
The first issue involves gaining a better understanding of how water pricing is done across
Bangladesh, and the extent to which subsidies are available to supplement user fees. There
are apparently no standardized methods for pricing or subsidy provision. Water pricing does
not appear to be linked to capital expenditures, O&M requirements, or affordability. There is
a lack of information and transparency regarding the size and extent of the subsidies available
in the sector as well. Policies to regulate the water sector and review and adjust tariffs are
under development, but implementation modalities and capacity support are still in the early
stages of review. While many of these issues around water pricing and subsidies are sensitive,

10
     The Fund reports that after five years of operation, 25 of these schemes appear to be generating surpluses.

                                                          47
further research, analysis, and capacity support for water pricing, subsidy provision, and
assistance in implementing a regulatory regime, seem essential no matter what delivery model
is ultimately selected. The unenthusiastic private sector reaction to the BOT models on offer
was due in many cases to the lack of regulation that could maintain tariffs at cost-reflective
levels and the many prominent examples of higher subsidies provided to other government-
supported water schemes.
The second issue involves the need for a compelling recommendation regarding the most
cost-effective model for the delivery of safe water in rural areas, which the government
ultimately can support with limited outside assistance. Ultimately this analysis would identify
a sustainable, affordable model to deliver clean water, at scale, in rural areas. More
specifically, this involves comparing the total life-cycle costs and benefits of the BOT model
with various other delivery models promoted in rural areas by the government and other
development agencies, or with delivery models used in other countries (such as the hybrid
schemes emerging in West Africa). The comparison of models and indeed the
conceptualization of new approaches going forward needs to be done in terms of comparing
the total, life-cycle costs of providing services at a defined level to a defined user population
over time. Box 5 lists cost components, identified by Fonseca, et al. (2011), which offer a
convenient framework for establishing total life-cycle cost profiles for different models.

                              Box 5: Cost Components of Water Services
    Capital expenditure –                 Expenditure on fixed assets such as physical infrastructure
    hardware and software                 (for initial construction or system extension), and the
    (CapEx)                               accompanying 'software' such as capacity building.
    Operating and minor                   Expenditure on labour and materials needed for routine
    maintenance expenditure               maintenance which is needed to keep systems running, but
    (OpEx)                                does not include major repairs.
    Capital maintenance                   Renewal, replacement and rehabilitation costs which go
    expenditure (CapManEx)                beyond routine maintenance.
    Expenditure on direct                 Costs of ongoing support to users and local stakeholders,
    support (ExpDS)                       for example on local government or district support staff.
    Expenditure on indirect               Costs of higher-level support, such as government
    support (ExpIDS)                      planning, policy-making and regulation.
    Cost of capital (CoC)                 Costs of servicing capital such as repayment of loans
    Cost of project preparation           Costs of pre-feasibility and feasibility studies,
    (CoP)                                 procurement, and contracting

   Source: Adapted from Fonseca, et al., 2011.



The point of this analysis would be to determine the resources needed to make the schemes
sustainable – and thereby facilitate a subsequent discussion of how to source adequate
financing for these costs. Very careful attention needs to be paid to “capital maintenance
expenditures? for the long term operation of these schemes. Both the BOT and community
maintenance models assume that communities will cover O&M from tariff payments. But
there is little evidence to date that any but the largest small-town schemes are able to cover
                                                       48
capital maintenance from user fees (Fonseca, et al., 2013). A second area of concern is the
total cost of project preparation. In selective instances the BOT schemes themselves may be
able to recover O&M and some of their capital costs. But how do the models compare in
terms of development costs? A related area to analyze would be capital expenditure. A
review of the technology used for water pumping and treatment would be helpful to
identifying the most cost-effective equipment for use in these schemes. This would include
an assessment of the low-cost tube well building materials developed by RDA, and the
possibility of using technologies like solar power for water pumping, as is now being
experimented with in India, Tanzania, and other countries. On the basis of a life-cycle
analysis of this kind, the government can then take its own informed decision about service
delivery models, and can begin to take ownership of the identified solutions.




                                            49
References
ADB (Asian Development Bank) (2009), “Urban Sector and Water supply and
Sanitation in Bangladesh: An Exploratory Evaluation of the Programs of ADB and
Other Aid Agencies,? Independent Evaluation Department, July.
Ahmad, J., B.N. Goldar, S. Misra, and M. Jakariya. 2003. Willingness to Pay for
Arsenic-free, Safe Drinking Water in Bangladesh, WSP South Asia Series, Delhi:
Water and Sanitation Program.
Argos, M., et al. (2010), “Arsenic exposure from drinking water, and all-cause and
chronic-disease mortalities in Bangladesh (HEALS): a prospective cohort study,? The
Lancet, Vol. 376, Issue 9737, 252 – 258, 24 July.
Aziz, S.N., K.J. Boyle, and M. Rahman (2006), “Knowledge of Arsenic in Drinking-
water: Risks and Avoidance in Matlab, Bangladesh,? Journal of Health, Population,
and Nutrition 24(3), 327-335.
Bilu, H.R. (2009), “RDA’s water use model gets global recognition,? The Daily Star,
February 16.
DANIDA (2005), “Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Programme Support (WSSPS)
Phase II, HYSAWA Project, Project Document,? Government of Bangladesh,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Denmark, October.
DPHE and JICA (2010), Situation Analysis of Arsenic Mitigation 2009, Dhaka:
Department of Public Health Engineering and Japan International Cooperation
Agency, June.
Ehrhardt, David, Josses Mugabe, and William Kingdom (2015), “Professionalization
Contracts for Small Municipal Water Service Providers in India: Business Model
Development,? Final Report prepared for the World Bank, June.
Estache, A. And C. Philippe (2012), “The Impact of Private Participation on the
Performance of Infrastructure in Developing Countries: Summary of the academic
evidence,? IFC Economics Notes, No. 2, April.
Fonseca, C., R. Franceys, C. Bachelor, P. McIntyre, A. Klutse, K. Komives, P.
Moriarty, A. Naafs, K. Nyarko, C. Pezon, A. Potter, R. Reddy, and M. Snehalatha
(2011),“Life-cycle costs approach: Costing sustainable services,? WASHCost
Briefing Note 1a, The Hague, Netherlands: IRC International Water and Sanitation
Centre.
Fonseca, C.; S. Smits, K. Nyarko, A. Naafs, and R. Franceys (2013) “Financing
capital maintenance of rural water supply systems: Current practices and future
options,? WASHCost Working Paper No. 9, The Hague, the Netherlands: IRC
International Water and Sanitation Centre.
Fontein, M., J. Webster, and P. Trawick (2020), “Multiple-use water supply systems:
do the claims stack up? Evidence from Bangladesh,? Waterlines 29(1), January.
Foster, V. and T. Yepes (2006), “Is Cost Recovery a Feasible Objective for Water and
Electricity? The Latin America Experience,? Policy Research Working Paper 3943,
Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                        50
Foster, T. (2012), Private Sector Provision of rural Water Services: A Desk Study for
Water for People, Denver, CO: Water for People.
Gassner, K., A. Popov, and N. Pushak (2009), Does Private Sector Participation
Improve Performance in Electricity and Water Distribution? PPIAF Trends and
Policy Options, No. 6, Washington, DC: World Bank.
Hydroconseil and DevCon (2013), “Institutional Options for Small Town Water
Supply and Sanitation Services in Bangladesh: Options analysis of appropriate models
of WSS service delivery, Deliverable No. 3,? Report to the World Bank, May.
Ibrahim, A.K.M. (2004), “Rural Piped Water Supply in Bangladesh: Myth or Reality,?
People-Centred Approaches to Water and Environmental Sanitation, 30th WEDC
International Conference, Vientiane, Lao PDR.
Kamruzzaman, A.K.M., I. Said, O. Osman, M. Hasmori, and E. Hossain (2012),
“Water Business – Public Private Partnership in rural Bangladesh,? Proceedings of the
3rd International Conference on Business and Economic Research, Bandung,
Indonesia, 12 March.
Kleemeier, E (2010), Private operators and rural water supplies: A desk review of
experience. World Bank Water Papers. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Kumar, G., I. Lieberman, and Y. Mumssen (2010), “Access to Finance in Output-
Based Aid,? OBA Working paper Series, Paper No. 11, October.
Marin, P. (2009), Public-Private Partnerships for Urban Water Utilities: A Review of
Experiences in Developing Countries, PPIAF Trends and Policy Options, No. 8,
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Moriarty, P., S. Smits, J. Butterworth, and R. Franceys (2013), “Trends in rural water
supply: Towards a service delivery approach,? Water Alternatives 6(3): 329-349.
RWSN (Rural Water Supply Network) (2010), “Myths of the rural water supply
sector,? Perspectives Paper No. 4, RWSN Executive Steering Committee, St. Gallen:
RWSN.
SDF (Social Development Foundation) (2014), “Rural Piped Water Pilot Project,?
Presentation to the World Bank, 25 March.
Sirtaine, S., M.E. Pinglo, J.L. Guasch, and V. Foster (2005), How Profitable are
Infrastructure Concessions in Latin America? Empirical Evidence and Regulatory
Implications, PPIAF Trends and Policy Options, No. 2, Washington, DC: World
Bank.
Sy, J., R. Warner, and J. Jamieson (2014), Tapping the Markets: opportunities for
Domestic Investments in Water and Sanitation for the Poor, Directions in
Development, Private Sector Development, Washington, DC: World Bank.
Trémolet, S., M. Scatasta, and P. Borkey (2010), “Innovative Financing mechanisms
for the Water Sector,? Report of the Working Party on global and Structural Policies,
Environment Policy committee, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), February.
Unb (2008), “$5m Danish help for rural water schemes,? The Daily Star, July 3.
                                         51
World Bank (2003), Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Credit in the Amount
of SDR 13.5 Million (US$18.24 Million Equivalent) to the People's Republic of
Bangladesh for a Social Investment Program Project, Washington, DC: World Bank.
__________ (2004), Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Grant in the Amount
of SDR 27.6 Million (US$40.0 Million Equivalent) to the People's Republic of
Bangladesh for a Water Supply Program Project, Washington, DC: World Bank.
__________ (2007), Implementation Completion and Results Report (IDA-31240
SWTZ-21082) on a Credit in the Amount of SDR 24.2 Million (US$44.4 Million
Equivalent) to Bangladesh for Arsenic Mitigation Water Supply, Washington, DC:
World Bank.
__________ (2011a), Implementation Completion and Results Report (IDA-H1010)
on a Grant in the Amount of SDR 27.6 Million (US$ 40.0 Million Equivalent)
Subsequently Reduced After Restructuring to the Amount of SDR 11.8 Million (US$
18.6 Million Equivalent) to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for a Water Supply
Program Project, Washington, DC: World Bank.
__________ (2011b), Implementation Completion and Results Report (Cr. 3740) on a
Credit in the Amount of SDR 13.5 Million (US$18.4 Million Equivalent) to the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh for a Social Investment Program Project,
Washington, DC: World Bank.
__________ (2012), Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Credit in the Amount
of SDR 48.4 Million (US$75 Million Equivalent) to the People’s Republic Of
Bangladesh for the Bangladesh Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project,
Washington, DC: World Bank.
WSP (Water and Sanitation Program) (2010), “Learnings from Bangladesh:
Experience in Private Provision of Rural Piped Water,? Field Note, December,
Washington, DC: World Bank.
__________ (2015), “Monitoring Report on 21 Rural Piped Water Schemes under
Bangladesh Water Supply and Program Project (BWSPP),? Bangladesh SSDPSP –
Water Project, Washington, DC: World Bank.
WHO (World Health Organization) (2002), “Arsenic – Mass poisoning on an
unprecedented Scale,? accessed at www.who.int/features/archives/feature206/en/#




                                       52
Interviews
Government of Bangladesh
  Local Government Division (Joint Secretary – Water)
    Akram Al Hossain, Dhaka, arch 25, 2015
  Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE)
    Kazi Abdul Noor, Dhaka, March 30, 2015
    Engr. A Kaium, Dhaka, March 30, 2015
  Public Private Partnership (PPP) Office
    Syed Afsor H Uddin, Dhaka, March 24, 2015

DevConsultants Ltd.
Tanveer Ahsan, Dhaka, March 22, 2015

Water Tech Ltd.
Jail D Ahsan, Dhaka, March 22, 2015

Hilful Fuzul
Rafiqul Islam, Dhaka, March 24, 2015

Social Development Foundation
MIM Zulfiqar, Dhaka, March 25, 2015
AZM Sakhawat Hossain, Dhaka, March 25, 2015

Rural Development Academy (RDA)
MA Matin, Dhaka, March 25, 2015

Hysawa Fund
Enamul Kabir, Dhaka, March 24, 2015

BRAC
Milan Kanti Barua, Dhaka, March 22, 2015
Md Akramul Islam, March 22, 2015

World Bank
Abdul Motaleb, Dhaka, March 18, 2015
Arif Ahamed, Dhaka, March 18, 2015
Waliul Islam, Dhaka, March 18, 2015
Zahed Khan, Dhaka, March 19, 2015
AKM Abdullah, Dhaka, March 19, 2015
Karin Erika Kemper, phone interview, April 22, 2015.
Khawaga Minnatullah, phone interview, May 12, 2015.
Fook Chuan Eng, Washington DC, May 18, 2015




                                       53
