                The Local Governance Performance Index
                                                   (LGPI)1




What is the Local Governance Performance Index (LGPI)?

The Local Governance Performance Index (LGPI) provides a new approach to the
measurement, analysis and improvement of local governances. The LGPI is a tool that
aims to help countries collect, assess, and benchmark detailed information around issues
of local and public sector performance and service delivery to citizens and businesses. It
is also a methodology, using heavily clustered surveys to uncover important local-level
variation in governance and service provision. This information aids policymakers and
development specialists in designing specific action plans, provides an initial benchmark
from which to measure of progress, and empowers citizens’ and businesses’ voices to
influence government efforts on improving quality and access of public service delivery.

The tool uses household surveys that gather micro-level data from multiple communities,
including data on experience, perception and satisfaction regarding cross-cutting
governance issues. Specifically, citizen household surveys that include batteries for
health, education, security, voice and participation, and other metrics of governance have
been developed as the core of the LGPI instrument. The specificity of the information
and its focus on experiences rather than simply perceptions permit an in-depth assessment
of institutional quality and capacity, providing a detailed map of institutional weaknesses
and strengths from the citizens’ perspective. Such information can be combined with
data gathered from civil servants and other providers, to provide a full picture of
governance. Such information helps identify specific priority areas for reform,
facilitating the policy design and policy implementation improvements at the country and
local level (Recanatini 2011).


1
   The LGPI summary document was prepared by Ellen Lust, University of Gothenburg; Pierre Landry,
New York University – Shanghai; Dhafer Malouche, University of Carthage and Jumana Alaref, World
Bank. The LGPI modules described here are part of the comprehensive Local Governance Performance
Index that has been developed by a team comprised of Ellen Lust, Pierre Landry, Lindsay Benstead, of
Portland State University, and Dhafer Malouche. As part of the activities of the Program on Governance
and Local Development (GLD) at Yale University, directed by Ellen Lust and financed by the Moulay
Hicham Foundation, the Carnegie Foundation, and Yale University, the team designed the instrument,
refined it and implemented a pilot survey in Tunisia.
    This presentation of the LGPI modules has been developed as a product of the Public Service Delivery
Global Solutions Group. Gregory Kisunko, Kimberly Johns, Asmeen Khan, and Francesca Racanatini
(World Bank) and Jairo Acuna-Alfaro provided valuable comments. Hana Brixi has led the task at the
World Bank.

                                                                                                      1
What are the Objectives of the LGPI?

By assessing the performance of public administration at the local level, the LGPI
provides critical feedback to help government officials, political parties, civil society
actors, the public and the international development community pinpoint specific
geographical areas and substantive areas where policy reform is needed. The performance
of public administration is multi-dimensional, including the quality of service provision,
equal access to citizens, and rationalization of procedures in obtaining services. We
conceptualize performance from a citizen’s perspective, with an eye on the availability
and quality of services as they are actually delivered to the respondents’ respective
communities. By providing a mechanism for monitoring and evaluating local governance,
based on citizens’ experiences and perceptions, the LGPI can support governments in
addressing social, political, and economic challenges facing their country or region. In
addition, the data collected provides a basis for effective outreach and dissemination of
results to local and central governments, citizens, media, and outreach agencies. By
making such information available, the LGPI encourages evidence-based advocacy and
policymaking, and also strengthens citizen-state engagement.

Indeed, employment of the LGPI can help strengthen local skills and foster a culture of
evidence-based reform and implementation. The LGPI implementation in conjunction
with local partners builds their skills in data collection, analysis and dissemination. It can
also promote policy reform and application that is built upon transparent data collection
procedures, replicable analysis and open, evidence-based policy debate.


What Tools Informed the LGPI?

The LGPI draws upon and extends a tradition of measuring governance and service
delivery. Like the Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC) diagnostic studies and
Service Delivery Indicators (SDI) implemented at the World Bank, the Public
Administration Performance Index (PAPI) implemented in Viet Nam by the UNDP, and
Citizen Scorecards, it aims to provide organized and specific evidence that allows
citizens, policymakers and development specialists to assess and address existing
problems in governance and service delivery.

The LGPI tool builds on the Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC) country diagnostic
surveys that have been implemented and assessed worldwide. GAC surveys have been
used as a diagnostic tool that first aimed at unbundling corruption and governance
challenges existing at various levels (administrative, state capture, bidding, theft of public


                                                                                            2
resources, etc.) and at identifying weak and strong institutions to determine the source of
the problem. The approach further aimed at assessing the costs of corruption and poor
governance to different stakeholders, with the objective of identifying concrete and
measurable ways to reduce those costs through targeted reforms. GAC surveys have been
adapted to sector-specific governance assessments and implemented in fifteen countries
in South Asia, Africa, and Latin America and the Caribbean regions, at the request of and
in collaboration with multiple local stakeholders. (See the Governance and Anti-
Corruption Diagnostics website for more information)

The Public Administration Performance Index (PAPI), which was first implemented in
Viet Nam, also inspired development of the LGPI. PAPI used experiences with such
issues as corruption, participation, transparency and service delivery to develop
governance indices aggregated at the provincial level. The index has proven remarkably
useful in Viet Nam. Results have spurred provincial officials to request assistance in
developing action plans that help improve performance and researchers have observed a
marked improvement in public service provision over time. PAPI aids citizens by giving
them information to hold officials accountable, providing the information necessary to
target reforms and creating incentives for government agencies to improve performance.
(See the PAPI website for more information.)


Why Focus on the Local Level?

The LGPI is based on the premise that local governance matters, and that the drivers that
explain local level variation may differ from those that operate at higher levels. The tool
aims to uncover this, and thus differs from extant tools by providing information that is
representative at the appropriate local level. Even in highly centralized systems, the
nature and quality of governance and service provision varies significantly at the local
level. Some communities and local leaders find ways to overcome resource deficits,
assure transparency and accountability, and provide better services than other
communities do. Moreover, decentralization efforts are aimed at extending local rights
and responsibilities. Finally, we recognize that communities do not perform equally well
in all areas of governance and services provision; for instance, they may provide adequate
health services while their schools suffer, while the converse may be true elsewhere.

Extant tools that examine governance and service provision tend to be representative at
the national level, and are thus unable to detect variation at the subnational level and
across different agencies. Simply put, they suffer from aggregation bias. Aggregate
outcomes at the governorate or country level often fail to detect significant differences at
the local or community level. Such aggregation also leads to erroneous conclusions,


                                                                                          3
making inferences about local level processes by examining outcomes at these higher
levels—the ecological fallacy. Instead, we need a tool that can measure the variation
both within and across local communities if we are to pinpoint needs, determine drivers
of positive outcomes, design relevant programming, and assess outcomes. The LGPI is
designed to provide such information.


What are the Other Key Characteristics of the LGPI?

The LGPI has a number of other key features:

First, the LGPI provides a comprehensive picture of governance and service delivery
across sectors and criteria, giving clearer insight to their interconnectivity. For instance, it
is well-recognized that health and security can affect school performance; unhealthy
children or those unable to travel safely to and from school are likely perform more
poorly than those who enjoy quality health care and public safety. Examining citizens’
experiences across sectors provides a better understanding of these linkages and the
complex root causes of poor performance. Thus, the LGPI provides a tool for
programming based on service delivery sectors that both advances and complements
information collected with the use of sector-specific tools (e.g., SDI, citizen scorecards).

Second, the LGPI emphasizes citizens’ experiences over their satisfaction. Citizen
satisfaction is affected by two factors: citizens’ expectations and their experiences. The
LGPI focuses on citizens’ experiences, thus providing a better understanding of how
access to services, service quality and governance differs across localities and
demographic groups. Some GAC tools focus on experience as well; thus, it is not unique
in this regard. However, this is an important difference from citizen scorecards, which
generally emphasize satisfaction.

Third, the LGPI is designed to be scientifically implemented and to include experiences
of both users and non-users of services. It is thus distinguished from citizen scorecards,
SDI and many GAC tools, which focus on experiences of users through such instruments
as student and parent surveys, or patient exit interviews. The experience of users is
important, but it is equally important to understand the experiences and decisions of those
who turn elsewhere for services.

Fourth, the LGPI provides a better understanding of how citizens participate in service
delivery and governance. Despite the current concern with participatory planning and
implementation, the existing tools tend to limit our understanding of citizen engagement.
The SDI, for example, focuses on the role of parents in parent-teacher organizations and


                                                                                              4
contact with the school, but it does little to inform us about the ways parents seek help
when their children face problems, to whom they turn to for assistance, and the extent to
which they are successful. By asking the problems that citizens often face with regard to
education, health, security and other issues, and how they seek to solve these problems,
the LGPI draws a better picture of citizen participation and provides insights into entry
points for improving participation and accountability.

Fifth, the LGPI allows us to examine the role of state and non-state institutions and actors
in service delivery and governance. Often, citizens turn to non-state actors to help access
public services, enhance community security, and engage in activities that improve
community governance and services. Communities also differ significantly in their social
composition, including the existence of formal organizations (e.g., trade unions, CSOs,
political parties) and the extent and nature of social norms and institutions. It is thus
important to look beyond formal institutional arrangements and actors to understand
when communities successfully govern themselves and manage to meet their needs.


What Are the Main Modules of the LGPI?

The LGPI is divided into 6 main modules: 1) Education, 2) Health, 3) Physical Security
and Dispute Resolution, 4) Social Assistance and Welfare, 5) Citizen-State Linkages and
Corruption, and 6) Social Composition and Culture. Each module, provided in Annex 1,
includes batteries of questions that are designed to tap into key issues. These can be
inserted into existing surveys, using the additional batteries on demographics and other
issues in the analysis. However, the survey is also designed to allow us to combine
responses to questions across the batteries in order to form indices that tap into
governance dimensions (e.g. transparency, participation, and accountability). Using the
full complement of modules, combined with demographic questions, is an optimal
because it provides a comprehensive view of local level governance and service
provision.

Education. The education module allows us to tap into school attendance and drop out
rates, education quality, and school governance. For each child under the age of 17,
parents are asked if the child attends school and the nature of the school attended (e.g.,
public vs. private, religious vs. non-religious). Questions target the quality of
infrastructure, (e.g., well-built schools, clean bathrooms), service delivery process (e.g.
crowded classrooms, teacher absenteeism, favoritism), and governance (e.g., use of
bribes, informal payments, existence of parent-teacher organizations). It also includes
batteries of questions on how parents seek assistance for school fees and to solve



                                                                                          5
problems with their child’s education, allowing us to determine the extent to which they
turn to state actors or instead seek assistance from non-state actors or informal channels.

Health. The health module measures self-reported physical and mental health and the
ability to access health care (e.g., unmet medical needs, insurance). It also focuses on
respondents’ experience with doctors and local clinics, both public and private. It
provides assessments of the quality of the health infrastructure, (e.g., clean bathrooms),
service delivery process (e.g. patients treated with respect, presence of doctor, posted
fees, doctor presence) and governance (e.g., use of bribes, informal payments, referrals to
private clinics), satisfaction (e.g., with cost, infrastructure, and treatment). It asks whom
respondents turn to for help with medical problems (e.g., pharmacist, local healer, doctor,
clinic) and inquires about problems in accessing or financing care. Finally, it taps into
expectations about local medical facilities, including doctor presence at the local public
clinic and care at various medical providers (e.g., local hospital, private clinic, public
clinic).

Physical Security and Dispute Resolution. The module on physical security and dispute
resolution gauges individuals’ experience with, and perception of, crime and violence. It
examines personal experiences with crime and civil disputes and, for each victim,
determines whom they turned to for help and their level of satisfaction with the outcome.
The module also includes questions that gauge citizens’ experience and perceptions of the
police with regard to fairness, responsiveness, honesty, knowledge of the community and
effectiveness. Finally, it includes perceptions of security in a variety of places (e.g., at
home, in the neighborhood, at the local market) and awareness of crime (e.g., burglary,
physical assault, smuggling).

Social Assistance and Welfare. The module begins by assessing the utilities and basic
public services (e.g., garbage collection, water provision, electricity). It probes personal
experiences with food, shelter and clothing shortages, as well as unemployment, asking
whom they turn to for help if they experienced problems. It also measures citizens’
experience and perceptions of the availability and fair distribution of welfare assistance,
considering the extent to which they believe those in need are served, the need for
personal connections (wasta) and informal payments in obtaining assistance, and the
relative willingness of various state and non-state actors to provide assistance.

Citizen-State Linkages and Corruption. The module on citizen-state linkages is designed
to assess governance dimensions, including transparency, participation at the national and
local level, and accountability. It comprises experiential questions that examine an
individual’s participation in elections, engagement in meetings with local council
members or others to discuss needs, and experience with corruption—especially if the


                                                                                           6
person has been victimized by corrupt institutions. This module also includes perception
questions regarding the willingness of public officials to address corruption complaints
and the relative influence of citizens and other stakeholders.

Social Composition and Culture. The social composition and culture module allows us to
aggregate information on the types of groups and organizations that are influential in
local governance. It also examines the nature of social ties and the informal rules of
engagement, particularly focused on norms of obligation and the use of wasta. Wasta is
defined as the use of personal connections, usually based on friendship or blood relations,
to obtain resources or positions or, alternatively, as the person who performs this
mediating function. It can be understood as a form of corruption (e.g., nepotism) but also
reflects cultural expectations.       Examining these questions, in conjunction with
experiential questions in other batteries that examine which actors individuals turn to in
times of need, allows us to compare the relative efficacy of formal and informal
institutions.


What Key Questions Can Be Addressed by the LGPI?

The LGPI allows us to examine a range of questions about governance and service
delivery. By asking about both citizens’ experiences with and their perceptions of service
quality, corruption and other issues, we are able to determine the extent of gaps between
perception and revealed behavior. By examining a range of issues (e.g., education, health,
dispute resolution, welfare), we can identify the localities that excel in some dimension
while falling short in others, and explore how outcomes co-vary across dimensions.

With the LGPI, it is also possible to detect sources of inequality. Variation across
localities highlights geographic disparities, allowing the considerable differences in the
quality of education or health to be better understood, as demonstrated in the results of
the pilot study reported in Annex 2. The data also allow for the detection of unequal
access to services, levels of participation and other outcomes related to gender, socio-
economic status, and age. Finally, it can help us to see differences in the quality of public
or private facilities, both experienced and perceived.


How Can LGPI Modules be Adapted for Country-Specific Programming?

The LGPI modules can, and should, be adapted to country-specific considerations in two
ways. First, questions within the modules must be adapted to fit the context—use
appropriate terminology, incorporate all possible outcomes and remove inappropriate


                                                                                           7
items. Second, specific issues of interest can be incorporated into the modules. For
instance, it may be useful to introduce questions that gauge citizen knowledge of (or
engagement with) specific programs. Finally, it may be necessary to eliminate questions
that appear to be wholly irrelevant or even culturally offensive in certain country
contexts.

The questionnaire should be carefully reviewed and revised before implementation. This
should be done in collaboration with relevant officials, service providers, civil society
activists, other stakeholders and citizens. Such reviews can take place through focus
groups to examine key issues and governance problems, collecting annotated comments
on the instrument from relevant stakeholders or holding workshops to review the
questionnaire. Vignettes can also be used to help calibrate responses across countries. In
each case, implementing careful pre-testing can also provide an important check on the
relevance and applicability of different batteries.

Amendments are possible and often necessary, but they should also be made sparingly.
The LGPI can be used both to detect subnational variation and, eventually, to make
comparisons across countries. Both comparisons can be useful for government officials,
civil society leaders, and citizens. All stakeholders should thus be keenly aware of the
fact that even small changes in question wording can make comparisons difficult. They
should adapt the module by making necessary changes, but resist making less critical
ones.


How Can the LGPI be Supplemented or Extended by Other Tools?

The LGPI tool, which is a citizen-based approach, can be fielded in conjunction with
other instruments. Doing so permits a multi-pronged approach to programming and
analysis that can allow for systematic and rigorous measurements of governance and
service delivery. It also allows for triangulation of responses to enhance the analysis of
existing problems and measurement of programming outcomes.

Sector-specific facility-level instruments may be particularly useful in this regard. The
Service Delivery Indicators (SDI), developed by the World Bank and adopted mainly in
Africa, provide one potential option whereby the quality and performance of health and
education services are assessed from users’ and providers’ perspectives against three key
indicators: (i) providers’ efforts; (ii) providers’ abilities; and (iii) availability of resources,
by administering facility surveys.




                                                                                                 8
Additionally, facility-level surveys developed in the health sector as part of the World
Bank MDTF in governance and service delivery engagement in Jordan may prove
complementary with the LGPI. The MDTF instruments extend beyond the SDI surveys
as they examine linkages between service delivery outcomes (as measured by provider
effort) and governance and accountability mechanisms at the local levels, both internal
(in-facility monitoring and incentive systems) and external (citizen engagement). The
MDTF instruments include (i) key informant interviews with directors of health
directorates; (ii) Chief Medical Officers’ (CMOs) interviews; (iii) provider surveys; (iv)
patient exit interviews; and (v) surveys with chairs of community health committees at
the local level. The MDTF instruments have been developed and are to be fielded early
August 2015.

In addition to facility-level surveys, the LGPI could be further supplemented with
targeted municipal and public official surveys. These surveys would further probe local
governance challenges, identified in the citizen household survey, that are possibly
associated with citizens’ trust and satisfaction levels with services and service delivery
outcomes. In specific, such surveys could reveal crucial information on the structure of
incentives and actual degree of enforcement within public agencies, the existence and use
of accountability mechanisms, the quality of rules and procedures, the degree of
transparency of budget and employment decisions, and the overall quality of
management. In this regard, a core governance module on municipalities has been
developed and pre-tested in Tunisia (funded by the program on Governance and Local
Development at Yale University) and may be fielded in conjunction with the LGPI (with
a complementary sampling strategy to be identified).

The Local Governance Institutions Comparative Assessment (LoGICA) framework is
another complementary tool to consider as it analyzes local and intergovernmental
systems, processes, and institutions that contribute to effective local governance and
service delivery performance, by examining five main domains: (i) the assignment of
functional responsibilities; (ii) the existence of local political space and effective local
political systems; (iii) the degree of local control over the administration of local
services; (iv) local fiscal autonomy and local financial management; and (v) participatory
and responsive local service delivery mechanisms. While the LoGICA framework
overlaps with the LGPI tool in that the latter touches on some of the mentioned elements,
if both tools are utilized together in a targeted manner their distinct features and insights
may prove complementary. For example, the LGPI adopts sector-specific modules with
respect to local governance and service delivery from the perspective of citizens’
experiences, while the LoGICA framework provides an assessment of the overall local
system governing service delivery. In doing so, the LoGICA employs a couple of
instruments: (1) LoGICA survey that captures information about the organizational


                                                                                           9
governance structure in the public sector; (2) LoGICA score card that examines the five
aforementioned domains on the basis of 40 developed assessment individual indicators
for each domain2, which in turn are aggregated into an index; and (3) LoGICA report that
in turn provides a narrative assessment of the local governance system based on the
indicator-led analysis stemming from the scorecard.

Finally, the LGPI may benefit greatly from the Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC)
diagnostic tools that also use experience-based (vs. ‘opinions’) and employ multi-
pronged surveys of users of public services/households, business people and public
officials, which as previously mentioned permits triangulation of the responses. The GAC
diagnostic tools have been adapted to specific sector (health, education, transport etc.)
and thematic areas (gender, human rights, security, violence, etc.) depending on policy
interest. The approach has been piloted and fielded in over fifteen countries in Latin
America, Africa, and South Asia regions. The GAC greatly complements the design of
the LGPI, particularly with respect to its emphasis on participatory approach in data
collection, analysis, and dissemination to enhance capacity and ownership, in addition to
obtaining an initial benchmark of governance and public sector performance at the local
level, allowing for monitoring progress on a regular basis, and institutionalizing the tool
in projects and country operations. It my offer several valuable complementary tools as
an addition the LGPI household survey for consideration, such as public official surveys
and business surveys.


What Operations can Benefit from the LGPI?

The LGPI tool is an essential tool in generating evidence-based, local level data that
could be incorporated in upcoming and future World Bank operations to further inform
their designs, provide an initial benchmark for measuring progress, revise specific action
plans, and involve stakeholders in meaningful dialogue around reform options. The LGPI
can be implemented at various levels (e.g., the municipality, village, or neighborhood
level). Lower level analyses provide greater insight into how community dynamics
impact governance and outcomes, but they increase the costs of implementation.
Nevertheless, the results of the Tunisia LGPI pilot reveal considerable variation at the
municipal level within governorates, highlighting the importance of examining lower
level units. As previously mentioned, the tool is focused on six modules that measure
local governance and service delivery performance. We detail the ways in which the
LGPI tool could be useful with respect to each program in the following discussion:

2
 The 40 assessment indicators are focused on assessing the basic performance of the local governance
system based on conceptual norms of effective localization and good local governance as well as existing
good international practices. The scores of the individual indicators for each of the five dimensions are
aggregated into an overall score that forms an index ranging from zero points to a maximum of 50 points.

                                                                                                        10
Participation and Accountability at the Local Level. The LGPI can provide citizens with
information about the quality of governance and service provision at the local level,
allowing them to monitor providers and officials and to voice their concerns. The tool
also measures users’ behavior and modes of engagement with state and non-state actors
when seeking public services. It helps gauge state responsiveness, citizen satisfaction and
trust, and highlights accountability gaps between citizens and providers. In this regard,
household surveys gather data on the experience that citizens have with inappropriate
procedures and behavior, the presence of accessible accountability mechanisms (if any)
and any informal and non-state mechanisms they rely on for receiving services.

The LGPI tool measures participation at the local level through four main sub-
dimensions: (1) civic knowledge, which examines citizens’ knowledge of their electoral
rights and awareness of institutions that safeguard political and social participation at the
grass-roots level; (2) opportunities for service delivery participation, which assesses
citizens’ opportunities to participate in the delivery process of public services in various
sectors through exercising their voice and choice rights; (3) quality of elections, including
citizen ability to voice demands and hold policymakers accountable; and (4) voluntary
contributions, which investigates ‘demand-side accountability’ in citizens’ willingness
and capacity to participate in planning and to oversee and contribute to local development
projects.

Control of Corruption and Quality of Institutions. The LGPI provides a diagnostic tool
for assessing the extent of corruption experienced by service users. By pinpointing
experiences with corruption at the local level and identifying variations across geographic
regions, service-provision sectors, or demographic groups, the LGPI helps measure the
scope of country corruption. This approach also allows for the identification of weak and
strong local institutions, and in doing so, deepens our understanding of the link between
institutional factors and corruption. In addition, it allows for the assessment of the costs
of corruption to different stakeholders, by looking at the impact of poor governance and
corruption on their trust levels in state institutions and consequently, their modes of
engagement with the state. Finally, the approach allows for the identification of concrete
and measurable ways to reduce those costs through targeted reforms. The LGPI measures
corruption at the local level by focusing on four main aspects: (1) pervasiveness of
corruption in the public sector within local governments; (2) pervasiveness of corruption
in public service delivery; (3) willingness to fight corruption; and (4) presence and
effectiveness of anti-corruption and monitoring mechanisms.

Vertical Accountability. The assessment of voice mechanisms and participation at local
and national levels provides evidence on the strength of vertical accountability. It helps to


                                                                                          11
determine in which sectors and over what issues vertical accountability mechanisms are
more or less developed, and provides a diagnostic tool for further reform. This dimension
is measured through the inclusion of questions that gauge the levels of citizens’
interactions with local authorities and participation in politics, highlight perceptions on
degree of effectiveness of such interactions, and underline factors that may limit
governments’ and public officials’ accountability to their citizens in the
operationalization of governance functions.

Decentralization and Local Governance. Countries in MENA and elsewhere are
considering the merits of moving towards decentralized governance and granting more
autonomy and decision-making power to local authorities. In this regard, the LGPI could
be a somewhat useful tool that generates a quantifiable baseline of the current status,
which can be used to assess the new approach and measure progress, highlight any
problems and bottlenecks with implementation. In this respect, the tool utilizes questions
that probe, from citizens’ experiences, issues around financial autonomy, government
responsiveness, and the adequacy and availability of key inputs at the local level in
different sectors.

Service Delivery. The LGPI produces novel and independent information on health
services, quality of education services, levels of personal security, trust and use of local
state institutions. It also provides insights into possible correlates between governance
and service delivery by looking at incentive structures of providers and identifying weak
and strong institutions at the local level to determine the source of the problem. In many
cases, countries seek to identify concrete and measurable ways for reforms in specific
sectors. In this case, the LGPI, as a cross cutting governance tool, can be adapted to
address sector-specific challenges (for example, health and education). Additionally, the
tool sheds some light on possible sub-national variation in service delivery performance
that may allow for further testing of the relationship between governance at the local
level and service delivery outcomes.

Incentives for Service Delivery and Policy Implementation. The LGPI can provide a
bottom-up and unique perspective on the grassroots incentives that providers and
policymakers face. Combining the modules, and particularly the module on social
composition and culture with that on citizen state linkages, allows us to understand how
citizens view the obligations and responsibilities of various stakeholders, the extent to
which they use connections to obtain services, and whom they turn to for help, and whom
they view as responsible. By combining the LGPI with the GAC or other facility- and
municipal-level studies that gauge the perspectives of providers and civil servants, we
can trace the incentive structure and weigh their relative impact.



                                                                                         12
How Can Results be Disseminated to Enhance the Impact of the LGPI?

The LGPI tool provides a basis for effective outreach and dissemination of results. As
previously noted, the tool allows for a participatory approach in the design, validation,
and implementation phase as well as data collection and analysis. As evidenced by
previous GAC diagnostic surveys, “if the assessment process is not owned by a broad
range of stakeholders, it will not be sustained over time nor will its findings feed back
into the policymaking process” (Recanatini 2011). With the aim of empowering
governments to develop their own reform strategies based on a more objective and micro-
level data, it is also equally important that the analysis and results for the LGPI are
disseminated jointly with local stakeholders and policy makers to ensure local ownership
and promote long-term, sustainable partnerships between civil society and the
government.

Joint collaboration with local partners in disseminating findings to stakeholders and the
public may include partnering with civil society organizations (CSOs) in the development
of websites and outreach strategies to media to promote awareness and use of the data.
Workshops, focus group discussions, and a series of policy dialogues with local and
central officials, national and foreign agencies can also promote dialogue that helps
accurately identify key issues and underlying causes of local weaknesses, and consider
potential solutions to remedy them. Such efforts should engage policymakers, local non-
governmental actors, and other citizens.

Indeed, the PAPI, implemented in Viet Nam, provides a useful model in this regard. The
PAPI was undertaken in partnership between the UNDP and a local civil society
organization. Importantly, the organization was well respected, committed to doing good
work and also had a good relationship with the government. This gave it the inclination
to engage constructively with methodologists on the team, the determination to use
lessons learned and build capacity over time, and the latitude to undertake the study.
Working with the civil society organization, and also engaging other stakeholders in the
development of the survey instrument, helped to achieve local ownership. Additionally,
the PAPI was disseminated in meetings with the government and local officials, but also
through an interactive website that allowed citizens, local civil society organizations, and
others to access reports, review the methodology and instruments, and undertake simple
data manipulation. (See PAPI.vn and Annex 3 for examples of how data was presented
on their website.) The dissemination was furthered as well by small grants provided to
local and international researchers, who used the data and prepared working papers



                                                                                         13
addressing critical national issues. These papers formed the basis of workshops and
discussions, sometimes sparking intense debate.

There is also scope for the LGPI results to be institutionalized and mainstreamed by the
various national and sub-national government institutions as part of their strategy and
operations. This should be done through an inclusive approach with all relevant actors.
In Tunisia, the government, in collaboration with various CSOs, led various efforts
following the revolution to institutionalize participatory monitoring approaches. Options
for collaboration with many relevant agencies could be leveraged in disseminating the
LGPI findings and in incorporating the tool as part of their operations that can further
build on existing efforts to improve public service delivery and enhance citizen
engagement. Potential government counterparts may include the National Controllers
Body for Public Services (Contrôle Général des Services Publics, CGSP) and the Prime
Ministry’s Department of Public Administration Reforms (Direction Générale de la
Reforme Administrative, DGRA) that jointly implemented a number of reforms and
participatory monitoring. Examples include (i) the national score card ("baromètre de
qualité et de gouvernance des services publics") that sought public feedback on over ten
public services after which results were published online; (ii) the introduction of
participatory audits as part of the mandate of the CGSP, to be overseen by a joint
government-civil society coordinating committee; (iii) the adoption of international
standards for participatory monitoring; (iv) the stipulation that all evaluations be
published for reinforcing access to information and accountability; and (v) the clear
emphasis on neutrality, objectivity and transparency of the CGSP’s mission (World
Bank, forthcoming).

A similar government-led approach was also utilized in disseminating the findings of
PAPI in Vietnam. The central dissemination strategy included partnering with Ho Chi
Minh National Academy of Politics and Public Administration in Hanoi, the Community
Part and government-run political school that trained politicians, senior party members,
and government officials, in an attempt at leveraging credibility and ownership of
research results. Using PAPI results, the academy researchers in turn produced action-
based research to support provinces with policy recommendations and drafting action
plans. The academy also worked more closely with provinces to issue formal action plans
to improve their PAPI scores. The academy researchers further owned the results by
conducting case studies that examined in depth why provinces with similar levels of
economic development and other indicators received different PAPI scores. Academy
researchers afterwards presented their findings to the Provincial People’s Committees
(Innovation for Successful Societies Case Study, 2014).




                                                                                      14
If results are disseminated continually and the survey implemented on a regular basis, the
LGPI can help inculcate a public culture of demand for good governance and evidence-
based policymaking. Once again, the PAPI provides insights. The PAPI has been
implemented on an annual basis, in each of the country’s 62 provinces, and the res ults
have become increasingly anticipated. In addition, short insights from the results are
disseminated through Facebook and other social media on a weekly basis. By providing a
short, provocative graph and insight, the PAPI helps to keep the issues of governance in
the forefront of public debate.

One point of caution to consider is the degree to which the details of the design and the
construction of indicators should be shared publicly in recurrent studies. Repeated
surveys implemented in the same localities over-time not only lead to survey-fatigue
among citizens (possibly resulting in non-response bias), but they can also unwittingly
open up opportunities for manipulation when local authorities are eager to rank-higher
than then peer ‘competitors’. If localities (e.g., municipalities, provinces) become aware
of the specific survey sites, they can strategically deploy resources to potential survey
respondents at the expense of non-sampled areas, thus further exacerbating the very
inequalities that we seek to measure and reduce. Authoritarian governments may even
attempt to ‘mobilize’ citizens in the days preceding the arrival of the survey team in order
to minimize the risk that embarrassing findings will travel up the bureaucratic ladder
when the data is analyzed. Researchers must also consider the ethical issues regarding the
possible tradeoff between the degree of transparency required in the dissemination
exercise and the promises made to respondents about the strict anonymity of their
answers. For those reasons, we recommend never to reveal information about the last
level of clustering in any design, which thus protects both the households and the
immediate communities in which they live from possible pressure or even retaliation.

Such efforts require extensive attention by local actors and organizations, but they are
critical to capitalize fully on the tool’s potential. This can help to establish greater
ownership, enhance local capacity, spread awareness of weak governance and service
delivery performance, and increase knowledge for policy and research.


How Much Does it Cost to Implement the LGPI?

The cost of implementing the LGPI depends on a number of factors.

One important consideration is whether the LGPI modules are implemented
independently or embedded in on-going survey projects. Embedding the modules in a
survey is less costly, but it also should be considered carefully. For the LGPI to be


                                                                                         15
effective, it must be implemented in a sampling design that is representative at the local
level. Embedding modules in a survey designed to be representative only at the national
level will yield little benefit.

A second consideration is the sample size of the survey. The sample size depends on the
number sampled in each locality, and the number of localities sampled, as well as the
overall structure of local administration in a given country, partculualy the number of
levels of local government as well as average unit size at each level. The survey would
be implemented ideally with local samples of at least 500 respondents, although samples
of even 200 respondents may be acceptable. (The problems are a loss of statistical power
and less ability to examine sub-population variations at the local level.) The number of
localities to be sampled also depends to some extent on the size of the country. Even in
very large countries, however, it may be useful to implement the LGPI, targeting
regions/provinces of specific interest.

Another consideration is the cost of survey implementation. This also varies significantly
depending on the country. High-income countries and those that require heavy security
(e.g., Libya, Afghanistan) are more expensive than lower income and less fragile
countries.

The costs will also vary depending on the extent and nature of dissemination. Similarly,
supporting local NGO engagement in weekly dissemination requires additional funding,
but it also expands the influence of the project. Establishing an interactive website can
increase the impact of the LGPI significantly although it is also costly at the outset.
Some of these costs may be reduced through cooperative or creative solutions. For
instance, forming a consortium or joint effort to disseminate results from several
countries on a single platform may reduce some of the costs of the website and
dissemination.

Finally, the costs decrease as the LGPI becomes institutionalized. The initial fielding
incurs start-up costs in adapting the instrument, developing sampling frames, and piloting
the survey, and sometimes nurturing local partner organizations in the science and
workflow of survey research.           Subsequent implementation reduces these costs
considerably. Furthermore, by working with local actors and building capacity, costs
can be reduced over time as they assume responsibility for implementation. A valuable
lesson learned from the PAPI that was fielded in Viet Nam is value of regularized
implementation of the tool. It not only helped to inculcate a culture of data-driven
analysis and programming, but also built capacity that reduced costs of sustaining the
effort.



                                                                                       16
Initial implementation requires resources. As a point of comparison, a full study in
Tunisia’s 24 governorates, with 3 municipalities per governorate and a sample of 200
respondents per municipality, would cost approximately $500,000 USD for preparation,
training and implementation, analysis and dissemination. (This would be similar to the
pilot discussed in Annex 2, but include 24 governorates and 72 municipalities.)

Yet, it can yield enormous benefits. The LGPI can play an important role in determining
needs and assessing progress at the local level. It can also help answer fundamental
questions about governance and service delivery. Today, decentralization is heavily
favored but little is known about the variation in and drivers of local governance; the
impact of governance on service provision is recognized, but studies of governance often
limited to within facility factors; and the strength of non-state actors is valued but we do
not yet grasp how and when citizens engage these actors. The LGPI can help answer
such questions.




                                                                                         17
       ANNEX 1: SURVEY MODULES



       1    EDUCATION


     Now I would like to ask you some specific questions about education:
101. What is your highest level of education?
1. No formal             2. Primary 3. Secondary 4. Higher              96. DK              97. RA
education                School        School        education

102.       Are there any children 17 years or under living in this household?
1. Yes                           2. No                     96. DK                  97. RA

“Children living here” includes all children 17 years and under who normally (or on a regular basis) sleep
in this housing unit. Does not need to be the children of the respondent. For example, this can be a cousin
or grandchildren if they normally sleep in this household.
103. How many children live in your household?

     The following was asked for every child separately.
104.     Is this child a boy or girl?            1. Boy                             2. Girl
105.     How old is he/she?                      |___| years
106.     Does this child attend school?          1. Yes         2. No               97. RA
107.     Is this school located in this 1. Yes 2. No 96. DK                         97. RA
         municipality?
108.     Is this school public or private?            1. Public  2. Private 3. Private religious     97. RA
109.     Which of the following are reasons he/she attends this school? [Multiple answers]
a. Close to home             b. No school choice                c. Higher quality teaching
d. Low cost school           e. School has specific programs    f. Only school available
other. Other (specify)



110.1.   In the last year, have you experienced a problem        1. Yes    2. No (skip   97. RA (skip to 111)
         with this child’s education at this school (such as               to 111)
         s/he was failing a class, being expelled, etc.)?
110.2. [If yes], did you seek help?                                   2. No (skip 97. RA (skip to 111)
                                                                 1. Yes
                                                                      to 111)
110.3. [If yes], who assisted you and your family? [Interviewer: Check all that apply – and follow-up “did
anyone else assist you?”]
a. Other INGOs/ Local CSOs               b. Directorate of education      c. Teacher
d. Other                                 e. Government official           f. Principal
g. Refuse to answer                      h. Business person               j. Friend or family member
k. Mayor                                 m. Imam                          n. Local council member
p. Religious organization
110.4. (If yes) Did you have to make an informal payment to 1. Yes    2. No          97. RA
solve a problem at this school?

                                                                                                        18
111.1.     Did    you      get 1. Yes                       2. No          96. DK          97. RA
government assistance to
pay     for    this    child’s
education in the last year?
111.2. Did you get non- 1. Yes                              2. No (skip 96.       Don’t 97.       Refuse     to
government assistance to                                    to 112)        know            answer (skip to 112)
pay     for    this    child’s
education in the last year?
111.3. [If yes], who assisted you and your family? [Interviewer: Check all that apply – and follow-up “did
anyone else assist you?”] [Check all that apply]
a. Principal                           b. Don’t know                              c. Government official
d. Friend or family member             e. Women’s organization                    f. Directorate of education
g. Other                               h. Refused to answer                       i. Teacher
j. Other INGOs / Local CSOs            k. Member of parliament
112.1. Did your child not attend school any day last week 1. Yes 2. No         96. DK (skip to 97. RA (skip
although it was in session?                                                    113)               to 113)
112.2. If child missed one or more days], what are the main reasons they did not attend school?
[Interviewer: Circle all that apply] (Required probe: Are there any other reasons?)
a. The child had to work                    b. It was too hard to get to school c. Need to stay at home to
                                            given weather, distance, etc.         help with house chores
d. The child had problems with the          e. The child had problems with f. The child was sick
teacher or principal at school              other students at school
g. The child doesn’t like school            h. The child was expelled or i. Other (mention)
                                            suspended
96. DK                                      97. RA

113. I’m going to read to you a series of statements about the school that this child attends. Please tell me if
it is true or not.
                                                                   1.            2.             96.        97.
                                                                   True          Not true       DK         RA
a. There are clean toilets                                              □             □          □          □
b. The school has two or more shifts                                    □             □          □          □
c. School is well-built                                                 □             □          □          □
d. Teachers are frequently absent                                       □             □          □          □
e. Classrooms have more than 40 students                                □             □          □          □
f. Boys are safe going to/from school                                   □             □          □          □
g. Girls are safe going to/from school                                  □             □          □          □
j. The school has a Parent-teacher association                          □             □          □          □
k. Teachers favor in performance evaluations students who               □             □          □          □
attend after-school study sessions

114. Do you do any of the following for a child living here     1. Yes   2. No     96. DK            97. RA
[If no children living here, check no]:
a. Helping a child with homework                                  □        □          □                 □
b. Purchasing school supplies for a child                         □        □          □                 □
c. Paying for private lessons                                     □        □          □                 □



                                                                                                        19
g. Giving informal payments to teachers or principals at a         □      □           □              □
child’s school



       2    HEALTH

       Self-rated general health:
201.      In general, how would you rate your overall health–very good, good, fair, poor, or very poor?
1. Very good              2. good       3. fair         4. poor        5. very poor        96. DK

202.       Do you suffer from a chronic disease?
1. Yes                           2. No                    96. DK                  97. RA


203.1.Have you          203.2. (If yes,) How old were                  203.4. (If yes) Did you
                                                         203.3. (If yes) During
ever had…               you the first time you had       the past 12 months,  receive any
                        (DX)?                                         treatment for (DX) at any
                                                         did you still have
                                                         (DX)?        time during the past 12
                                                                      months?
Asked for each of the following: 1. ARTHRITIS OR RHEUMATISM, 2. BACK OR NECK PROBLEMS, 3.
FREQUENT OR SEVERE HEADACHES, 4. SEASONAL ALLERGIES, 5. STROKE, 6. HEART ATTACK, 7.
HEART DISEASE, 8. HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE, 9. ASTHMA, 10. CHRONIC LUNG DISEASE, 11.
DIABETES OR HIGH BLOOD SUGAR, 12. AN ULCER, 13. HIV (INFECTION), 14. EPILEPSY OR
SEIZURES, 15. CANCER 16. OTHER（specify）

 204.    In general, how would you rate your overall mental health–very good, good, fair, poor, or very
         poor?
1. Very good           2. good         3. fair          4. poor          5. very poor       96. DK

         205.     The next questions are about how you have been feeling during the past 30 days.
                                                           1. All  2.        3.       4. A    5.      96.
                                                                   Most      Some Little None         DK
       1. About how often during the past 30 days did         □        □        □        □       □     □
       you feel tired out for no good reason —would you
       say all of the time, most of the time, some of the
       time, a little of the time, or none of the time?
       2. During the past 30 days, about how often did        □        □        □        □       □        □
       you feel nervous — all of the time, most of the
       time, some of the time, a little of the time, or
       none of the time?
       3. How often did you feel so nervous that              □        □        □        □       □        □
       nothing could calm you down? (IF NEC: all,
       most, some, a little, or none of the time?)
       4. During the past 30 days, about how often did        □        □        □        □       □        □
       you feel hopeless? (IF NEC: all, most, some, a
       little, or none of the time?)
       5. During the past 30 days, about how often did        □        □        □        □       □        □
       you feel restless or fidgety? (IF NEC: all, most,


                                                                                                      20
     some, a little, or none of the time?)
     607.6. How often did you feel so restless that you       □           □      □            □           □   □
     could not sit still? (IF NEC: all, most, some, a
     little, or none of the time?)
     7. During the past 30 days, about how often did          □           □      □            □           □   □
     you feel depressed? (IF NEC: all, most, some, a
     little, or none of the time?)
     8. How often did you feel so depressed that              □           □      □            □           □   □
     nothing could cheer you up? (IF NEC: all, most,
     some, a little, or none of the time?)

 206. How long has it been since you visited a health clinic or medical doctor for care, either for
        yourself or accompanying others?
1. Last year                               2. Between 1 and 3 years    3. More than 3 years ago (skip to
                                                                       616)
4. Never (skip to 208)                     96. DK                      97. RA

207.1. (Speaking of the last time) Were you the patient?
1. Yes                              2. No                         96. DK                          97. RA

207.2. Was this doctor or clinic in this municipality
1. Yes                               2. No                        96. DK                          97. RA

207.3. Was this a:
1. Public clinic or medical center            2. Military center                      3. Private doctor or clinic
4. Other                                      96. DK                                   97. RA

207.4. For each of the following, is it a reason you went to this doctor or clinic?
                                                                               1.        2.       96. DK      97. RA
                                                                               Yes       No
1. It was the closest facility                                                    □       □           □            □
2. It is known for high quality care                                              □       □           □            □
3. It is not too expensive                                                        □       □           □            □
4. You know doctors or nurses who work in it                                      □       □           □            □
5. You know people who helped you access medical care there                       □       □           □            □

207.5. As I read you the following statements about that doctor’s office or clinic, please tell me whether it is
true or not.
                                                                   1.           2.         96.         97.
                                                                 True       Not true       DK          RA
1. The restrooms were clean                                        □            □           □           □
2. The doctor was present                                          □            □           □           □
3. Patients were treated with respect                              □            □           □           □
4. Expenses for the received treatment were reasonable             □            □           □           □
5. Fees were posted and clearly explained ahead of time            □            □           □           □
6. The waiting period between entering the clinic and the             □           □               □           □
time you received the treatment was reasonable


                                                                                                              21
7. I paid a bribe in order to get a better treatment               □             □        □          □
8. I used wasta/aktef in order to get a better treatment           □             □        □          □
9. The necessary medicines were readily available in the           □             □        □          □
pharmacy
10. I was referred to a private clinic for further tests and       □             □        □          □
treatment

207.6. For each of the following, would you say you were very satisfied, not very satisfied, somewhat
dissatisfied, very unsatisfied?
                       1.           2.             3.              4.             96.              97.
                     Very       Not very      Somewhat           Very             DK               RA
                   satisfied    satisfied     dissatisfied    unsatisfied
1. Cost                □            □              □               □                □                □
2. Personal            □            □              □               □                □                □
care of
patient care
3. Medical             □            □              □               □                □                □
services
4. Room and            □            □              □               □                □                □
building

207.7. Did you receive assistance in accessing or paying for this health care?
1. Yes                      2. No (skip to 208)         96. DK (skip to 208)          97. RA (skip to 208)
 Financial assistance is material or financial support.

207.8. For each of the following, please tell me if they assisted you and your family?
                                                        1. Yes         2. No         96. DK       97. RA
1. Members of your extended family                            □             □             □            □
2. Neighbors                                                  □             □             □            □
3. Other members of your tribe or ethnic group                □             □             □            □
4. Local imam                                                 □             □             □            □
5. Religious charity                                          □             □             □            □
6. Non-religious charity                                      □             □             □            □
7. Other civil society association                            □             □             □            □
8. Trade or professional association                          □             □             □            □
9. Leaders of a powerful local family or clan                 □             □             □            □
10. Local council member                                      □             □             □            □
11. State welfare office                                      □             □             □            □
12.Other group                                                □             □             □            □

208. In the past year, did you seek medical advice from a …?
                                                          1. Yes            2. No        96. DK      97. RA
1. Pharmacist                                                □                □            □           □
2. Local healer                                              □                □            □           □
3. The internet                                              □                □            □           □
4. Friends, family and neighbors                             □                □            □           □



                                                                                                     22
209. How good do you believe the quality of medical care is at…?
                                                         1.       2.            3.     4. Very     96.        97.
                                                     Excellent   Good          Poor     Bad        DK         RA
1. The general public hospital nearest you               □        □             □         □         □          □
2. The military hospital nearest you                     □        □             □         □         □          □
3. The private hospital nearest you                      □        □             □         □         □          □
4. A private doctor or clinic                            □        □             □         □         □          □
5. A public clinic nearest you                           □        □             □         □         □          □
6. A pharmacist nearest you                              □        □             □         □         □          □
7. A local healer                                        □        □             □         □         □          □

210. If you showed up at the public clinic nearest you, do you think the doctor would be present and see
      you if the time was…?
                         1. Yes           2. No           96. DK                 97. RA
1. 8:30 am                      □               □                  □                         □
2. Lunch time                   □               □                  □                         □
3. 4:30 pm                      □               □                  □                         □

211.    Do you or anyone in your household living here have any health care needs that you are not able to
attend to, regarding:…
                                           1. Yes    2. No 96. DK              97. RA
1. Medical health                             □         □           □                       □
2. Dental health                              □         □           □                       □
3. Hearing                                    □         □           □                       □
4. Mental health                              □         □           □                       □
5. Contraception                              □         □           □                       □

212.     Are you covered by medical insurance?
1. Yes                       2. No (skip to 214)       96. Don’t know (skip        97. Refuse (skip to 214)
                                                       to 214)
Note: Medical insurance is any private or public coverage that pays all or part of your medical expenses.

213.   What kind of medical insurance do you receive?
1. CNAM                                2. Private health                3. Chahedat fakr (Poorness
                                           coverage                         certificate)
4. Other (specify)_____                96. DK                           97. RA

214.     Are there people in your family who are unable to obtain health insurance coverage?
1. Yes                        2. No               96. DK                      97. RA




                                                                                                         23
       3     PHYSICAL SECURITY AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION

301.       Please tell me if you would feel very unsafe, somewhat unsafe, somewhat safe, or very safe…?
                                                         1.          2.           3.              4.    96.        97.
                                                        Very     Somewhat      Somewhat          Very   DK         RA
                                                       unsafe      unsafe        safe            safe
1. In your home                                          □           □            □               □      □         □
2. Walking in your neighborhood during the day           □           □            □               □      □         □
3. Walking in your neighborhood at night                 □           □            □               □      □         □
4. At the local market                                   □           □            □               □      □         □
5. At the local mosque                                   □           □            □               □      □         □
6. At the nearest school                                 □           □            □               □      □         □
(If you don’t know, how safe do you think you
would feel?)

302.       In the past year, have you heard of the following problems occurring in (NAME MUNICIPALITY)?

                                                    1. Yes         2. No               96.              97.
                                                                                       DK               RA
1. Murder                                                    □             □                 □                □
2. Armed Robbery                                             □             □                 □                □
3. Burglary                                                  □             □                 □                □
4. Kidnapping                                                □             □                 □                □
5. Car theft and car jacking                                 □             □                 □                □
6. Celebratory shooting                                      □             □                 □                □
7. Assaults                                                  □             □                 □                □
8. Sexual violence                                           □             □                 □                □
9. Spousal abuse (Physical, mental, etc.)                    □             □                 □                □
10. Smuggling of goods                                       □             □                 □                □
11. Illegal gambling                                         □             □                 □                □
12. Prostitution                                             □             □                 □                □
13. Drug use                                                 □             □                 □                □
14. Disputes over land                                       □             □                 □                □
15. Disputes over access to water                            □             □                 □                □
16. Disputes over smuggling                                  □             □                 □                □

303. In the past 12 months, have you been personally the victim of …:
                                                               1. Yes          2. No         96. DK      97. RA
1. Assault/ physical violence (other than domestic violence)       □               □             □            □
2.Domestic violence (Physical, verbal, etc.)                       □               □             □            □
3. Theft or burglary                                               □               □             □            □
4. Armed robbery                                                   □               □             □            □
5. Murder of a friend or family member                             □               □             □            □
6. Kidnapping of friend or family member                           □               □             □            □
7. Car theft and car jacking                                       □               □             □            □




                                                                                                              24
303.1. (if yes) which of the following persons, groups or institutions did you ask for help? [Check all that
apply]
Questions:
1. Assault/ physical violence (other than domestic        2.Domestic violence (Physical, verbal, etc.)
violence)
3. Theft or burglary                                      4. Armed robbery
5. Murder of a friend or family member                    6. Kidnapping of friend or family member
7. Car theft and car jacking
Answer choices (for all):
1. Members of your extended family 2. Neighbors                            3. Other members of your tribe or
                                                                           ethnic group
4. A local imam                         5. Members of your mosque or 6. A religious charity/CSO
                                        religious organization
7. A non-religious charity/CSO          8. A trade or professional         9. Leaders of a powerful local family
                                        association                        or clan
10. Local municipal council             11. Other local council member 12. State welfare office (need to
head/mayor                                                                 check specifics)
13. Member of parliament                14. Candidate in parliamentary 15. Other
                                        elections

304. In the past 12 months, have you been a party to…
                                                                 1. Yes   2. No   96. DK       97. RA
1. Dispute over land                                                □        □        □                 □
2. Dispute over water                                               □        □        □                 □
3. Child custody battle                                             □        □        □                 □
4. Contract dispute                                                 □        □        □                 □
5. Other dispute                                                    □        □        □                 □

304.1. (if yes) Which of the following person, groups or institutions did you ask for help? [Check all that
apply.]
Questions:
1. Dispute over land                                    2. Dispute over water
3. Child custody battle                                 4. Contract dispute
5. Other dispute
Answer choices (for all):
1. Members of your extended family                      2. Neighbors
3. Other members of your tribe or ethnic group          4. A local imam
5. Members of your mosque or religious                  6. A religious charity/CSO
organization
7. A non-religious charity/CSO                          8. A trade or professional association
9. Leaders of a powerful local family or clan           10. Local municipal council head/mayor
11. Other local council member                          12. State welfare office (need to check specifics)
13. Member of parliament                                14. Candidate in parliamentary elections
15. Lawyer                                              16. Other

304.2. Were they able to solve the problem?
                                                                 1. Yes       2. No        96. DK       97. RA


                                                                                                        25
1. Dispute over land                                                   □            □           □             □
2. Dispute over water                                                  □            □           □             □
3. Child custody battle                                                □            □           □             □
4. Contract dispute                                                    □            □           □             □
5. Other dispute                                                       □            □           □             □

 305. Now I’d like to ask you, for each of the following, how much you believe they help to resolve civil
       disputes, such as conflicts over land, water or family, fairly and effectively and security issues, such as
       crime against physical property or persons in the area. Please rate on a scale from 0-10, with 0 being
       absolutely unhelpful and 10 being completely helpful. Let us begin with members of your extended
       family, how much can they help solve civil disputes? Security issues? (Please repeat for each of the
       following)
305.1.                                                   Civil disputes?            305.2. Security issues?
                                                        0-10 Ranking 96/97          0-10 Ranking 96/97
                                                                         DK/RA                       DK/RA

1.  Members of your extended family
2.  Friends
3.  Business associates
4.  Neighbors
5.  Other members of your tribe or ethnic group
6.  Local imam
7.  Members of your mosque or religious
    organization
8. Religious charities/CSOs
9. Non-religious charities/CSOs
10. Trade or professional associations
11. Leaders of a powerful local families or clans
12. Local municipal council head/mayor
13. Other local council members
14. State welfare office (need to check specifics)
15. Lawyers and Judges
16. Mediator employed by the local authorities
17. Member of parliament
18. Police
19. Other ………



 306. Would you say that the police in [Name municipality]…
                                                  1. Yes                   2. No         96. DK         97. RA
1. Can solve security problems                       □                       □             □              □
2. Respond quickly                                   □                       □             □              □
3. Are honest                                        □                       □             □              □
4. Know the community well                           □                       □             □              □
5. Are fair                                          □                       □             □              □




                                                                                                         26
 307.      Have you ever been subjected to a traffic fine?
 1. Yes                         2. No (Skip to 401)           96. DK (Skip to 401)           97. RA (Skip to 4o1)


 Thinking of the last time you were fined, did he/she clearly explain the reasons for penalty(ies), legal ground
 and type of applied penalty?
 308. did he/she clearly explain the reasons for penalty(ies), legal         1. Yes 2. No 96. DK 97. RA
 ground and type of applied penalty?
 309. engage in abusive acts or language toward the involved person(s)?
 310. Did you receive a written ticket and invoice?

 311. Were you issued an invoice, but one with a noted amount lower
 than the actual fine?
 312. Were you issued an invoice, but one with a noted amount lower
 than the actual fine?
 313. Did you call a powerful person to intervene?
 314. Did you pay a bribe?



       4     SOCIAL ASSISTANCE AND WELFARE

 401. How often is the garbage picked up by the public works agency in your village/neighborhood?
1. Every day                         2. More than once a week         3. Once a week
4. 2-3 times per month               5. Once a month                  6. Less than once a month
7. Never, practically never           96. DK                           97. RA

 402. Do you think that garbage collection is…?
 1. More often than        2. As often as             3. Less often than       96. DK         97. RA
 necessary                 necessary                  necessary

 403.   What source of water do you use for drinking in your neighborhood? [check all that apply]
 1. Mineral water (bottled)          2. Water tap to home             3. Shared water tap at a common
                                                                         place
 4. Open water well                  5. Drilled water well            6. River/Lake water
 7. Rain water                       8. Other                         96. DK           97. RA

404.      Within the last week, have you ….
                                1. Yes         2. No (skip to 407)         96. DK (skip to      97. RA (skip to
                                                                                407)                 407)
1.... not had                    □                      □                        □                    □
 enough food?
2. …experienced                  □                      □                        □                     □
 an electricity cut?
3. …not had                      □                      □                        □                     □
 enough drinking
 water?
4. …experienced a                □                      □                        □                     □
 water cut?

                                                                                                           27
405.     Did you ask any of the following for assistance (charity), including        406.    (If Yes to 405),
food, clothing and shelter?                                                          were they helpful?
                                          1.      2. No     96.           97.        1.     2.     96. 97.
                                          Yes     (skip to DK (skip       RA (skip   Yes    No DK RA
                                                  407)      to 407)       to 407)
1. Members of your extended family           □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
2. Neighbors                                 □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
3. Other members of your tribe or            □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
ethnic group
4. A local imam                              □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
5. Members of your mosque or                 □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
religious organization
6. A charity/CSO                             □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
7. Police                                    □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
8. A trade or professional association       □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
9. Leaders of a powerful local family        □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
or clan
10. Local municipal council                  □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
head/mayor
11. Member of parliament                     □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
12. Candidate in parliamentary               □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
elections
10. Other local council member               □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
11. State welfare office (need to check      □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
specifics)
12. Member of parliament                     □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
13. Candidate in parliamentary               □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
elections
14. other (specify)                          □       □           □            □       □      □      □         □
…………………………..

407. Now I would like to talk about assistance to the poor. In your commune/ward, please tell me if each of
       the following provide assistance for low-income households.
                                                                  1.       2.         96.            97.
                                                                 Yes      No          DK             RA
1. Neighbors                                                      □        □           □              □
2. Local imam                                                     □        □           □              □
3. Civil society and associations                                 □        □           □              □
4. Other members of tribe or ethnic group                         □        □           □              □
5. Members of mosques or religious organizations                  □        □           □              □
6. Leaders of powerful local families or clans                    □        □           □              □
7. State welfare office                                           □        □           □              □
8. Local municipal council members                                □        □           □              □
9. Businessmen and organizations                                  □        □           □              □
10. Trade unions or professional associations                     □        □           □              □




                                                                                                         28
408.    Do you personally feel you are eligible for government subsidies/assistance but have been unable to
obtain it?
1. Yes                        2. No                      96. DK                 97. RA

409.    Would you say there are none, a few, or many families eligible for government subsidies/assistance
in this municipality but have been unable to obtain it?
 1. None                             2. A few           3. Many           96. DK          97. RA

410.    Do you believe that there are households that receive subsidies but who are not poor? Would you
say there are none, a few, or many such cases?
 1. None                             2. A few          3. Many           96. DK           97. RA

411.     Did you seek help to find employment in the past year ?
1. Yes         2. No (skip to       96. Don’t know skip to 413)       97. Refuse to Answer skip to 413)
               413)


412.      (If yes to 411) Which of the following did you seek help from [check all that apply]?
                                                                     1. Yes   2. No     96. DK      97. RA
1. Friends                                                               □       □           □           □
2. Your family                                                           □       □           □           □
3. Neighbors                                                             □       □           □           □
4. Members of tribe or ethnic group                                      □       □           □           □
5. Local imam                                                            □       □           □           □
6. Members of mosques or religious organizations                         □       □           □           □
7. Civil society and associations                                        □       □           □           □
8. Trade unions or professional associations                             □       □           □           □
9. Leaders of powerful local families or clans                           □       □           □           □
10. Local council members                                                □       □           □           □
11. Businessmen and organizations                                        □       □           □           □
12. ANETI                                                                □       □           □           □

413.    How useful are bribe payments to government officials to: [Read categories 1 to 5]
                                             1.      2.            3.         4.         5.         96.        97.
                                            Not   Slightl Moderatel          Very Essential         DK         RA
                                           useful    y         y useful     useful
                                                  useful
                                             □       □             □          □          □           □         □
1. Obtain a job in the government sector

2. Obtain a job in the private sector            □        □            □          □          □       □         □




                                                                                                          29
414.    How useful is wasta (“Aktaf”) for you to:
                                    1.          2.            3.            4.           5.          96.       97.
                                   Not       Slightly      Moderately      Very       Essential      DK        RA
                                 useful       useful        useful        useful
1. Obtain a job in the              □           □             □             □             □           □         □
government sector
2. Obtain a job in the private      □           □               □            □            □           □         □
sector

415.     How important is a person’s professional qualifications in obtaining a government job relative to
 other factors? Please indicate whether each is more important, equally important, or less important as a
 person’s experience and professional qualifications.
                                    1.                      2.                   3.         96.        97.
                                  Less                   Equal                More          DK        RA
                            important than         importance with       important than
                            experience and          experience and       experience and
                             qualifications          qualifications       qualifications
1. A person’s                      □                      □                    □              □         □
political affiliations
2. A person’s                      □                      □                    □              □         □
personal network,
relation to
influential people
3. A person’s family               □                      □                    □              □         □
or tribal affiliation
  Note: Professional qualifications are things like diplomas, experience, and professional recommendations.

416.      How important is a person’s professional qualifications in obtaining at job in the private sector
relative to other factors? Please indicate whether each is more important, equally important, or less
important as a person’s experience and professional qualifications.
                                1.                     2.                     3.             96.          97.
                              Less                  Equal                   More             DK           RA
                        important than        importance with         Important than
                        experience and         experience and         experience and
                         qualifications         qualifications         qualifications
1. A person’s                  □                     □                      □                  □            □
political
affiliations
2. A person’s                  □                     □                      □                  □            □
personal
network,
relation to
influential
people
3. A person’s                  □                     □                      □                  □            □
family or tribal
affiliation


                                                                                                          30
417.    Please tell me to what extent you believe (your friends) would be to help you with [financial assistance
        / solving a dispute with a third party]?
                            417.1. Financial assistance            417.2. Solving a dispute with a third party
                       1.     2. I      3.       4.   96. 97.      1.      2. I     3.       4.   96. 97. RA
                     Never think Maybe Sure DK RA Never think Maybe Sure DK
                               so                                          so
1. Your friends        □       □        □        □     □     □     □        □       □        □      □        □
and family
2. Your                □       □        □        □     □     □     □        □       □        □      □        □
neighbors
3. Members of          □       □        □        □     □     □     □        □       □        □      □        □
your
tribe/ethnic
group
4. Members of          □       □        □        □     □     □     □        □       □        □      □        □
mosque or
religious group
5. Members of          □       □        □        □     □     □     □        □       □        □      □        □
a civil society
organization
you support
6. Leaders of          □       □        □        □     □     □     □        □       □        □      □        □
powerful local
families or
clans
7. Local council       □       □        □        □     □     □     □        □       □        □      □        □
members
8. Local               □       □        □        □     □     □     □        □       □        □      □        □
businesses
9. Police              □       □        □        □     □     □     □        □       □        □      □        □
10. Other              □       □        □        □     □     □     □        □       □        □      □        □




         5     CITIZEN-STATE LINKAGES

501.         Did you vote in the second round of the 2014 presidential election?
1. Yes                              2. No                   96. DK                  97. RA

502.   Did you vote in the first round of the 2014 presidential election?
1. Yes                      2. No                        96. DK                     97. RA

503.  Did you vote for the parliamentary elections that were held in November 2014?
1 Yes                  2 No                        96. DK                   97. RA

504. Do many of the politicians in your community try to buy votes with gifts, money, or access to services?
1. Yes                      2. No                  96. DK                    97. RA



                                                                                                        31
504.1. Did any politician or representative offer you gifts, money, or access to services for your vote?
1. Yes                        2. No                    96. DK                    97. RA

505. Did you vote in the elections for the Constituent Assembly in October 2011?
1. Yes                       2. No                   96. DK                 97. RA

506. Do you personally know any members who sat on the Constituent Assembly, elected in 2011?
1. Yes                    2. No                 96. DK                 97. RA

507. Do you personally know any members of the new parliament, elected in 2014?
1. Yes                     2. No                 96. DK                  97. RA

508. In your opinion, what is the most important problem Tunisia is facing today [do not read out categories.
Write answer and insert code from Table 3 following interview.]
Answer: ___________________                             Code: _________
Record exactly what R said.

509. In your opinion, what is the most important problem facing [NAME OF MUNICIPALITY] today? [do
     not read out categories. Write answer and insert code from Table 3 following interview.]
Answer: ___________________                             Code: _________
Record exactly what R said.

510. In the last year, have you contacted a member of the municipality council “Majlis Baladiyya” or “Niabba
       Khassousiya”?
1. Yes         2. No (skip to 511)   96. DK (skip to 511)          97. RA (skip to 511)

510.1. The last time you contacted a member of the local council, was it about a personal or community
problem?
1. Personal               2. Community problem             96. DK                97. RA

510.2. (The last time you contacted a member of local council), were you very satisfied, somewhat satisfied,
somewhat dissatisfied, or very dissatisfied with the response?
1. Very satisfied              2. Somewhat satisfied 3. Somewhat                  4. Very dissatisfied
                                                         dissatisfied
96. DK                          97. RA                    -999. Not applicable

511.     If you had a personal problem in the future that one of the members of the local council could do
something about, do you think he or she would be very helpful, somewhat helpful, or not very helpful?
1. Very helpful 2. Somewhat helpful 3. Not very helpful 96. DK 97. RA



512. Do you personally know any local council members in this municipality?
1. Yes                  2. N0              96. DK                     97. RA

513. Can you please tell me who is the head of the municipal council?
 1. Respondent answers with a name or description
 2. Respondent does not answer with a name or description


                                                                                                           32
514. Do you think that the mayor responds primarily to the:
1. Interests of national government  2. Interests of the community         3. Interests of part of the community
                                     as a whole
4. His own personal interests        96. DK                                97. RA

515. In general, to what extent do the following groups influence local politics in your area? Not at all, very
little, somewhat, a great deal?
                                                   1. Not 2. Very 3.                 4. A great 96.         97. RA
                                                   at all   little    Somewhat deal              DK
1. Average citizens                                   □         □          □              □         □          □
2. Powerful local families                            □         □          □              □         □          □
3. Trade unions or professional associations          □         □          □              □         □          □
4. Mosques or religious groups                        □         □          □              □         □          □
5. CSOs or associations                               □         □          □              □         □          □
6. Political parties                                  □         □          □              □         □          □
7. The chamber of commerce or business                □         □          □              □         □          □
organizations
8. Clans or tribes                                    □         □          □              □         □          □

516.   Have you (personally) engaged in meeting with any of the following groups in order to determine the
       community needs and plan services?
                                        1. Yes           2. No              96. DK              97. RA
1. Your neighbors                          □                □                  □                  □
2. Your friends                            □                □                  □                  □
3. Family                                  □                □                  □                  □
4. A powerful local family                 □                □                  □                  □
5. Trade union or professional             □                □                  □                  □
   association
6. Mosque or religious group               □                □                  □                  □
7. CSO or association                      □                □                  □                  □
8. A political party or parties            □                □                  □                  □
9. A chamber of commerce or                □                □                  □                  □
   business organization
10. Your clan or tribe                     □                □                  □                  □


517.      Do you think you are better able to get a local council member to respond to you if the council
          member is:
                                                                           1. Yes   2. No     96. DK      97. RA
1. Well educated                                                              □       □          □          □
2. Has lived in this [CITY NAME] his/her whole life                           □       □          □          □
3. Is from your family or clan                                                □       □          □          □
4. Is your friend or from your personal network                               □       □          □          □
5. Is a woman                                                                 □       □          □          □
6. Is religiously devout                                                      □       □          □          □
7. Is a member of a political party you support                               □       □          □          □
8. Is affiliated with a trade union or professional association that you      □       □          □          □


                                                                                                              33
support or belong to
9. Is a member of a civil society association you belong to                        □          □         □                 □

518.     Have you been a victim of corruption by a local government official in the past year? (Corruption
        occurs when an official misuses his/her position for personal financial gain. A local government
        official is an elected or appointed major or council person or any other civil servant working in your
        local community, such as a teacher, permit provider, police officer, etc.)
1. Yes                      2. No                     96. DK                   97. RA
  Note: Corruption occurs when an official misuses his/her position for personal financial gain.

519.      Has anyone else in your immediate family been a victim of corruption in the past year?
1. Yes      2. No       96. Don’t know (skip to 522)        97. Refuse to answer (skip to 522)

520.      (ASK ONLY IF YES to 518 or 519) Did you report this act of corruption?

1. Yes (skip to 522)       2. No                                  96. DK           97. RA

521.       (If No to 520) Why not? [Check all that apply]
1. It is useless to report           2. The process of reporting         3. I was scared about retaliation
corruption                           corruption is too burdensome
4. I don’t know how to go            5. Other (Specify) ____             96. DK           97. RA
about reporting corruption
                          Note: If R asks for clarification, say, “Whatever it means to you.”

522.    When there is a corruption case going on in your governorate, how serious do you think the
government deals with the case?
1. Very        2. Quite           3. Not very        4. not           96. DK          97. RA
Seriously      seriously          seriously          seriously at all
                      Note: If R asks for clarification, say, “Whatever it means to you.”

523.     Have you been a victim of corruption by any other public official in the past year?
1. Yes    2. No (skip to 525)    96. DK(skip to 525)              97. RA(skip to 525)

524.     If yes, by which type of official? |__________|                       96. DK                 97. RA

525.     Among the following groups, who do you believe currently has the most impact on (primary and
         secondary education): central government, the governorate, the local council, imams and religious
         organizations, the private sector/businesses, unions, large families and clans, and other civil society
         organizations, who do you think currently has the most impact on for education? [repeat for each]
                                                                   organizations




                                                                                       8. Other CSO
                                         Governorate
                            government




                                                                   businesses
                                                                   4. Imams/




                                                                   6. Unions
                            1. Central




                                                                   5. Private




                                                                                       families/
                                                                   religious




                                                                                       7. Large
                                                       3. Local
                                                       council




                                                                   sector/




                                                                                                        96. DK


                                                                                                                 97. RA
                                                                                       clans
                                         2.




1. Education (primary           □            □            □          □     □   □         □        □          □            □
and secondary schools)
2. Local Economic               □            □            □          □     □   □         □        □          □            □


                                                                                                                          34
development
3. Health services                □             □   □              □        □       □       □        □       □            □
(clinics and hospitals)
4. Public safety                  □             □   □              □        □       □       □        □       □            □
5. Social Welfare                 □             □   □              □        □       □       □        □       □            □
(disability benefits,
unemployment
benefits, etc.)
6. Solid waste                    □             □   □              □        □       □       □        □       □            □
collection
7. Drinking Water                 □             □   □              □        □       □       □        □       □            □
8. Electricity                    □             □   □              □        □       □       □        □       □            □

526.   Among the following groups, who would prefer to be responsible for (Education (primary and
secondary schools): central government, the governorate, the local council, imams and religious
organizations, the private sector/businesses, unions, large families and clans, and other civil society
organizations? [repeat for each]




                                                                       organizations




                                                                                            8. Other CSO
                                  Governorate
                     government




                                                                       businesses
                                                                       4. Imams/




                                                                       6. Unions
                     1. Central




                                                                       5. Private




                                                                                            families/
                                                                       religious




                                                                                            7. Large
                                                        3. Local
                                                        council




                                                                       sector/




                                                                                                             96. DK


                                                                                                                      97. RA
                                                                                            clans
                                  2.




1. Education              □                     □         □             □       □       □       □        □       □        □
(primary and
secondary
schools)
2. Local Economic         □                     □         □             □       □       □       □        □       □        □
development
3. Health services        □                     □         □             □       □       □       □        □       □        □
(clinics and
hospitals)
4. Public safety          □                     □         □             □       □       □       □        □       □        □
5. Social Welfare         □                     □         □             □       □       □       □        □       □        □
(disability
benefits,
unemployment
benefits, etc.)
6. Solid waste            □                     □         □             □       □       □       □        □       □        □
collection
7. Drinking Water         □                     □         □             □       □       □       □        □       □        □
8. Electricity            □                     □         □             □       □       □       □        □       □        □




                                                                                                                           35
527.   I’d like to ask you now a little about your own activities. Are you a member or a leader of a …
(mosque or religious organization)? [Interviewer: repeat for each]
                                                            1.      2.       3. Not   96.     97. RA
                                                            Member Leader member DK
                                                                             nor
                                                                             leader
1. A mosque or local religious organization?                      □         □          □        □           □
2. A civil society organization or association, such as a         □         □          □        □           □
charity, women’s group, sports club?
3. A trade union or professional association?                     □         □          □        □           □
4. A powerful local family?                                       □         □          □        □           □
5. A political party                                              □         □          □        □           □
6. A chamber of commerce or business organization?                □         □          □        □           □
7. A clan or tribe?                                               □         □          □        □           □
8. Another type of association (Please specify)                   □         □          □        □           □



     6    SOCIAL COMPOSITION AND CULTURE

     601.       In your neighborhood would you say…
1. Most people know each other        2. Some people know each other        3. Few people know each other
      96. Don’t know                        97. Refuse to answer

             602. Do you and your neighbors help      603.     [If yes,] is this on a daily, weekly, monthly,
                  each other with…?                   less than monthly basis? (Which is closest?)
                       1.Yes 2.      96.DK 97.        1.      2.           3.          3. Less    69.    97.
                              No     (Skip    RA      Daily Weekly Monthly than                   Don’t Refuse
                              (Skip to        (Skip                                    monthly know to
                              to     204)     to                                                         answer
                              204)            204)
.1 Childcare           1      2      96       97      1       2         3          4           96      97
.2 Education           1      2      96       97      1       2         3          4           96      97
.3 Healthcare          1      2      96       97      1       2         3          4           96      97
.4 Finances            1      2      96       97      1       2         3          4           96      97
.5 Obtaining govt      1      2      96       97      1       2         3          4           96      97
services
.6 Solving disputes    1      2      96       97      1       2         3          4           96      97
within families
. 7 Solving disputes 1        2      96       97      1       2         3          4           96      97
between neighbors
.8 Keeping your        1      2      96       97      1       2         3          4           96      97
neighborhood safe
from crime
.9 Keeping the area 1         2      96       97      1       2         3          4           96      97
clean


                                                                                                            36
604.    We would like to understand how people interact in your area. How much do you think people are
obligated to help others, even if it costs them a day’s wages? Would you say that the person is very obligated,
somewhat obligated, or not obligated at all to help, if the person is…
                         1. Very             2. Somewhat      3. Not           96. Don’t         97. Refuse to
                         obligated           obligated        obligated at all know              answer

604.1. A member of
their immediate
family (son or
daughter, mother or
father)?
604.2. A member of
their extended family
(uncle aunt,
grandparent)?
604.3. A neighbor?
604.4. A member of
their large family or
clan?
604.5. A member of
their tribe?
604.6. A resident of
their town/village
but not a neighbor?
604.7. A fellow work
mate?
604.8. Their
employee?
604.9. A member of
their mosque?
604.10. A Tunisian?
604.11. A non-
Tunisian?

605.     If you knew only the family name of someone in this area, how certain would you be that you know
whether they are among the most or least privileged people in the municipality? Would you say you are
1. nearly certain               2. somewhat certain       3. or don't know whether a person is rich or poor,
                                                          given just their family name.



      606.   How useful is wasta (“Aktaf”) for you to:
                                      1           2         3             4          5          96        97
                                     Not      Slightly   Moderately      Very     Essential    Don’t    Refuse
                                    useful     useful     useful        useful                 know       to
                                                                                                        answer
      1. Obtain a job in the          □          □            □           □           □          □        □
          government sector


                                                                                                             37
2. Obtain a job in the
    private sector

    607. How important is a person’s professional qualifications in obtaining a government job
    relative to other factors? Please indicate whether each is more important, equally important, or
    less important as a person’s experience and professional qualifications.
                               1                 2                  3           96             97
                            Less              Equal               More         Don’t       Refuse to
                        important          importance          important       know         answer
                           than               with                than
                        experience         experi-ence         experience
                            and                and                and
                         qualifica-         qualifica-       qualifications
                           tions              tions
1. A person’s                □                 □                   □             □             □
   political
   affiliations
2. A person’s                □                 □                   □             □             □
   personal
   network,
   relation to
   influential
   people
3. A person’s                □                 □                   □             □             □
   family or
   tribal
   affiliation

     608. How important is a person’s professional qualifications in obtaining at job in the private
          sector relative to other factors? Please indicate whether each is more important, equally
          important, or less important as a person’s experience and professional qualifications.
                                1                  2                 3            96           97
                             Less               Equal              More          Don’t     Refuse to
                        importantth         importance          Important        know        answer
                              an                with               than
                         experience         experi-ence         experience
                             and                 and               and
                          qualifica-         qualifica-       qualifications
                            tions               tions
1. A person’s                 □                  □                  □              □           □
political
affiliations
2. A person’s                 □                  □                  □              □           □
personal
network,
relation to
influential
people
3. A person’s                 □                  □                  □              □           □

                                                                                                       38
family or tribal
affiliation

     609. In general, to what extent do the following groups influence local politics in your area? Not at
           all, very little, somewhat, a great deal?
                                         1             2            3                  4           96/97
                                   Not at all      Very little Somewhat         A great deal      DK/RA
1.   Average citizens                    1             2            3                  4           96/97
2.   Powerful local families             1             2            3                  4           96/97
3.   Trade unions or                     1             2            3                  4           96/97
     professional
     associations
4.   Mosques or religious                1             2            3                  4           96/97
     groups
5.   CSOs or associations                1             2            3                  4           96/97
6.   Political parties                   1             2            3                  4           96/97
7.   The chamber of                      1             2            3                  4           96/97
     commerce or business
     organizations
8.   Clans or tribes                     1             2            3                  4           96/97



    610. Now I would like to talk about assistance to the poor. In your commune/ward, please tell
           me if each of the following provide assistance for low-income households.
                             1                 2                   96              97
                             Yes               No                  Don’t know      Refuse to
                                                                                   answer
1. Neighbors
2. Members of tribe or
ethnic group
3. Local imam
4. Members of
mosques or religious
organizations
5. Civil society and
associations
6. Trade unions or
professional
associations
7. Leaders of powerful
local families or clans
8. Local municipal
council members
9. Businessmen and
organizations
10. State welfare office




                                                                                                        39
ANNEX 2: PRELIMINARY INSIGHTS FROM LGPI PILOT
STUDY, TUNISIA 2015


The Program on Governance and Local Development at Yale University (GLD) designed the
pilot LGPI citizen household survey and implemented it in Tunisia in February 2015. The
survey was fielded in 6 of Tunisia’s 24 governorates, focusing on 3 municipalities in each
governorate.3 (See Table 1 for a list of municipalities.) The pilot study illustrates how the tool
can help provide a comprehensive picture of service delivery and governance at the municipal
level, identifying key areas of need, highlighting significant inequalities, and shedding light
on the relationship between governance and service delivery.



       Governorate                                 Municipality
Bizerte                    Bizerte Nord         Bizerte Sud          Menzal Jemil
Mahdia                     Mahdia               Ksour Essaf          Souassi
Monastir                   Monastir             Taboulba             Moknine
Sfax                       Sfax Sud             Sfax Nord            Sakiet Eddair
Siliana                    Siliana Ville        Bouarada             Gaafour
Tunis                      La Marsa             Cité El Khadra       Jebel Jloud
Table 1. Municipalities included in the LGPI Pilot Survey, Tunisia 2015.


Health

The Tunisian 2015 pilot study demonstrates how the survey can yield insights into the varying
qualities of service across municipalities. It also helps ascertain inequalities based on socio-
economic status, gender, and availability of public and private sector services.

The study found that across municipalities there were exceedingly low expectations for a
doctor to be present in local clinics during usual business hours, suggesting a high rate of
absenteeism in public clinics. When asked if they believed that the doctor would be present at
8:30 am, at lunchtime, and at 4:30 pm, respondents overwhelmingly answered that the doctor
would not be present. There is some variation at the municipal level, as shown in Figure 1.
There is a much greater expectation that the doctor will be present in Gaafour, for instance,


3
  Households within each governorate were randomly sampled, using PPS by points of light data (due to the fact
that the last census was conducted in 2004 and there appear to be considerable changes in population distribution
in the last decade.) Respondents within households were chosen randomly from among those over 18 years old,
using Kish tables.

                                                                                                             40
than in Siliana Ville, despite the fact that these municipalities are located in the same
governorate.




Figure 1. Doctor Availability: Questions Included: Do you think there is a doctor present in
the local clinic at 8:30 am, lunchtime and 4:30 pm? The answers were coded as a 1 if the
answer is “Yes” and as 0 if answer is “No.” This yields a score that ranges from 0 to 3 for
each respondent. The sums are averaged across respondents in the municipality. A score of
0 thus would mean that all respondents believed the doctor is never present, and a score of 3
would mean that all respondents believe the doctor is present at all of these times.

The study further examined the quality of healthcare, focusing on respondents who had gone
to a doctor or clinic in the last two years. Respondents were asked about specific traits of a
clinic visit, including facility cleanliness, duration of waiting time, costliness, respectfulness
of staff, and availability of medicine. The results again revealed significant variation at the
local level, even within the same governorate. For instance, while Mahdia scores among the
highest on the Health Quality Index, the other two municipalities sampled in the governorate,
Ksour Essaf and Souassi, scored considerably worse.




                                                                                               41
Figure 2. Health Quality Index: Index included 1) clean bathroom, 2) doctor present, 3)
reasonable costs, 4) reasonable wait time, 5) respectful treatment and 6) medication
availability.

Similar variance is seen in the Health Governance Index, which reflects the transparency and
accountability of local clinics and doctors. The Index is based on patient use of informal
payments or wasta to obtain quality medical care, the clear posting of fees, and referrals to
private clinics for necessary care (See Figure 3). We find areas in which poor governance is a
clear concern, and, within the index, also find significant variation in the extent to which this
is due to low transparency, the use of informal payments and wasta, or the tendency to refer
patients to private providers.




                                                                                              42
Figure 3. Health Governance Index. Variables included 1) Were you referred to private
clinic/doctor? 2) Did you pay an informal payment for better treatment? 3) Did you use wasta
to obtain better treatment? 4) Were fees clearly posted?

Furthermore, the LGPI reveals discrepancies between healthcare provided in the public and
the private sectors. With the exception of Jbel Jloud, healthcare provided by private clinics far
surpassed the quality of that provided by public medical centers. (See Figure 4). For most
municipalities even the highest scores given to public medical centers were inferior to those
given to the lowest scoring private clinics.




                                                                                              43
Figure 4. Private and Public Clinics: The index is comprised of six variables, including 1)
clean bathroom, 2) doctor present, 3) reasonable costs, 4) reasonable wait time, 5) respectful
treatment, and 6) medication availability.

The results indicate a disparity between the services that patients receive under private care
and those that they receive under public care. Public healthcare centers lag in doctor
availability, duration of patient wait times, availability of proper medication, and the
completion of treatment without the use of bribery or wasta.


Education

The LGPI also allows us to examine the quality of education service delivery in Tunisia,
finding high numbers of students failing to complete their educations. At the national level,
10.4% of the youth aged 8-17 years (or 178,341 Tunisian youth) did not attend school,
including 11.9% (107,674) of the males and 8.9% (70,667) of the females. Considering the
results at the governorate level, we find the lowest percentage was observed in Sfax, where
3.9% of potential students this age were out of school, and the highest observed in Monastir,
with 10.1%. The official MOE statistic (2012-13) is 107,000 (under 16).4

Close examination of the data also reveals gender differences in dropout rates. In Mahdia for
example, the dropout rate is relatively low and equal between both male and female students.
(See Figure 5.) In Monastir, however, where the dropout rate is the highest overall, the level


4
 See more about dropout rates in Tunisia: http://nawaat.org/portail/2014/09/16/abandon-scolaire-en-tunisie-des-
chiffres-alarmants-banalises-par-la-crise-economique-et-occultes-par-le-ministere-de-tutelle/


                                                                                                            44
for male students far surpasses that of female students. Siliana, on the other hand, presents a
different situation in which there are more female students dropping out of school than male
students. A student’s decision to leave school often rests on factors such as financial need,
gender dynamics, customs, and available employment alternatives. Thus, the data reflect
other fundamental differences in local governance that are ripe for exploration.




Figure 5. Drop-out Rates, by Gender and Governorate

The LGPI can also help to pinpoint specific needs in schools. For instance, teacher
absenteeism appears to vary substantially across municipalities. Few parents report problems
of teacher absenteeism in Bouarada, Cite El Khadra or Gaafour, for instance, particularly
compared to Moknine, Mahdia or Taboulba. (See Figure 6.) Taken together in the school
quality indices, such as those shown in Figure 7, we have an indication of overall school
quality across municipalities. The best schools were found in Jbel Jloud and Sfax Sud and the
worst in Bizerte Nord and Bizerte Sud.




                                                                                            45
                bizerte nord      bizerte sud       bouarada        cite khadhra     gaafour




  .1 .2 .3 .4
            0

                 jbel jloud       ksour essaf       la marsa          mahdia       menzel jemil
  .1 .2 .3 .4
            0




                 moknine           monastir     sekiet eddayer       sfax sud       sfax ville
  .1 .2 .3 .4
            0




                siliana ville      souassi          tebolba
  .1 .2 .3 .4
            0




                        mean of crowded_classroom                mean of school_mult_shilft
                        mean of teacher_absent                   mean of teacher_fav_lessons
    Graphs by Municipality




Figure 6. Education Quality: Crowded classrooms, Teacher favoritism, Multi-shifts per
school day, and Teacher absenteeism




Figure 7. School Quality Index: Quality of schools across municipalities

There are also important disparities in school quality related to socio-economic status. Figure
8 illustrates how school quality increases as socio-economic class scores increase.



                                                                                                  46
Figure 8. Socio-economic Status Effects on School Quality

The LGPI allows us to assess the difficulties that parents face within the school system and
how parents attempt to address these difficulties. Indeed, it is a particularly useful tool in this
regard because of our ability to gauge responses both from parents who have and have not
found success in enrolling their children in school. That is, the LGPI avoids some of the
selection bias problems inherent in the SDI and similar tools.

In Tunisia, the survey found significant variation in the problems facing students and parents.
Respondents faced the least amount of difficulty in Jbel Jloud, and the most in La Marsa (see
Figure 9). Importantly, in Tunisia as a whole, the majority of parents facing difficulties do not
seek help. Parents in Siliana reported asking for help the most, as opposed to Bizerte where
they reported asking the least (see Figure 10).




                                                                                                47
Figure 9. Students facing difficulty in School, by Municipality




Figure 10. Families Seeking Help, by Governorate

The survey also sought to understand on whom parents placed the responsibility for
education, with the vast majority holding the central government responsible. Moreover, when

                                                                                         48
asked on whom the responsibility for education should rest, parents again cited the central
government as best suited for providing education. There appears to be widespread
acceptance of Tunisia’s centralized education system. (See Figures 12 and 13.)




Figure 12. Who is responsible for education?




Figure 13. Who should be responsible for education?




                                                                                        49
Physical Security and Dispute Resolution

The LGPI also found a great deal of variation in security and dispute resolution. For instance,
when asked how safe they asked in various areas (e.g., the market place, their neighborhood at
night, their house), people reported feeling much safer walking around in their neighborhood
at night in Ksour Essaf than they did in Moknine. Along with assessing individual quantifiers
of security such as feeling safe in one’s neighborhood, the LGPI also measured overall
security scores. Siliana Ville reported the highest levels of security followed by Jbel Jloud and
Sekiet Eddayer. The results show, once again, that Moknine suffers from insecurity far more
than other areas. (See figures 14 and 15.)




Figure 14. Neighborhood Safety: How safe do you feel walking around at night in your
neighborhood?




                                                                                              50
Figure 15. Security Score by Municipality. The security score is composed of questions
asking, “How safe do you feel…?” 1) In your home, 2) Walking in your neighborhood during
the day, 3) Walking in your neighborhood at night, 4) At the local market, 5) At the local
mosque, and 6) At the nearest school.


Somewhat surprisingly, the survey did not reveal a significant gender differences in feelings
of insecurity. As shown in Figure 16, women and men perceive the security of their local
environment similarly. Moreover, where we do see differences, it is frequently the case that
women feel more secure than the men in their area.




                                                                                          51
                        bizerte nord                  bizerte sud                  menzel jemil                 siliana ville               bouarada




      0 1 2 3 4
                        0              1             0               1             0                 1         0                 1         0               1
                  Female=1                     Female=1                      Female=1                    Female=1                    Female=1

                             gaafour                      monastir                      tebolba                     moknine                     souassi
      0 1 2 3 4




                        0              1             0               1             0                 1         0                 1         0               1
                  Female=1                     Female=1                      Female=1                    Female=1                    Female=1

                        ksour essaf                       mahdia                   cite khadhra                     jbel jloud                  la marsa
      0 1 2 3 4




                        0              1             0               1             0                 1         0                 1         0               1
                  Female=1                     Female=1                      Female=1                    Female=1                    Female=1

                       sekiet eddayer                     sfax sud                      sfax ville
      0 1 2 3 4




                        0              1             0               1             0                 1
                  Female=1                     Female=1                      Female=1

      Graphs by Municipality2



Figure 16. Perceptions of Security by Gender and Municipality.

There was, however, important variation in the extent to which people reported that their
neighbors helped each other in keeping the area safe from crime. Tebolba reported the greatest
amount of cooperation between neighbors, while the least amount of neighbor collaborations
for safety was reported from Sfax Sud. (See figure 17.)


                                                                bizerte.nord
                                           sfax.ville                                         bizerte.sud
                                                                     100                              menzel.jemil
                         sfax.sud

sekiet.eddayer                                                                                                        siliana.ville


   la.marsa                                                                                                                  bouarada
                                                                         0

   jbel.jloud                                                                                                                gaafour


  cite.khadhra                                                                                                        monastir


                             mahdia                                                                      tebolba
                                       ksour.essaf                                            moknine
                                                                     souassi


                                                                                                                                                               52
Figure 17. Neighbor Safety Collaboration: Do you and your neighbors help each other with
keeping the area safe from crime?

The LGPI also explores attitudes towards police. Municipalities varied in their perceptions of
police, with about half of the municipalities reporting that the police are moderately fair, and
the other half reporting that they are not very fair. (See Figure 18.)




Figure 18. Respondents’ Perception of Police Fairness.

The LGPI revealed an interesting relationship between perceptions of the police and
respondents’ socio-economic status. Figure 19 shows the socio-economic score against a
variety of expectations of police officers. Surprisingly, those of lower socio-economic status
appear to have a more favorable view of police officers. They are more likely to report the
police as being fairer, more knowledgeable of the community, and more honest, compared to
those of higher socio-economic status.




                                                                                             53
Figure 19. Attitudes toward Police Competencies and Socio-Economic Class




Social Assistance and Welfare

The module on social assistance and welfare examines individual municipalities for problems
in social welfare provision as well as the sources of assistance that people turn to in case of
need. The LGPI found important differences across municipalities with regard to whom
people believed were assisting the poor in their areas. In Siliana Ville, Gaafour, Menzel Jemil,
and Taboulba, for instance, the majority of respondents said that neighbors were an important
source of assistance for those in need. This was not the case in Bizerte Nord, Bouarada, or
Monastir. Far more respondents in Monastir, for example—as well as in Taboulba and Sakkiet
Eddayer—believed that businessmen and organizations provided better sources of local
assistance. Common among all municipalities, however, was the united belief that local
council members were not important points of assistance for the poor. (See figure 20.)




                                                                                             54
                 bizerte nord            bizerte sud        menzel jemil      siliana ville    bouarada

  .2 .4 .6 .8
            0




                   gaafour                monastir            tebolba          moknine         souassi
  .2 .4 .6 .8
            0




                 ksour essaf              mahdia            cite khadhra       jbel jloud      la marsa
  .2 .4 .6 .8
            0




                sekiet eddayer            sfax sud           sfax ville
  .2 .4 .6 .8
            0




                                 Nobody                                    Neighbors
                                 Local Iman & Relig. Org.                  CSO
                                 Tribe                                     Powerful Families
                                 State Welfare                             Municipal council
                                 Business / business org.                  Trade Unions / prof. org.
    Graphs by Municipality2


Figure 20. Sources of Assistance for Those in Need.

We find that the vast majority of respondents reported having no sources of assistance when
faced with personal problems, such as shortages of food, clothing, or shelter. Those who did
seek help turned to others in their personal networks: family, neighbors, and members of their
tribe or extended family. Very few, however, turned to formal avenues for personal assistance,
including the state welfare office. (See figure 21.)




                                                                                                          55
                  bizerte nord    bizerte sud          menzel jemil    siliana ville   bouarada



   .2 .4 .6 .8
             0



                    gaafour        monastir              tebolba        moknine        souassi
   .2 .4 .6 .8
             0




                  ksour essaf      mahdia              cite khadhra     jbel jloud     la marsa
   .2 .4 .6 .8
             0




                 sekiet eddayer    sfax sud             sfax ville
   .2 .4 .6 .8
             0




                                                Nobody                Family
                                                Neighbors             Tribe
     Graphs by Municipality2



Figure 21. Personal Sources of Assistance to Those in Need. Potential sources of
assistance included 1) Friends, 2) Your family, 3) Neighbors, 4) Members of tribe or ethnic
group, 5) Local imam, 6) Members of mosques or religious organizations, 7) Civil society
and associations, 8) Trade unions or professional associations, 9) Leaders of powerful local
families or clans, 10) Local council members, 11) Businessmen and organizations, 12)
ANETI. Note: We only show results for items with more than 1% positive answers overall.


Citizen-State Linkages

The module on citizen-state linkages delves into perceptions and experiences with
government corruption, transparency, and participation. Many of the questions in this module
can be combined with those in previous modules, giving a more comprehensive picture of
governance at the local level.

The results reveal an important variation of individuals’ perceptions of corruption across
municipalities. Respondents in Bouarada, La Marsa and Moknine tended to believe that local
corruption was high, while those in Sfax Ville, Siliana Ville and Monastir were less likely to
report that corruption exists. (See figure 22.) Within both the municipalities that perform
poorly and those that perform well on the corruption index, it is important to note the presence
of heavy socio-economic and geographic diversity.




                                                                                                  56
Figure 22. Perceptions of Corruption by Municipality. Questions incorporated into the
additive, normalized index included 1) Do many of the politicians in your community try to
buy votes with gifts, money, or access to services? 2) Would you say there are none, a few, or
many families eligible for government subsidies/assistance in this municipality that are unable
to obtain it? 3) Do you believe that there households that receive subsidies but who are not
poor? Would you say there are none, a few, or many such cases? 4) How useful are bribe
payments to government officials to obtain a job in the government sector? 5) 9) When there
is a corruption case going on in your governorate, how serious do you think the government
deals with the case?


Within municipalities, there is also an important disparity between the number of residents
who perceive high levels of corruption and those who report experiences with it. For instance,
residents of Sfax Ville do not view corruption as prevalent, but they report experiencing
corruption frequently. On the other hand, Gaafour perceives corruption to be more prevalent
than the reported experience with it would suggest.        It is also noteworthy that there is
significant variation within some of the governorates. Bizerte Nord and Bizerte Sud have
similar experiences, but Sfax Ville and Sfax Sud are very distinct.




                                                                                            57
Figure 23. Experience with Corruption, by Municipality. Questions incorporated into the
additive, normalized index included 1) Did any politician or representative offer you gifts,
money, or access to services for your vote? 2) Agreement with “I paid a bribe in order to get
a better treatment” for patients of municipal clinics or doctors, 3) Have you been a victim of
corruption by a local government official in the past year? 4) Has anyone else in your
immediate family been a victim of corruption in the past year?

It is useful to note that awareness of public meetings and the perception of corruption may be
positively correlated. As we see in Figure 24, the greater the percentage of respondents who
say that the local council holds public meetings, the higher the perception of corruption. The
drivers of this relationship are not entirely clear; it may be that in areas where the perception
of corruption is higher, there is also a greater awareness of local meetings in which grievances
can be aired. What is important, however, is that this relationship is masked when examining
only the governorate level. As shown in Figure 25, when data is aggregated at the
governorate level, the relationship between awareness of public meetings and perceptions of
corruptions appears slightly negative.




                                                                                              58
                                       Data agregated at Municipal Level



             2
                                        sfax ville

             1                                       monastir
                                                 moknine
                                                bouarada      siliana ville
                                                           mahdia
                                                                                          souassi
                                                                                          la marsa
             0




                                                                                        tebolba
                                          gaafour
                                                                                                       bizerte nord
                                           sfax sud
        -1




                                                                   ksour essaf   cite khadhra
                                 sekiet eddayer

                                                     bizerte sud
        -2




                                         jbel jloud
                       menzel jemil

                  0                              .05                       .1                                         .15
                                               Municipality holds public meetings
.
Figure 24. Relationship between Awareness of Local Council Meetings and Perceptions
of Corruption, Aggregated at the Municipal Level.

                                      Data agregated at Governorate Level
        .5




                                                                                            monastir
                                                                   siliana



                                                                                                                  mahdia
          0




                               sfax
    -.5




                                                                                                                  tunis
        -1




                                                                                      bizerte
 -1.5




                 .02                            .04                       .06                                         .08
                                              Municipality holds public meetings


Figure 25. Relationship between Awareness of Local Council Meetings and Perceptions
of Corruption, Aggregated at the Governorate Level.


                                                                                                                            59
                            The LPGI measures the extent that economic, social, political and religious actors that play
                            key roles in local governance varies by locality. Although the sample in Tunisia is limited at
                            this stage to 18 delegations, we are able to detect clear local clusters where most actors are
                            perceived to matter a great deal (Siliana Ville) as well as those where they matter very little
                            (Bizerte Sud). (See Figure 26) Notice that even within the same governorate (Siliana),
                            Bouarada and Siliana Ville lie at opposite ends of the distributions. This highlights the
                            importance of designs that allow us to detect variation at the local level.




                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                     1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            monastir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   siliana ville




                                                                                                                                                                              .5
                                                                                                    Informal Social Influence                                                                                                     ksour essaf             gaafour
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  citesekiet eddayer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       khadhra
                                                                                                                                        monastirsiliana ville                                                                 tebolba
                                   .5




                                                                                                                                             gaafour
Informal Social Influence




                                                                               ksour essaf                                          sekiet eddayer
                                                                                                                                 cite khadhra                                                                                           la marsa  sfax ville




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  jbel jloud mahdia
                                                                                   tebolba                                                                                                                                                              moknine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sfax  sud
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 bizerte nord
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               souassi       menzel jemil
                                                                               jbel la  marsa                                     sfax ville mahdia
                                     0




                                                                                     jloud
                                                                                                                                         moknine




                                                                                                                                                                          -.5
                                                                                          sfax sud
                                                                                 souassi bizerte nord                           menzel jemil                                                              bizerte sud
                               -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                      bouarada




                                                                                                                                                                              -1
                                                                          bizerte sud

                                                              bouarada
                                   -1




                                                                                                                                                                       -1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                     -1                     -.5                 0               .5                                 1
                            -1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Formal Non-Economic Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                    Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities
                                         -1                       -.5                 0                                                   .5                       1                Informal social influence includes: INFL_1 INFL_2 INFL_8
                                                                           Formal Economic Influence                                                                                Fornal non-economic influence includes: (1) mosque & religious groups (2) CSOs (3) political parties
                                         Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities                                                     Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015
                                         Informal social influence includes: (1) regular citizens (2) powerful local families (3) clans or tribes
                                         Formal economic influence includes: (1) Trade Union (2) Chamber of commerce or bus. assoc.
                                         Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015
                                     1




                                                                                                                                           monastirsiliana ville
                                   .5




                                                                                                                                        gaafour
Informal Social Influence




                                                                                             ksour essaf
                                                                                                                                citesekiet eddayer
                                                                                                                                     khadhra
                                                                                        tebolba
                                                                                                 la marsa  sfax ville
                                     0




                                                                                           jbel jloud mahdia
                                                                                                                 moknine
                                                                                              sfax
                                                                                          bizerte
                                                                                        souassi     sud
                                                                                                   nordmenzel jemil
                               -.5




                                                                 bizerte sud

                                           bouarada
                                   -1
                            -1.5




                                          -1                       -.5                 0               .5                                                          1
                                                                         Formal Non-Economic Influence
                                         Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities
                                         Informal social influence includes: (1) regular citizens (2) powerful local families (3) clans or tribes
                                         Fornal non-economic influence includes: (1) mosque & religious groups (2) CSOs (3) political parties
                                         Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015


                            Figure 26 Cross-Correlations between Key Measures of Social Influence


                            There is evidence that these local level differences are related to variation in governance. We
                            detect a negative relationship between the density of informal social ties and the perception of
                            corruption in a given locality. It is crucial to keep in mind that these measures should be taken
                            in the immediate geographical context of the respondents daily lives rather than at an
                            (arbitrary) administrative level. Figure 27 displays the relationship between the extent to

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60
which informal social actors—matter defined as relatives, powerful local families and
clan/tribes—and the perception of corruption. We find that at the delegation level, those areas
in which informal social influence is stronger report lower levels of perceived corruption.
Importantly, as the Figure 27 illustrates, a relationship that is not detectable at the (higher)
governorate level appears far more clear when the data is disaggrated at the municipal level.
We recognize that with only six governorates included the survey, a ‘true’ signi ficant
correlation that would be detected if all governorates were taken into account is unlikly to
appear when the LGPI Tunisia is used at the governorate level. It is thus especially important
to design and analyze data at the most appropriate level.

The LGPI reveals an important contrast between answers to questions regarding the
perception of corruption in the local area and the individuals’ experience with corruption. In
delegations where local stakeholders (e.g., political parties, trade unions, powerful families)
have a strong influence, respondents percieve a lower incidence of corruption; yet, the
reported experience with corruption is constant across localities, regardless of the strength of
local actors.

These relationship of local non-economic actors with perceived corruption and experienced
corruption are demonstrated in Figure 28. Non-economic actors include mosques and
religious groups, CSOs, and political parties. We find a virtually flat line – indicating no
apparent relationship – when we examine the relationship with experienced corruption. Yet,
there is a negative slope and narrower confidence interval with regard to perceived corruption.
One can question whether this indicates response bias, wherein individuals are less willing to
report the perception of corruption in areas with strong local stakeholders, or whether it
reflects a perception of security and order, in which those living in areas with strong local
stakeholders perceive the sitaution to be better than those who live in areas without such
stakeholders. More work needs to be done to adjudicate between these explanations.




                                                                                             61
                                        2
                                        1




                                                                                                      TunisMonastir
                                        0




                                                                              Bizerte             Siliana
                                                                                                   Mahdia


                                                                                                    Sfax
                                    -1
                                    -2




                                            -1                      -.5                  0                            .5                      1
                                                                              Informal Social Influence
                                       2




                                                  bouarada

                                                                                                  la marsa
                                                                                             moknine
                                       1




                                                                                                          tebolba
                                                                                   souassi

                                                                                   bizerte nord                        gaafour
                                       0




                                                                                  menzel jemil
                                                                bizerte sud
                                                                                    sfax sud jbel jloud             sekiet eddayer
                                                                                                                  cite khadhra
       3




                                                                                                mahdia
                                                                                                                             essaf
                                                                                                                       ksour monastir
                                   -1
       2




             bouarada                                                                                                       siliana ville
                                                                  la marsa                sfax ville
                                                                                    moknine
       1




                                                     tebolba
                                   -2




                                                      souassi
                                                         bizerte nord                  gaafour
       0




                                          -1
                                bizerte sud                     -.5    menzel jemil 0                          .5                    1
                                                           jbel  jloud
                                                              sfax   sud Informalsekiet  eddayer
                                                                       mahdiacite khadhra
                                                                                   Social  Influence
                                                          ksour essaf                    monastir
-3 -2 -1




                                          Indices computed by MCA. Regression   and
                                                                             sfax  ville            siliana
                                                                                    Confidence Interval     ville
                                                                                                          based on 18 Municipalities
                                            Corruption perception includes:
                                            (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
                                            (3) corruption control (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
                                            (5) providing assistance to those not in need
                                            Informal social influence includes:(1) regular citizens (2) powerful local families (3) clans or tribes
            -1                   -.5 Source: LGPI dataset,
                                                   0       Tunisia 2015 .5                                                   1
                                  Formal
                             Legend      Non-Economic       Influence

                                            95% CI                              Fitted values
                                            Bizerte                             Siliana
                                            Monastir                            Mahdia
                                            Tunis                               Sfax
           Indices computed by  Figure     27 Informal
                                  MCA. Regression               Social
                                                     and Confidence        Influence
                                                                      Interval           and
                                                                               based on 18    Perceived Corruption at
                                                                                           Municipalities                                             the Governorate and
           Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
                                Municipal
           (3) corruption control                (Delegation)
                                  (4) perceived failure              Levels:
                                                        to provide social         An
                                                                          assitance   Example
                                                                                    when due        of Aggregation Bias
           (5) providing assistance to those not in need
           Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015




                                                                                                                                                                        62
                                      3
                                      2


                                                                                                          sfax ville

                                                                                                                   monastir
                                      1




                                                                                                                moknine   siliana ville
                                                bouarada                                           mahdia
                                                                                     souassi
                                                                                               la marsa
                                      0




                                                                                    tebolba
                                                                                                                   gaafour
                                                                                       bizerte nord
                                                                                           sfax sud
                                    -1




                                                                                        ksour essaf       cite khadhra
                                                                                                              sekiet eddayer
                                                                 bizerte sud
                                    -2




                                                                                         jbel jloud menzel jemil
                                    -3




                                            -1                     -.5                 0               .5                                      1
                                                                         Formal Non-Economic Influence
                                           Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities
                                           Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015
                                      3
                                      2




                                                bouarada

                                                                                               la marsa
                                                                                                                moknine
                                      1




                                                                                    tebolba
                                                                                     souassi
                                                                                        bizerte nord              gaafour
                                      0




                                                                                                     menzel jemil
                                                                 bizerte sud              jbel jloud
                                                                                             sfax sud        sekiet eddayer
                                                                                                         cite khadhra
                                                                                         ksour essaf mahdia
                                                                                                                    monastir
                                    -1
       3




                                                                                                                               siliana ville
                                                                                                          sfax ville
       2




             bouarada
                                    -2




                                                                  la marsa         moknine
       1




                                                       tebolba
                                                        souassi
                                                          bizerte nord                gaafour
                                    -3
       0




                                  bizerte sud                           menzel jemil
                                                            jbel jloud
                                                               sfax  sud        sekiet  eddayer
                                                                            cite
                                                                       mahdia    khadhra
                                                           ksour essaf                  monastir
-3 -2 -1




                                            -1                       -.5                    0                          .5                      1
                                                                            sfax Non-Economic
                                                                         Formal   ville         siliana ville
                                                                                                      Influence
                                           Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities
                                           Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
                                           (3) corruption control (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
                                           (5) providing assistance to those not in need
            -1                     -.5     Source: LGPI 0                  .5
                                                        dataset, Tunisia 2015                                    1
                                    Formal Non-Economic Influence
                               Legend
                                            95% CI                        Fitted values
                                            Bizerte                       Siliana
                                            Monastir                      Mahdia
                                            Tunis                         Sfax
           Indices computed by  Figure               and Confidencethe
                                           28. Contrasting
                                  MCA. Regression                           Relationship
                                                                      Interval               between
                                                                               based on 18 Municipalities      Non-Economic Actors on Perceived vs.
           Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
                                Experienced
           (3) corruption control                    Corruption
                                  (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
           (5) providing assistance to those not in need
           Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015

                                                                                                                                                   63
                                                However, as Figure 29 demonstrates, the relationship holds as well between the extent to
                                                which other stakeholders influence local governance and perceived corruption. Perceived
                                                corruption is also negatively related to the influence of economic stakeholders, which include
                                                trade unions and chambers of commerce and business associations. The same holds for
                                                informal social influences, which includes ordinary citizens, powerful local families, and
                                                clans and tribes.
                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                               2




                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                              bouarada                                                                                                                                     bouarada


                                                                                                                                                    2 3 Perception
                        Corruption Perception




                                                                                                                                la marsa                                                                                                      la marsa
                                                                                                                                                                     moknine                                                                                                    moknine
                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                     tebolba                                                                                                                   tebolba
                                                                                                                      souassi                                                                                                                souassi
                                                                                                                        bizerte nord              gaafour                                                                                               bizerte nord                gaafour




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                               0




                                                                                                                                     menzel jemil                                                                                                                      menzel jemil
                                                                                                                                               1 Corruption
                                                                                                 bizerte sud              jbel jloud                                                                                                  bizerte sud
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           jbel jloud
                                                                                                                             sfax  sud       sekiet eddayer                                                                                             sfax sud           sekiet eddayer
                                                                                                                                         cite khadhra                                                                                                                   cite khadhra
                                                         -3 Perception




                                                                                                                         ksour essaf mahdia                                                                                               ksour essaf                              mahdia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               monastir
                                                                                                                                                    monastir




                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                   -1




                                                                                                                                                                            bouarada
                                                                                                                                                                               siliana ville                                                                                          siliana ville
                                                                                                                                              sfax ville                                                                                                                 sfax ville
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               la marsa                  moknine



                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                                                              -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tebolba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 souassi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   bizerte nord               gaafour
                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               menzel jemil
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -3
                                                                                                                                                                                                    bizerte sud
                                                Corruption




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    jbel jloud
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sfax  sud         sekiet eddayer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cite
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mahdia     khadhra
                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1                    -.5 ksour essaf  0               monastir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .5               1
                                                                                                                                        -3 -2 -1




                                                                           -1                     -.5                 0               .5                                                       1
                                                                                                        Formal Non-Economic Influence                                                                                               Formal Economic Influence           siliana ville
                                                                         Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     sfax ville
                                                                         Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment                                            Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities
                                                                         (3) corruption control (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due                                               Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
                                                                         (5) providing assistance to those not in need                                                                                   (3) corruption control (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
                                                                         Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015                                                                                              (5) providing assistance to those not in need
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Formal economic influence includes: (1) Trade Union (2) Chamber of commerce or bus. assoc.
                                                                                                                                                                          -1                            -.5                        0 2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia   .5                                                          1
                                                            3




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Formal Non-Economic Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Legend
                                                            2
Corruption Perception




                                                                                bouarada
                                                                                                                             la marsa
                                                                                                                        moknine                                                                                   95% CI                                     Fitted values
                                                            1




                                                                                                                                     tebolba
                                                                                                               souassi
                                                                                                                bizerte nord                                             gaafour                                  Bizerte                                    Siliana
                                                            0




                                                                                                               menzel jemil
                                                                                             bizerte sud
                                                                                                                 sfax sud jbel jloud
                                                                                                                            mahdia
                                                                                                                                                                       sekiet eddayer
                                                                                                                                                                     cite khadhra
                                                                                                                                                                                essaf
                                                                                                                                                                          ksour monastir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Monastir                                   Mahdia
                                                 -1




                                                                                                                                sfax ville                                     siliana ville                      Tunis                                      Sfax
                                                 -2




                                                                                                                                                                        Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities
                                                                                                                                                                        Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
                                                 -3




                                                                         -1                      -.5                  0                                                 .5 corruption control
                                                                                                                                                                        (3)            1      (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
                                                                                                           Informal Social Influence                                    (5) providing assistance to those not in need
                                                                         Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities         Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015
                                                                         Corruption perception includes:
                                                                         (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
                                                                         (3) corruption control (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
                                                                         (5) providing assistance to those not in need
                                                                         Informal social influence includes:(1) regular citizens (2) powerful local families (3) clans or tribes
                                                                         Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015


                                                Figure 29. Perception of Corruption and Economic, Non-Economic and Informal
                                                Forms of Local Influence

                                                Importantly we also find a similar relationship if we parse local influences by the extent to
                                                which they reflect vertical relations (e.g., clientelist networks driven by political parties, trade
                                                unions or powerful families) or horizontal ones (e.g., level, mutually reinforcing relationships
                                                between ordinary citizens and clans and tribes.) In both cases, the negative relationship
                                                between perceived corruption and social ties remains. (See Figure 30.)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              64
                             3
                             2
                                                  bouarada
                                                                                                      la marsa
                                                                                                                                         moknine
                             1


                                                                                                                            tebolba
                                                                                                             souassi
                                                                                                           bizerte nord gaafour
                             0




                                                                                                                      menzel jemil
                                                                                   bizerte sud
                                                                                        jbel jloud      sfax sud                sekiet eddayer
                                                                                                                         cite khadhra
                                                                                                                                        mahdia
                                                                                                                        ksour essaf monastir
                           -1




                                                                                                                            sfax ville       siliana ville
                           -2
                           -3




                                 -1.5                     -1                    -.5                            0                            .5
                                                                        Vertical Influence
                                  Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities
                                  Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
                                  (3) corruption control (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
                                  (5) providing assistance to those not in need
                                  Vertical influence includes: (1) powerful families (2) trade unions (3) political parties
                                  Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015
                             3
                             2




                                                                          bouarada
                                                                                                                    la marsa
                                                                                         moknine
                             1




                                                                                                                        tebolba
                                                                                                     souassi
                                                                                        bizerte nord                                         gaafour
                             0




                                                                                        menzel jemil
                                                                            bizerte sud                            jbel jloud
                                                                                                 sfax sud                        sekiet eddayer
                                                                                                                                   cite khadhra
                                                                                                               mahdia                    ksour essaf
                                                                                                                                        monastir
                           -1




                                                                                                               sfax ville                     siliana ville
3




                           -2
2




      bouarada
                                                        la marsa
                           -3




                                                                          moknine
1




                                             tebolba
                                              souassi
                                 -1.5           bizerte -1nord                  -.5
                                                                            gaafour                     0                  .5
0




                         bizerte sud                          menzel jemil
                                                  jbel jloud
                                                     sfax  sud     citeHorizontal
                                                                       sekiet       Influence
                                                                              eddayer
                                                                        khadhra
                                                 ksour       mahdia
                                                         essaf                monastir Interval based on 18 Municipalities
                                  Indices computed  by MCA.   Regression and Confidence
                                  Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes    obtain gov. employment
                                                                                             to ville
                                                                                       siliana
                                                                   sfax ville
                                  (3) corruption control (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
                                  (5) providing assistance to those not in need
                                  Horizontal Influence includes: (1) relatives (2) tribe)
                                  Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015
     -1                   -.5                 0               .5                                         1
                                Formal Non-Economic Influence
                      Legend
                                   95% CI                        Fitted values
                                   Bizerte                       Siliana
                                   Monastir                      Mahdia
                                   Tunis                         Sfax
    Indices computed by Figure        30. Perception
                           MCA. Regression    and Confidence  of  Corruption
                                                               Interval             and Horizontal
                                                                        based on 18 Municipalities                  and Vertical Forms of Local
    Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
    (3) corruption control Influence
                           (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
    (5) providing assistance to those not in need
    Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015


                                                                                                                                                              65
The LGPI also reveals a relationship between the reported necessity of wasta to get a
government job and the prevalence and need for informal payments. As shown in Figure 31,
there is a positive correlation between the use of wasta and perceived corruption. Once again,
there is no apparent relationship with experienced corruption.

The LGPI pilot study also suggests an interesting relationship between the social composition
of localities and citizen engagement. In Tunisia, we find a negative relationship between
attendance at public meetings and the strength of stakeholders, whether defined by the type of
stakeholder or vertical influence. (See Figure 32.) This suggests that in areas where
stakeholders are powerful, people do not appear compelled to attend them. This occurs
despite the fact that meetings are held in such areas; indeed, the data reflect a slightly positive
relationship between knowing that meetings are held and the power of stakeholders. The
results have important implications for programs designed around participatory processes and
citizen engagement.       We should expect their impact to vary according to the social
composition of the locality.
    2




                                                                                                   bouarada

                                                                                              la marsa
                                                                                           moknine
    1




                                                                                                tebolba
                                                                                                         souassi
                         gaafour                                        bizerte nord
    0




                                                       menzel jemil
                                              bizerte sud        jbel jloud
                                                           sfax sud               sekiet eddayer
                                                                             cite khadhra
                            mahdia
                                         ksour essaf
                                                 monastir
  -1




                                                            siliana ville
          sfax ville
  -2




           2.4             2.6              2.8                   3            3.2                 3.4
                   Perceived importance of wasta for getting a government job

        Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities
        Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
        (3) corruption control (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
        (5) providing assistance to those not in need
        Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015




                                                                                                                   66
                                2
                                       sfax ville
                                                                                monastir
                                1
                                                                                           siliana ville                      moknine
                                                          mahdia                                                                  bouarada
                                                                                                                                        souassi
                                                                                                                                 la marsa
                                0




                                                      gaafour                                                                         tebolba
                                                                                                           bizerte nord
                                                                                              sfax sud
                             -1




                                                                       ksour essaf                              cite khadhra
                                                                                                                     sekiet eddayer
                                                                            bizerte sud
                             -2




                                                                                               jbel jloud
                                                                                     menzel jemil
3




                                        2.4              2.6              2.8                    3                3.2                 3.4
2




      bouarada
                                                         la marsa            moknine
                                                 Perceived importance           of wasta for getting a government          job
1




                                                 tebolba
                                                  souassi
                                                    bizerte nord                gaafour
0




                           bizerte sud
                                     Indices computed    by       menzel jemil
                                                             Factor
                                                      jbel
                                                         sfax  sud Analysis
                                                           jloud              (pcf)eddayer
                                                                       citesekiet
                                                                            khadhra
                                     Regression and    Confidence
                                                     ksour   essaf  Interval
                                                                 mahdia      based   on 18 Municipalities.
                                                                                   monastir
                                     Corruption experience includes:
                                     (1) Vote buying attempt on respondent
                                                                       sfax ville          siliana ville
                                     (2) Being personally a victim of corruption by local government officials
                                     (3) Relative is a victim of corruption by local government officials
                                     (4) Having to bribe doctors at the local clinic
                                     (5) Bribing a policeman seeking to fine you
     -1                      -.5                 0dataset, Tunisia 2015
                                      Source: LGPI                  .5                                     1
                                   Formal Non-Economic Influence
                        Legend
                                      95% CI                       Fitted values
                                      Bizerte                      Siliana
                                      Monastir                     Mahdia
                                      Tunis                        Sfax
    Indices computed by Figure                and Confidenceand
                                      31. Corruption
                           MCA. Regression                           the
                                                               Interval    Use
                                                                        based    ofMunicipalities
                                                                                    Wasta
                                                                              on 18
    Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
    (3) corruption control (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
    (5) providing assistance to those not in need
    Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015




                                                                                                                                                  67
                                                 1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                           1.2
                                                 1.2
 Attend public meetings




                                                                                                                           Attend public meetings




                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ksour
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jbel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        bouarada bizerte souassi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sud
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tebolba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           jloud
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             essaf bizerte nord
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sfax sud                gaafour
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         moknine
                                                       1




                                                             bouarada              bizerte sud           souassi
                                                                                                           bizerte
                                                                                                            ksour
                                                                                                            jbel
                                                                                                        tebolba sfax
                                                                                                                 jloud
                                                                                                                   essaf
                                                                                                                     sud
                                                                                                                    nord                                     gaafour
                                                                                                                                                            moknine




                                                                                                                                                                                           .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  cite khadhra
                                                 .8




                                                                                                                                                    cite khadhra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          la marsa                        mahdia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        monastir
                                                                                                                      mahdia
                                                                                                                  la marsa                                     monastir




                                                                                                                                                                                           .6
                                                 .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    siliana ville
                                                                                                                                                                       siliana ville
                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
                                                            -1                       -.5                 0               .5                                                            1              -1                    -.5               0                           .5                         1
                                                                                           Formal Non-Economic Influence                                                                                                           Formal Economic Influence
                                                           Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities                                                     Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities
                                                           Formal non-economic influence includes: (1) mosque & relig. groups (2) CSOs (3) political parties                                          Formal economic influence includes: (1) Trade Union (2) Chamber of commerce or bus. assoc.
                                                           Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015                                                                                                         Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015
                                                 1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                            1.4
                                                 1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                            1.2
 Attend public meetings




                                                                                                                                   Attend public meetings
                          3




                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                 bouarada       bizerte sud         bizerte
                                                                                                   souassi
                                                                                                     sfax sud
                                                                                                            moknine
                                                                                                            nordjbel jloud tebolba                              gaafour
                                                                                                                                                               ksour essaf                                 bouarada                 bizerte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        jbelsud
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             jloud    sfax
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        bizerte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         souassi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           sud nord
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tebolba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ksour essaf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    gaafourmoknine
                          2




                                bouarada
                                                                                                       la marsa
                                                 .8




                                                                                                                                                                                             .8


                                                                                                                            moknine
                          1




                                                                                            tebolba                     cite khadhra                                                                                                                                cite khadhra
                                                                                             souassi
                                                                                                          mahdia
                                                                                               bizerte nordla marsa            gaafour
                                                                                                                                  monastir                                                                                                           la marsa                    mahdia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 monastir
                          0




                                                           bizerte sud                                       menzel jemil
                                                 .6




                                                                                                                                                                                             .6




                                                                                                 jbel jloud
                                                                                                    sfax  sud           sekiet    eddayer
                                                                                                            mahdia  cite khadhra
                                                                                                ksour essaf                        monastir
-3 -2 -1




                                                                                                                                  siliana ville                                                                                                                                  siliana ville

                                                                                                                                                siliana ville
                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                             .4




                                                                                                                    sfax ville
                                                           -1                       -.5                  0                                                    .5                       1                         -1                -.5                  0                      .5                        1
                                                                                              Informal Social Influence                                                                                                                    Vertical Influence
                                                           Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities                                                      Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities
                                                           Informal social influence includes: (1) regular citizens (2) powerful local families (3) clans or tribes                                    Vertical influence includes:
                                                           Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015                                                                                                          Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015
                               -1                           -.5                 0               .5                                                                                                           1
                                                                  Formal Non-Economic Influence
                                                   Legend
                                                                          95% CI                                           Fitted values
                                                                          Bizerte                                          Siliana
                                                                          Monastir                                         Mahdia
                                                                          Tunis                                            Sfax
                              Indices computedFigure        32. Civic
                                                 by MCA. Regression     and engagement         and
                                                                             Confidence Interval     Social
                                                                                                  based       Influence
                                                                                                        on 18 Municipalities
                              Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
                              (3) corruption control (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
                              (5) providing assistance to those not in need
                                           dataset, the
                              Source: LGPIFinally,      pilot
                                                    Tunisia   study
                                                            2015         in Tunisia uncovers interesting potential relationships between local
                                               social organization and the quality of service delivery. The study suggests that, if anything,
                                               there is a negative relationship between the significance of local stakeholders (here, economic
                                               stakeholders) and the quality of education. The same holds true with the relationship between
                                               education quality and density of social ties. (See Figure 33) One potential explanation for
                                               this relationship may be the dominance of public education in Tunisia and its centralized
                                               provision. This does not fully explain why we observe a negative relationship, rather than a
                                               non-relationship, but it may help explain disparities in the service quality of services in
                                               education versus health within localities.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    68
                                 .4          bouarada
                                                                          jbel jloud
                                 .2

                                                                         ksour essaf
                                                                 bizerte sud                                             cite sekiet
                                                                                                                              khadhraeddayer
                                                                                                                        menzel jemil
                                                                                             bizerte nord
                                                                                              sfax sud
                                      0




                                                                                                                                             gaafour
                                                                            souassi                                                   monastir    siliana ville
                                                                              la marsa                                      sfax ville    mahdia
                                -.2




                                                                               tebolba
                                -.4
                                -.6




                                                                                                                                      moknine

                                                    -.5                                 0                                                   .5
                                                                            Formal Economic Influence
                                           Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities
                                           Formal economic influence includes: (1) Trade Union (2) Chamber of commerce or bus. assoc.
                                           Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015
                                                             sfax sud
                                 .7




                                                               cite khadhra                             jbel jloud


                                                                         la marsa
                                 .6




                                                    sfax ville                           bizerte nord
                                 .5




                                                                      sekiet eddayer
                                                                                                                    souassisud
                                                                                                        menzel jemilbizerte
                                 .4




                                                                 monastir                                                          mahdia
       3




                                                                                                            siliana ville
                                                                                                                                             bouarada
                                                                                               gaafour
                                 .3




                                                                                                                                                ksour essaf
       2




             bouarada
                                                                   la marsa                           moknine               tebolba
                                                                                   moknine
       1




                                                        tebolba
                                 .2




                                                         souassi
                                                           bizerte nord               gaafour
       0




                                bizerte sud                             menzel jemil
                                                             jbel jloud
                                                                sfax  sud       sekiet  eddayer
                                                                            cite
                                                                        mahdia   khadhra
                                          1.6                1.8 essaf
                                                            ksour                2      monastir 2.2                         2.4                 2.6
-3 -2 -1




                                                                             sfax ville         siliana ville
                                                           Extent to which people know each other in this area
                                           Indices computed by MCA. Regression and Confidence Interval based on 18 Municipalities
                                           Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015
            -1                    -.5                   0               .5                                              1
                                          Formal Non-Economic Influence
                             Legend
                                             95% CI                           Fitted values
                                             Bizerte                          Siliana
                                             Monastir                         Mahdia
                                             Tunis                            Sfax
           Indices computed by  Figure     33. Quality
                                  MCA. Regression             of Education,
                                                     and Confidence                Influence
                                                                      Interval based             of Economic
                                                                                     on 18 Municipalities                       Stakeholders and Social Density
           Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
           (3) corruption control (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
           (5) providing assistance to those not in need
                         We observe
           Source: LGPI dataset,         very different
                                       a 2015
                                 Tunisia                 relationship between local social influences and health quality. As
                             shown in Figure 34, for instance, the more people know each-other, the better the quality of

                                                                                                                                                                  69
                               health services in clinics and doctors’ offices. One explanation may be that local clients are
                               able to put greater pressure on health care providers than they are on education providers,
                               given the higher level of private provision and consequently less dominant state-centralized
                               provision in the health sector. More remains to be done to examine these relationships, both
                               by expanding the sample size and combining the LGPI with other tools (as discussed
                               previously.)


                                                                                                                                            bouarada
                                    .5




                                                                                                                     bizerte sud
                                                                                                                                   mahdia
                                                                                               gaafour      siliana ville
                                                                 monastir
                                                                                         bizerte nord
                                                                                                        menzel jemil
                                                                                                                                              ksour essaf
                                          0




                                                                                                                        tebolba
                                                                                                           moknine souassi
                                                                       sekiet eddayer
                                                                          la marsa
                                                       sfax ville cite khadhra

                                                                                                        jbel jloud
                                    -.5




                                                                sfax sud
       3




                                    -1
       2




             bouarada
                                              1.6             1.8la marsa         2moknine             2.2                2.4                 2.6
       1




                                                      tebolba
                                                       souassi
                                                          bizerte
                                                           Extent   nord
                                                                     tomenzel
                                                                         which jemil
                                                                                peoplegaafour
                                                                                           know each other in this area
       0




                                  bizerte sud               jbel jloud
                                                               sfax  sud        sekiet  eddayer
                                                                            cite
                                                                       mahdia    khadhra
                                                           ksour   essaf                 monastir Interval based on 18 Municipalities
-3 -2 -1




                                           Indices computed   by MCA.   Regression and Confidence
                                                                                                  silianaof
                                           HQI includes: (1) clean restrooms in the clinic (2) presence     a doctor at the clinic
                                                                                                          ville
                                                                             sfax ville
                                              (3) reasonable expenses (4) reasonable waitng period at clinic (5) patients treated with respect
                                              (6) necessary medicines readily available
                                              Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015

            -1                      -.5                 0               .5                                             1
                                          Formal Non-Economic Influence
                               Legend
                                               95% CI                        Fitted values
                                               Bizerte                       Siliana
                                               Monastir                      Mahdia
                                               Tunis                         Sfax
           Indices computed by  Figure     34. Health
                                  MCA. Regression             Quality
                                                     and Confidence        and
                                                                      Interval   Social
                                                                               based on 18Influence
                                                                                           Municipalities
           Corruption perception includes: (1) vote-buying (2) bribes to obtain gov. employment
           (3) corruption control (4) perceived failure to provide social assitance when due
           (5) providing assistance to those not in need
           Source: LGPI dataset, Tunisia 2015
                               In short, the LGPI provides an important tool for examining local level variation in
                               governance and service delivery. Even where systems are highly centralized, there are
                               significant variations in implementation and needs at the local level. The tool allows us to
                               assess these needs, to better gauge local drivers of governance, and to develop locally
                               appropriate programming. There are often no straightforward answers to what troubles local
                               communities and how best to serve those concerns, but the LGPI can help to pinpoint
                               problems, identify the major players engaged in developing solutions, and create better
                               informed and more effective policies.


                                                                                                                                                            70
ANNEX 3: Dissemination Guidelines5

Many tools exist for disseminating survey findings and communicating messages clearly and
in a simplified manner to the public and the broader audience for information and future use.
Among the many tools are:

o Holding Public Awareness Campaigns

Running a public awareness campaign requires a conscious effort to define the problem, shape
a message and get the message to the community in an effective inclusive manner. Common
methods for campaigns include Media, advertisements, internet, public institutions, and direct
outreach.

    An effective public awareness campaign will have:

              A well-defined issue;
              A clear message;
              An identified target audience;
              Multiple communications strategies- including use of volunteers for peer-to-peer
         


o Holding small group discussions
A small group discussion is a conversation between a small group of people on a specific
topic. It is different from a meeting because it is moderated or managed by a person who asks
specific questions on a topic. Small group discussions allow citizens to find out a lot of
information and different perspectives from the municipality in a single meeting.

For effective discussions, it is important to:

            Have a structured discussion, with well-planned questions that will guide the discussion;
            Reach beyond the usual circle of colleagues and actors to reach more vulnerable and
             marginalized groups;
            Take time to test the small group questionnaire before formally implementing the
             discussion.

o Developing interactive websites that allowed citizens, local civil society organizations,
  and others to access reports, review the methodology and instruments, and undertake
  simple data manipulation


5
 For a broader discussion on the tools and guidelines for enhancing communication with the public and
disseminating results, please see “Resilient Municipalities: A Resource for Countries Affected by the Syria
Crisis. Module 4: Increasing two-way communication” UNDP.

                                                                                                              71
The Vietnam PAPI results were extensively promoted through various social media outlets,
such as Facebook and twitter, and through an interactive website to help citizens review and
understand the results for future results. Below are some snapshots captured from the website
(http://papi.vn/en/):




                                                                                           72
73
74
Reference

Innovation for Successful Societies. (2014). Measuring Citizen Experiences: Conducting a
Social Audit in Vietnam, 2009-2013. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University.

Recanatini, F. (2011). Country-Specific Diagnostic Assessments: An Alternative Approach
for Policy Reform. Washington, DC: The World Bank Group.

UNDP (forthcoming). Resilient Municipalities: A Resource for Countries Affected by the
Syria Crisis. Module 4: Increasing Two-Way Communication. New York: UNDP.

World Bank (forthcoming). Raising the Bar: Building Citizen Feedback Loops for Service
Delivery in Tunisia. Policy Note. Washington, DC: The World Bank Group.




                                                                                     75
