   Impact Evaluation Design for the Zambia Access to ACT Initiative (ZAAI) – A
Project Concept Note

   Improving the Public Sector Supply Chain, Community Engagement, and
Affordable Access to ACTs in the Private Sector


    I. POLICY CONTEXT – CURRENT SYSTEM AND MOTIVATION FOR INTERVENTION

    The Zambian National Malaria Strategy has achieved remarkable success in expanding access
to preventative services. With the most recent rollout of 3 million long lasting insecticide treated
nets to date, ITN coverage has increased to a national average of 60% (MOH 2008). Indoor
residual spraying (IRS) is planned to be scaled up from the current 15 districts to 36 over the
coming year. Zambia is developing an innovative model for community engagement by
strengthening its Community Health Worker network and improving their skills with regard to
malaria prevention and control activities.

     Despite the success in malaria control the Zambian burden remains widespread, with an
estimated 3.7 million malaria cases of P. falciparum and 6,500 malaria-related deaths in 2006
(source?). One critical area of disease prevention and control where less progress has been
observed is case management, especially in rural areas. According to the preliminary results from
2007 DHS, only 24% of urban children and 19% of rural children under 5 received malaria
medication within 24 hours of onset of fever. In related analysis, the 2006 MIS finds that only 8%
of children under-five received Coartem within 24 hours even though ACT therapy is now the
first line treatment and is available free of charge at the point of service in the public sector as
well as sold in selected private sector outlets. This relative underperformance in case management
is due to several factors including:
              • Frequent stock-outs in public health facilities have hampered access – the 2006
          Pubic Expenditure Tracking Study reported 81% of all health facilities experienced ACT
          outage at some point in the last three months.
              • In the private sector both the high price of ACTs and general lack of awareness
          constitutes a barrier to access – a recent University of Zambia/Clinton Foundation study
          finds the sale of significantly lower priced Chloroquine and SP/Fansiadar to be much
          more common in private outlets than ACT sales.

    The 2008 Annual Malaria Plan identified a number of bottlenecks where successful
interventions can enhance the access and affordability of ACTs in both the public and private
sectors. A general consensus among the National Malaria Control Center, the Ministry of Health,
and key donors has emerged to address these concerns. This consensus holds that finding
solutions for the described bottlenecks in the two sector can be best achieved by implementing
complementary intervention strategies in both the public and private sector to increase ACT
access as listed below:

            1. Through the Public Sector: Improving the Supply Chain of Essential Medicines
        from Central Stores Down to Primary Care Facilities
            2. Through the Private Sector: Improving Access to and Affordability of ACTs
        with the Targeted Subsidization of ACTs to Private Sector Outlets

   The objective of the proposed impact evaluation is to measure and provide rigorous
quantitative evidence on the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of each pilot intervention. The
paired public and private sector interventions presents a unique opportunity to measure and
evaluate concurrent improvement in both public and private sector accessibility and their joint
effect on household access to first line treatment. The technical design will be as thorough as the
context allows in order to assure the internal validity of the findings. Simultaneously the design
maximizes the external validity of findings, and thus informs scalable learning, through the
implementation of the interventions in a variety of settings.

    The effectiveness of the proposed interventions is anticipated for the following reasons:

             • Improving the public sector supply chain management will reduce stock-outs in
        public hospitals and health facilities. With improved stocks levels, the population will be
        able to better rely on public services/ACT delivery. Improved services at the point of
        delivery should increase utilization and the cost-effectiveness of service provision. The
        positive perception by people visiting public facilities and receiving timely treatment
        should also influence the decision of other households.
             • Due to the coincident introduction of an ACT subsidy and diagnostics in the
        private sector, as well as sensitization efforts directed towards retailers, malaria- related
        private sector health seeking behavior is expected to change. The objective of the subsidy
        is to reduce the market price of ACT to a level that is within the willingness to pay
        (WTP) bounds of the majority of the poor population, to achieve price competitiveness
        with mono-therapies and non-optimal drugs so that the clinically more efficacious
        treatment will crowd out demand for inferior malaria therapies/drugs, and to sensitize
        consumers and private drug suppliers on the need for diagnostics when accessing such
        effective anti-malarial medication.
             • Observing the impact of these two interventions when implemented either
        separately or conjointly is a unique opportunity to inform policy decisions regarding the
        accessibility and affordability of anti-malaria drugs accessed either through the public or
        the private sector. The proposed study will quantify the relative effect of each
        intervention, as well as their combined effect on household decision making on malaria
        treatment.

    II. DESCRIPTION OF INTERVENTIONS

    1. Public Sector Intervention

     In May 2007, the World Bank conducted an assessment of the public-sector supply chain for
essential medicines in Zambia (Kim O. Beer, 2007). This, as well as studies by Yadav (2007)
reiterate that there is poor visibility of demand and inventory information and lack of
accountability in the downstream supply chain (i.e. in the secondary distribution from the districts
to the health centers/posts) (Figure 1). Currently Medical Stores Ltd. (MSL) is responsible for the
primary distribution of drugs, from the central warehouse to district stores, and the secondary
distribution is the responsibility of the districts themselves. The WB report hypothesized that
expanding the mandate of MSL to include secondary distribution may improve the system
performance.

    To address these problems and ensure adequate stocking at the facility level, experts
proposed a number of intervention pilots to redesign the distribution system. There are two
primary channels for system innovation. These include:
           i.    Through resource reconfiguration in the existing distribution system (e.g.
        allocating more planning capacity to districts; allocating or creating new transport



                                                 2
        resources at the district). Operationally this can be achieved through the introduction of a
        Commodity Planner (CP) at the District Level who is responsible for stock
        management, coordinating information from Health Facilities, providing technical
        assistance to enhance stock flows and obtain improved and timely data from health
        facilities (HFs).
           ii.    Through change in the physical and operating structure of the distribution
        network, in particular the introduction of a cross-docking system that eliminates the need
        to hold stores at the district level. This design, in addition to the improved flow of stocks,
        is expected to reduce the scope for leakages out of the public system.

    Selection of Pilot Interventions

    Following technical proposals by logistic experts and discussions with the World Bank and
JSI concerning technical and operational merits (i.e. opportunities for scalable learning,
sustainability, expected impact on system, etc.), the MOH and MSL agreed to focus on testing the
following three interventions in the public sector supply chain:

     a. District Store maintained with Commodity Planner- System A
     This system represents the smallest incremental change from the existing arrangements. The
districts store is maintained as a stockholding point, and orders monthly on MSL. MSL will make
monthly deliveries to the districts in which this model is piloted. Each order from the district store
to MSL will be based on aggregated consumption data collected from all health centres in the
districts. The health centres in the districts will report to their district monthly, and will receive
one or two deliveries per month from the district (supported by the commodity planner)
dependent on the availability of storage space at the health centre and a vehicle and driver at the
district level.

   A commodity planner, employed by MSL, will be placed at the district store to support all
supply activities.

    The purpose of system A is to evaluate the impact of the introduction of the Commodity
Planner and the new ordering/reporting system on the availability of drugs and medical supplies
at service delivery points.

    For a diagram representing system A, please see Appendix Figure 1.

    b. District Store converted to a Cross-Dock, no Commodity Planner System-B
    This system converts district stores to cross-docking points. No stock will be held at the store;
rather, it will act as a pass through for consignments already packed and labeled for health
centres. The district cross-dock will collect reports monthly from all health centres, convert them
into orders and forward them to MSL. MSL will pick and pack orders for each health centre, and
deliver to the district cross-dock once per month. The district cross-dock will then deliver once or
twice a month down to each health centre, based on the availability of space at health centres and
vehicles at the district level.

    No commodity planner is proposed for system B. This system seeks to evaluate how well the
cross-docking system can operate with no extra resources provided at the district level.

   The purpose of system B is to evaluate the impact of converting district stores to cross-
docking points (with MSL packing for individual health centres), and introducing a new




                                                  3
ordering/reporting system, on the availability of drugs and medical supplies at service delivery
points.

    For a diagram representing system B, please see Appendix Figure 2.

    c. District Store converted to a Cross-Dock, with a Commodity Planner- System C
    This system has the same features as system B, with a commodity planner added.

    The purpose of system C is to evaluate the incremental benefit, if any, of adding a commodity
planner at district level in a cross-docking system.

    For a diagram representing system c, please see Appendix Figure 3.

    Scope of pilot: Each of the three systems will be implemented in six districts representing a
range of administrative, socio-economic, and epidemiologic conditions found in rural and peri-
urban Zambia.

    2. Private Sector Intervention

    Private Sector Subsidy to Promote ACT as First Line Malaria Treatment

    Over the last two decades, parasite resistance to common malarial treatments such as
Chloroquine and Sulfadoxine-Pyrimethamine (SP) has spread. In response, most national
governments have adopted Artemisinin-based Combination Therapies (ACTs) as first-line
treatment for uncomplicated malaria, in line with the recommendation of the World Health
Organization. While the efforts of national government programs and international donors have
increased ACT access through public health systems, the high cost of ACTs has limited their
uptake through the private sector. To address this situation and to mitigate the risk of
development of resistance to ACTs, the Institute of Medicine recommended the establishment of
an international financing mechanism – now known as the Affordable Medicines Facility –
malaria (AMFm) – to lower the price of ACTs to both the private and public sectors through a
subsidy applied at the global level (Arrow et al, 2004).

    The role of the private sector in malaria case management in Zambia is significant. As
captured in Table 1, roughly 42% of the population that seek care for fever do so in the private
sector (LCMS 2004). Furthermore, private sector care is not merely the domain of wealthy
households. Roughly equal proportions of individuals in each expenditure quintile access anti-
malarials in from private outlets.

 Table 1. Percent of individuals seeking treatment in the non-public sector for suspected fever/malaria

                                                                Expenditure quintile                                          Total
 Age category and data source         Urban        Rural
                                                                Bottom       2nd       3rd          4th          Top          N

 All individuals, 2004 LCMS           42.0%        35.4%        36.9%        41.4%     36.8%        32.2%        45.5%        3203
 Children under 7, 2004 LCMS          38.7%        36.7%        34.3%        50.5%     49.2%        23.6%        35.8%        316
 Children under 5, 2006 MIS           ----------   ----------   ----------   16.4%     ----------   ----------   ----------   360
 Note: Results for 2006 MIS do not distinguish by rural/urban or expenditure quintile. Non-public sector does not
 include mission and mining facility.


        While work by Yadav and others provides insight into the top level of the private supply
chain for anti-malarials, little is known about the semi-formal and informal retail outlets that


                                                                4
provide treatment to patients. To provide some initial evidence, the Clinton Foundation
HIV/AIDS Initiative (CHAI) and University of Zambia, with support from the World Bank and
National Malaria Control Center, conducted a rapid analysis of private retail and wholesale
outlets in six districts of the country to guide ongoing deliberations on a national ACT subsidy
through the private sector. This recent small-scale study by the CHAI and University of Zambia
(2008) shows that the majority of medicines available and purchased in the private sector are
Chloroquine and SP. Artemisinin mono-therapy (AMT) is also available for sale. The largest
barriers to ACT utilization appear to be:

                  i)        Stocking: In all surveyed districts, SP has the highest penetration among
              private sector outlets stocking anti-malarials.
                  ii)       Price and Business Practice: The high price of ACTs1 is a principal factor
              limiting the private sector uptake – the continued prescription of SP from public
              facilities also appears to contribute.
                  iii)      Perception of Demand: Private outlets perceive the demand for ACTs to
              be low Shop keepers cite price as the primary factor for not stocking ACTs while
              low demand and lack of information appear to limit ACT and RDT uptake.

     Given the high price and lack of awareness among both consumers and retailers, this study
proposes to explore the effect of a price subsidy, incentives for consistent mark-ups to assure low
prices for the subsidized product, and training for shop keepers to alter stocking and dispensing
behavior. The declining occurrence of malaria incidence in Zambia due to successful prevention
interventions also creates an urgent need for proper diagnosis of all febrile cases as it is no longer
possible to consider any fever case to be malaria. The national malaria control program has
started deploying rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) in the formal healthcare system as part of its case
management and diagnosis strategy. However, diagnosis capacity is almost non-existent in the
private sector. In order to ensure that those seeking treatment outside of the public health care
system are also incentivized and educated about use of RDTs, this private component will
therefore subsidize both RDTs and ACTs in the private sector.

    Subsidy Design

    The private sector component has two principal components:

     (i) Subsidization and Distribution: The ACTs and RDTs are procured from the manufacture
at its public sector price and then sold at a subsidized price to pharmaceutical wholesalers, which
deliver the products, through their normal distribution channels, to eligible drug outlets in the
designated districts included in the pilot.
     (ii) Implementation of supporting activities: A number of supporting interventions (e.g.
repackaging, determining a suggested retail price, public awareness campaigns, incentives to
wholesalers and training to drug dispensers) will be implemented. These interventions seek to
increase demand for the subsidized ACTs and improve the quality of care that patients receive in
the private sector.


1
  Overall, ACTs and Artemisinin monotherapies (AMTs) were the most expensive anti-malarials observed
in sampled outlets at average reported rates of $8.48 and $7.92, respectively. Chloroquine and SP were the
least expensive anti-malarials observed, with average retail prices of $0.38 and $0.59. Anti-malarial retail
prices varied across and within districts. The greatest variations were witnessed in ACT pricing, with, on
average, outlets in urban areas charging much higher prices ($10.58 per course) than those in rural areas
($3.53-3.70 per course).


                                                     5
       Key aspects of the private sector pilot include:

    SELECTION OF OUTLETS FOR THE PILOT
    The pilot will aim to maximize access to ACTs for all socio-economic groups of the
population. In order to ensure equitable access, the selection of outlets for the pilot will be based
on analysis of the type and number of existing outlets in each area. The criterion for selection will
ensure that communities with a high malaria burden with poor access to ACTs will particularly
benefit from the pilot. However, certain basic conditions on drug storage, dispensing, willingness
to comply with contractual obligations of the pilot, willingness to undergo training etc. will be
made important pre-conditions for outlets to be eligible to stock the subsidized ACTs.

    INCENTIVES FOR USE OF RDTS
    There is evidence that RDT results are often ignored when treatment decisions are made. To
address this issue, the project will include strong communication components to educate the
community on the importance of diagnosis. In addition, the pricing of the RDT will be such that
the cost of diagnosis to the end-patient is minimal or zero. A willingness-to-pay study will be
conducted to assess the appropriate price for RDTs. Adequate management algorithms will be
included for management of negative cases (non-malarial febrile illness) and the dispensing
outlets will be trained to refer patients to the nearest public health facility.

    To ensure that the wholesaler and the dispensing outlets have adequate incentives for
dispensing ACTs only to malaria positive patients, the margins and incentives for them to
dispense RDTs will be set a little higher than the margin to dispense ACTs.

    PILOT DISTRICTS
    The pilot project will be implemented in four highly endemic districts that are representative
of peri-urban and rural Zambia in terms of socioeconomic status, access to public facilities,
presence of private outlets and malaria.

   CONSUMER AWARENESS AND BCC
   Activities will be undertaken to raise public awareness about the need for rapid treatment of
malaria with ACTs; the availability of affordable ACTs and RDTs at the selected outlets in their
communities; and the need for proper diagnosis using RDTs. Multiple approaches including print,
mass media, and community outreach will be used. These activities will be combined with
NMCCs existing communication and BCC/IEC strategy to convey other key malaria messages.

    SUGGESTED RETAIL PRICE
    An appropriately-determined suggested retail price (SRP) will be marked on the packaging.
Once again, these prices will be set to achieve the lowest possible prices for end patient while
maintaining a healthy incentive for the wholesalers and dispensing outlets to continue distributing
the product efficiently.

    INCENTIVES FOR WHOLESALERS
    Experience from pilot projects in other countries4 suggests that the private sector distribution
of subsidized ACTs to peripheral areas is successful only when there are adequate incentives for
the wholesalers and retailers. The Government of Tanzania and Clinton Foundation ACT subsidy
pilot in two rural districts has found that only 38% of stores in remote areas versus 80 percent of
stores in more densely populated areas were stocking ACTs five months after the subsidized
drugs were available in the market.2 Distribution to more peripheral areas is limited due to: (i)

2
    Government of Tanzania-Clinton Foundation. “Tanzania Pilot ACT Subsidy: Report on Findings.” April 2008.


                                                          6
long distances and poor road conditions to peripheral areas; (ii) limited capital of retail outlets to
purchase when the distributor delivers; (iii) lower demand in rural areas. Thus, the pilot project
will include a system of incentives where the wholesalers/distributors will receive performance
awards upon providing evidence that they are distributing subsidized ACTs and RDTs in the
selected peripheral dispensing outlets in addition to the easier to reach ones.

    3. Interaction between the Public and Private Sector Interventions

    Finally, the study proposes to overlay the public and private sector intervention districts in
order to measure the joint effects of the two simultaneous interventions. Based on the descriptions
thus far on the public and private sector interventions, the treatment and control arms are as
follows:

    Control: Current State (Neither public nor private sector intervention introduced)

    Treatment 1: Public Sector Intervention Only
               a)       Enhanced Current System
               b)       Cross Dock only
               c)       Enhanced Cross Dock

    Treatment 2: Private Sector Intervention Only

    Treatment 3: Interaction of Public and Private Sector Interventions (Combined Effect)

    4. Complimentary Interventions

    Where possible, the research will take into account the role of complementary demand side
interventions, such as the role of Community Health Workers (CHW). The ongoing CHW pilot in
Livingstone and the plans for scaling up the use of CHWs into further 9 districts presents an
opportunity to measure the combined effect of the public and private interventions in an
environment where Zambia is introducing Home Management of Malaria (HMM). This effort
includes including ACTs in the CHW Kits, as well as training CHWs to be able to promote and
effectively and safely dispense ACTs in their communities. HMM is especially important for
rural, hard-to-reach areas, where households have limited access to facility-based care. The CHW
intervention is planned to be scaled up to ten districts by the end of 2008. Upon successful
piloting in 2008, the CHW program would be expanded to 19 district, then to 27 districts, and, as
resources allow, country-wide, to all 72 districts.

    III. PRIMARY RESEARCH QUESTIONS

   Research Questions on the Public Sector Intervention to Improve the Public Supply
Chain

            1. How does strengthening the supply chain in the public sector affect priority
        health outcomes through the increased availability of essential drugs, including ACTs, for
        households?
            2. Which one, if any, of the supply chain pilots is the most cost effective in ensuring
        adequate supplies of essential medicines at the facility and community level?

    Research Questions on the Private Sector Intervention



                                                  7
           1. How does a flat subsidy to the manufacturer for both diagnostics and curatives,
        coupled with BCC activities and community outreach, affect household demand for
        ACTs in private sector outlets?
           2. What is the pass-through rate of subsidy to the end user?
           3. To what extent do households switch from conventional malaria drugs (CQ, SP,
        AMTs) to ACTs as ACT price is lowered to a more competitive level?

    Research Question on Public and Private Sector Interaction

              1. Under the pilot interventions, what is the extent of switches in health demand
        from public to private sector, or from private to public sector, for malaria related
        treatment seeking behavior? What are the key characteristics driving choice of care
        between hte public (including CHWs) and private sector?
              2. Which of the three interventions (i) public supply chain, (ii) private subsidy, or
        (iii) both is the most cost effective for achieving priority health outcomes?

    IV. DATA SOURCES AND KEY OUTCOME MEASURES

    As the proposed design will inform GRZ on a variety of factors, study information will be
collected across a range of topics stretching from process inputs to ultimate health outcomes. It is
important for key outcome measures to capture:

            i) The extent of the effect of the public interventions on ACT and other essential
        medicine stock levels at health facilities, household health seeking behavior in regards to
        malaria and other illnesses, the consequent impact on HH health and socio-economic
        outcomes, as well as the public sector cost of such an improvement.
            ii) The extent of the effect of the private intervention on household behavior,
        health, and socio-economic outcomes as well as the cost of attaining such an
        improvement.
            iii) Whether substitution behavior from the public to the private sector occurs, or
        from the private to the public sector, given the improvements in one or both sectors.

    Data Sources:

    The data necessary to capture these measures will be derived from the following main data
sources:

                i)      Public Sector Intervention

            - Public Sector Administrative Data and Facility Surveys

                  a. Health Facility Data through Routine (and recently upgraded)
                HMIS/MSL Reporting and Upgraded HMIS/MSL
                  b. Dedicated Survey on Public Sector Supply Chain
                  c. Exit interviews from public clinics
                  d. CHW Survey

                ii)     Private Sector Intervention

        - Private Sector Facility Surveys



                                                 8
                       a.   Facility Census of Private Sector Outlets
                       b.   Audits, including use of ACT tracing through uniquely labeled packages
                       c.   Exit Interviews from private dispensers
                       d.   Mystery Shopping

                iii)        Private and Public Sector Interventions

    In addition to the administrative data and dedicated surveys, the following additional sources
will be used to (a) provide a comprehensive picture of health seeking behavior at the household
level, (b) analyze the equity implications of each intervention and control for potential
confounders, and (c) measure the costs, relative costs and cost effectiveness of the proposed
interventions.

                -           Household Survey
                -           Complementary Data
                            o       Monthly Weather Statistics
                            o       Community Survey
                -           Costing Data

    Rationale and Plan for Data Sources:

    - Public Sector Administrative Data and Facility Surveys

    Regular administrative data on facilities and supply chain management, such as the HMIS
and MSL reporting, does not cover all key variables of interest necessary to track and evaluate the
described interventions. To complement the existing administrative data streams, the IE team has
been collaborating with the MOH, NMCC, MSL, JSI, the University of Zambia, and the Clinton
Foundation to upgrade the reporting system and develop the instruments required to capture the
effect of the interventions in the public and private sectors.

    In the public sector, the reform effort on supply chain management will collect

            a. Administrative Data: Monthly reports and summaries from MSL will be
        produced to allow tracking of data. Collaborating partners have agreed on the list of
        tracer products and other data elements to be collected. In addition, the first stage
        baseline data collected from JSI will be used to monitor the performance in terms of
        stock outages at the facility level.

             b. Dedicated Surveys: Key data provided through surveys of public facilities and
        patients include: i) facility type; ii) access to electricity / water / sanitation / telephone;
        iii) personnel per capita; iv) HR (absenteeism, ghost workers, staff education, qualified
        staff) v) working equipment; vi) material (stock of drugs and commodities, stock outs of
        tracer items, etc.); vii) incentives (compensation, salary retention, delays in payment,
        supervision and its frequency, public resources share in revenues, public resources per
        capita, external resources, donor support, user fees, user fee’s share of client income,
        informal payments); viii) service outputs (number of consultations, etc.); ix) provider
        KAP for malaria related illness; x) consumer satisfaction (accessibility, affordability,
        quality, timeliness, information value, etc.).




                                                  9
            c. Further, for the complementary intervention in the public sector, data on CHWs
        will be retrieved from routine administrative data, and the upgraded facility and supply
        chain reporting system. CHW surveys will take place in selected communities.

        - Private Sector Facility Surveys

    In the private sector, the ACT subsidy intervention necessitates improved mapping and stock
taking of various levels of private outlets, and improving the tracking of drugs, specifically
fever/malaria related drug stocks and diagnostic capacity. Data has been scarce in this context.
The design has been informed by a small-scale study performed by the Clinton Foundation and
the University of Zambia (June 2008). As stated above, the evaluation will require:

                    a.   Census of Private Sector Retail Outlets in selected districts
                    b.   Audits, including use of ACT tracing through uniquely labeled packages
                    c.   Exit Interviews
                    d.   Mystery Shopping

    The (a) census will provide a mapping of the outlets (location, catchment, concentration,
accessibility, etc.) as well as information on stocking and prices and the malaria related
knowledge of retailers. (b) Audits will enable measuring, for example, the effect of volume
incentives by recording sales. (c-d) Exit interviews and mystery shopping will shed light on
consumer choice factors, the availability of ACT and diagnostics, etc., and ascertain pricing, price
mark-up information.

    - Household Survey Data

    Administrative data and facility surveys suffer from well know limitations (O’Donnell et al.
2008), such as i) concerns regarding quality (e.g. reporting system capacity, potential for data
tempering); ii) representativeness (biased estimates due to sample selection; e.g. the difference in
results/variables for those who seek care at facilities and those who self-treat can be systematic);
and iii) little complementary data on important covariates, for example, household socio-
economic status, education, health status, labor productivity, etc., as well as the effect of the
intervention on these household variables over time.

    To offset these limitations, the evaluation will include a household survey. A combined
malaria indicator and socioeconomic household survey will be administered in randomly selected
households in both the control and intervention districts prior to the intervention (baseline data),
and one year following the baseline survey (follow up round).
            •    The household survey modules will provide data on: household composition
        (age, gender, etc.), consumption, assets, education, labor supply, health seeking behavior,
        fever/malaria episode-related KAP, history of malaria within the household, treatment
        seeking behavior, WTP for anti-malarials, fever/malaria related expenditures, and
        opportunity costs of illness.
            •    Biomarker Tests: Parasite prevalence, hemoglobin, and anthropometry will be
        collected from all household residents. Upon consent from the household member or
        his/her guardian, parasite prevalence will be tested using rapid diagnostic test kits
        (RDTs). The procedure is mildly intrusive, whereby a small sample of blood is taken by
        standard finger-prick methods using a sterile lancet. Trained public health technicians
        will be responsible for all blood collections.

                -        Complementary Data


                                                10
     Complementary data will be collected to track and understand the effect of potential
confounders, and to, ideally, ensure lack of contamination between treatments and control groups,
or - if unavoidable - to best mitigate these effects during the analytical work. Complementary data
includes: i) monthly weather statistics; ii) community factors, including community participation,
changes in behavior communication related to fever/malaria prevention and treatment, etc.; and
iii) specialized agency consultations (MOH, NMCC, NRA, MLS, DHMT, etc.) to track/control
for confounding interventions, such as introduction of new regimes (e.g. RBF, CHW, etc. pilots;
additional preventive intervention ITNs, IRS etc. through other donors; changes in the regulatory
regime, etc.)

    - Costing and Cost Effectiveness

    In addition to tracking operational progress, measuring the effectiveness, and the impact of
the interventions on the population, the study includes a rigorous costing and cost effectiveness
component. The cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) will provide evidence on the relative costs and
consequences of different interventions in order to assist in priority-setting and budget allocation.
Costing will inform on accounting and economic costs of the interventions. Cost effectiveness
will inform on the gross (incremental cost of intervention only) and net costs (incorporating
potential cost savings as a result of the intervention, measured e.g. as cases averted, reduction in
productivity loss, etc.) of the interventions.

        Specifically,
             ƒ Cost data will be analyzed to assess the unit and incremental costs of the
        alternative supply chain management modalities (public sector intervention), and the
        ACT and diagnostic subsidy (private sector intervention). These will be compared to the
        baseline case of the existing system and alternative treatment regimes.
             ƒ An ingredients approach will be used to calculate unit costs. Resource categories
        will be assessed independently to identify the more costly components to running the
        given public supply chain modality, and treatment regime.
             ƒ The primary resource categories include: personnel, equipment and supplies
        (e.g., ACT, RDT, etc.), vehicles and transportation, training, community sensitization,
        initial capital investments (for buildings, hiring staff), and overhead. Identifying the
        relative contribution of resource categories to the total cost of each intervention is useful
        for improving resource allocation decisions and overall program efficiency. Both
        financial (e.g. reflecting actual market prices) and economic costs (reflecting the true
        opportunity costs of donated inputs and volunteer time) will be analyzed and compared to
        assess issues of affordability and sustainability. All cost analyses will be divided to
        illustrate the costs incurred at the start of the project versus maintenance costs after
        program has been operational for a period of time. The analysis will emphasize the
        provider perspective, but we will also assess the direct (e.g., savings to individuals and
        households from medical treatment averted) and indirect costs (e.g., the value of lost
        work time from illness and care-seeking) to individuals and households.

    Indicators:

    Through the listed data sources numerous indicators will be collected.

    For the purpose of study design, the main indicators considered will be the direct targets of
the pilot interventions:



                                                 11
            1. Percentage of Public Facility Stock-Outs of Key Commodities (Including ACTs)
        (Facility Reporting System, MSL-JSI)
            2. Percentage of Fever Cases Treated with ACT within 24 Hours (Facility
        Records/HH Survey)
            3. Availability and Price of ACT in the Private Sector (Private Sector Outlet
        Survey/HH Survey)

    Additional measures are numerous but important ones include:

           1. Parasite Prevalence (HH Survey)
           2. Reduction in Malaria Incidence for Children Under 5 (HH Survey)
           3. Reduction in Malaria Mortality for Children Under Five (Facility
        Records/HMIS)
           4. Days of school and work lost to illness (HH Survey)
                  5. Public Sector Supply Chain Reporting (Upgraded System, MSL-JSI)

    V. IDENTIFICATION STRATEGY

     Rigorous evaluation demands that any observed change in outcomes in areas that receive
treatment must be compared with a valid counterfactual area that represents the course of events
that would have occurred in the absence of the intervention. This counterfactual proxies for what
would have happened without the program. There are various methodological approaches to the
construction of a valid counterfactual, but by far the most rigorous evaluation design is an
experimental design where treatment/control status is assigned to a locale on a randomized basis.
Randomization assures that all units have an equal chance of control or treatment status and
satisfies the conditions of a valid counterfactual comparison, that is (1) all pre-intervention
factors/characteristics will be on average equal between groups and (2) the only difference in
observed outcomes is due to the intervention and not to other observed or unobserved factors.

    The public sector interventions proposed here, however, are implemented at the district level.
A total of 18 out of 58 peri-urban and rural districts will receive some form of the public sector
intervention. Due to the relatively small sampling universe, districts will be randomly selected
from strata (defined below) to ensure a balance across treatment arms in regards to district
characteristics.

    A total of 24 districts (including control districts) will be included in the public sector study.
Urban districts are not included due to the relatively high performance of the health system in
urban areas as well as relatively low malaria burden. 18 of the remaining 58 districts are peri-
urban, 40 are rural. Maintaining a relative balance, this implies the selection of 8 peri-urban and
16 rural districts. The treatment arms and control status will be randomly assigned within this
sample of 24, stratified by rural or peri-urban status as well as by general region of the country –
The Eastern and Northern Region, the Central Region, and the Southern and Western Region.
Districts are stratified by region to ensure a geographic balance in the selected districts and to
further control for possible region wide influences such as general weather patterns.

    Facility data collected in 2006 indicates there are 4 significant predictors of ACT stock
outage at the facility level besides the, additionally significant, rural/peri-urban status. These
predictors are: malaria incidence (a positive relationship – the greater the malaria incidence the
more likely a reported ACT stock outage), likelihood of phone at facility level (a negative
relationship), district population (negative relationship), and average catchment area of facility



                                                 12
(positive relationship). Together these predictors account for about 15% of the variation in
observed ACT outages in the non-urban districts.

     Given these findings, districts within each region and peri-urban or rural category are further
grouped into “high risk” districts (those that have either 3 or all 4 of these risk factors) and “low
risk” districts (those with 2 or fewer risk factors). An equal proportion of high and low risk
districts are randomly selected into the study sample. As a final step, the assignation of districts to
interventions 1 (district stores plus commodity planner), 2 (cross-docking), 3 (cross-docking plus
commodity planner) or Control (existing system) are also randomly determined.

    This method results in the selection of districts listed in Annex Table 1.

    Geographic Targeting of the ACT Subsidy Intervention

    The ACT subsidy intervention is geographically targeted to four districts. Limiting the pilot’s
scale (compared to the public intervention where the number of intervention districts is 24) is
required due to the costly nature of the ACT subsidy. Furthermore, due to the cross-over nature of
the joint study, two of these districts will also receive some version of the public sector
intervention – either district stores plus commodity planner or cross-docking plus commodity
planner – as well as the home-based management of malaria.

    Only rural and peri-urban districts will be randomly selected into the ACT subsidy pilot since
the malaria burden in urban districts is comparatively low. Again, the approach is to randomly
select districts from within strata. In this case the strata are three-fold: peri-urban or rural
location, general region of the country, and public sector pilot treatment status.

    The four selected private sector districts are listed in Annex Table 2.

    VI. SAMPLING AND POWER CALCULATION

     According to the 2006 PETS data, 81% of facilities experienced some outage of ACTs in the
3 moths prior to survey. A study of 6 districts per arm is sufficient to identify a decrease of 40
percentage points in the stock outage rate, at a standard significance level of .05 and a power of
.8, given the following assumptions:
              •    15% of observed variation in facility stock-out rates is attributable to observed
         district characteristics.
              •    An average of 15 facilities per district.
              •    A hypothesized intra-cluster correlation of .35 (the observed PETS data
         correlation in .24)
If instead we use adopt the observed intra-cluster correlation (.24), then we would be able to
identify a 33 percentage point reduction in the stock outage rate at the same levels of precision
and power.

    Distinguishing the relative improvements in stock outages across different models will be
more difficult at standard levels of precision if the performances of each pilot intervention are
expected to be more similar to each other in relation to the control group. However the each pilot
should lead to a great deal of procedural learning and so will help to discern the effectiveness and
costs of each intervention.

    With regard to the household survey, a critical data input to the evaluation of the private
sector study as well as the joint impact of both private and public sector intervention in relation to


                                                  13
none or either alone, the sample will be composed of households from 8 districts. This includes
the two districts that receive both the public and private sector intervention, the additional two
that receive the private sector intervention alone, two districts that receive the public sector
intervention (one type A district and one type C district in order to match the two cross-over
districts), and two controls. The four sampled districts that do not receive the private sector
intervention will be purposively chosen to match the four private sector districts in terms of peri-
urban or rural location, region, and epidemiologic profile.

     According to the 2006 LCMS, 7.6% of the population (all ages) self-reports symptoms of
fever/malaria in the 4 weeks before survey. Of this number, 90% either seek care at a facility or
self-medicate. Given the lack of more specific data is it difficult to determine the number of fever
cases that received Coartem within 24 hours of onset of symptoms – the 2006 MIS reports that
8% of children under 5 had done so. We choose the deliberately conservative supposition that by
2008 20% of fever cases had received Coartem within 24 hours of onset (here a conservative
value is a higher value).

    A study of 4800 households comprising 240 communities (20 sampled households per
community) in eight districts is sufficient to identify a increase of 20 percentage points in the
proportion of the population either receiving Coartem or a diagnostic test within 24 hours of onset
of fever in any of the treatment arms (public sector intervention, private sector intervention, or
both), at a significance level of .01 and a power of .99. This is based on the following
assumptions:
             •   An average household size of 5 individuals.
             •   Health seeking behavior at baseline as per the above discussion.
             •   A hypothesized intra-cluster (within community) correlation of .10 with regards
        to individual health seeking behaviors.
The same sample size and assumptions are also sufficient to discern a difference of 10 percentage
points in the proportion of the population either receiving Coartem or a diagnostic test within 24
hours of onset of fever between any two treatment arms at a standard sifgnificance level of .05
and a power of .8.

    VII. OPERATIONAL/ MPLEMENTATION ISSUES

    1. Government Support

    The evaluation is client driven. The GRZ initiated the discussion on piloting the overall ACT
subsidy in the country. The project has been endorsed by both the Ministry of Health and the
National Malaria Control Centre (NMCC). The government has expressed support for a rigorous
impact evaluation and participated in the design, including representatives from the MOH,
NMCC, and MSL. Partners, such as the DFID, Clinton Foundation, JSI, and the University of
Zambia are also actively involved in the design and, to various degrees, in implementation.

    2. Risks and Risk Mitigation

    Challenges include i) financial constraints to implement an ACT subsidy; ii) cross-border or
other leakages of pharmaceuticals; iii) regulatory challenges related to the deregulation of ACT to
make it available as over the counter (OTC) drug to enable the private sector ACT subsidy; iv)
the determination of pricing, availability, and administration of RDTs in private sector outlets,
sharps disposal, and development of treatment and referral protocols.




                                                14
    Mitigation measures to control for these potential risks include i) limiting the geographic
coverage that assures operational feasibility and, at the same time, enables scientifically rigorous
evaluation; ii) incentivizing wholesalers to use package tracing to enable better monitoring of
leakages; iii) discussion with the National Regulatory Agency (NRA) assured that the use of
ACTs in the private sector pilot is feasible if the study is limited to a few districts; iv) careful
development of diagnosis, treatment, and referral protocols, which requires training of personnel,
and high level discussions with the MOH, NMCC, and the NRA

    3. Human Subject Review

     Ethical clearance will be obtained from the Ministry of Health. All work will be performed
according to the international guidelines for human experimentation in clinical research specified
in the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki (2000), built around the basic principal
that “it is the duty of the physician in medical research to protect the life, health, privacy, and
dignity of the human subject.”

     The proposed data collection includes tests for malaria and anemia, both of which require the
drawing of a small amount of blood (one drop) from test subjects through finger-pricking. This
process is painless and both tests use clean, sterile instruments that are completely safe. Neither
test will be carried out before first obtaining the written consent of the subject or, in the case of
minors, a parent or primary caretaker. Results are provided to the subject immediately following
the test and are kept confidential. Given the presence of malaria or anemia in any test subject, a
local doctor will be informed only with the prior written authorization by or on behalf of the
subject.

    Proposed Implementation Time Line

    The implementation timeline depends on the pace of deregulation, and reaching a consensus
on the optimal design of the interventions. The design and regulatory questions are coming to
finalization. The MOH and NMCC have been encouraging the commencement of
implementation. Given these, the baseline survey is planned to be fielded in December 2009. It is
important that the interventions only start following the baseline to avoid contamination/bias in
the findings. Commencement of the implementation of the public sector intervention is planned
for around December 2009 or January 2010, The first follow up round is planned one year later,
in December 2010.




                                                 15
Annex Figure 1: System A.

Group A : District Stores plus Commodity Planner (CP)


                                                   Medical Stores Limited :
                                One pack for each Level 1, 2 and 3 Hospital and one for
                                                      each district




                                                                   ly




                                                                                               M
                                               PULL                                                         PULL
                                                                 th




                                                                                                 on
                                                              on




                                                                                                    t hl
                                                           M




                                                                                                        y
                                                 CP receives stock from
                                                  MSL and manages                                                  Hospitals receive stock
                                                     district stock in                                                    from MSL
                                                   District store room
                                         Districts                                                     Level 2 and 3 Hospitals

                        CP processes and packs
                            orders from HCs



                                                                                                            Level 1 Hospitals
                                          ly
                                        th


                                                   M
                                      on



                                                      on
                                 M




                                                         t




                                          PUSH
                                 ce




                                                          hl
                                                            y
                               wi
                          T




                                                                          Receive facility packages
   Receive facility packages
            from CP                                                                from CP

 Health Centers with limited                              Health Centers with
       storage space                                    adequate storage space




                                  Community
                                 Health Workers
Annex Figure 2: System B.

Group B : Cross Dock , No Commodity Planner


                                                       Medical Stores Limited :
                                        One pack for each Hospital and Health Center




                                                                         ly




                                                                                                 M
                                                                      th




                                                                                                     on
                                               PULL                                                           PULL
                                                                   on




                                                                                                      th
                                                                 M




                                                                                                      ly

                                                    District receives facility
                                                    packages from MSL ;                                              Hospitals receive stock
                                                        No stock kept at                                                    from MSL
                                                          District store
                                           Districts                                                      Level 2 and 3 Hospitals
                                                      District repacks
                                                     orders for HC s with
                                                       limited storage
                             District distributes
                        facility packages to HCs


                                                                                                             Level 1 Hospitals
                                         y
                                       hl
                                    nt


                                                       M
                                  Mo




                                                        on
                                                             th
                               ice




                                                                ly




                                        PUSH
                             Tw




                                                                         Receive facility packages
 Receive facility packages
       from District                                                           from District


Health Centers with limited                                  Health Centers with
      storage space                                        adequate storage space




                                 Community
                                Health Workers
Annex Figure 3: System C

Group C : Cross Dock plus Commodity Planner                                                                          (CP)


                                                    Medical Stores Limited :
                                       One pack for each Hospital and Health Center




                                                                     y




                                                                                                M
                                                                  t hl

                                              PULL                                                         PULL


                                                                                                on
                                                               on




                                                                                                    th
                                                                                                      ly
                                                             M




                                                    CP receives facility
                                                   packages from MSL ;                                            Hospitals receive stock
                                                     No stock kept at                                                   from MSL
                                                       District store
                                          Districts                                                   Level 2 and 3 Hospitals
                                                     District repacks
                                                   orders for HCs w ith
                               CP distributes        limited storage
                        facility packages to HCs



                                                                                                           Level 1 Hospitals
                                        ly
                                      th


                                                     Mo
                                   on
                                 M




                                                        nt
                            i ce




                                                           hl




                                         PUSH
                                                             y
                          Tw




                                                                    Receive facility packages
  Receive facility packages
           from CP                                                           from CP

Health Centers with limited                             Health Centers with
     storage capacity                                adequate storage capacity




                                Community
                               Health Workers
                                                                                                                                            .
Annex Table 1. Public sector pilot districts, by type

Province             District      CHW District?
Group A - District stores plus commodity planner
Luapula              Mwense
Luapula              Milenge             Yes
Lusaka               Luangwa
Southern             Choma
Southern             Kalomo
Northwestern         Kabompo
Group B - Cross dock, no commodity planner
Northern             Nakonde
Northern             Mungwi
Copperbelt           Mpongwe
Southern             Monze
Northwestern         Mwinilunga
Western              Sesheke             Yes
Group C - Cross dock plus commodity planner
Northern             Kasama              Yes
Eastern              Chama
Central              Mkushi
Western              Mongu
Northwestern         Chavuma
Western              Lukulu
Comparison Group - No public sector intervention
Eastern              Nyimba
Eastern              Chadiza
Lusaka               Chongwe             Yes
Southern             Siavonga
Western              Kaoma
Southern             Gwembe



Annex Table 2. Private sector pilot districts and those covered in household survey

Province    District      Public pilot type   Private sector pilot? CHW district?     Rural?
Northern    Kasama               C                    Yes              Yes             No
Luapula     Milenge              A                    Yes              Yes             Yes
Luapula     Mwense               A                     No              No              No
Eastern     Chama                C                     No              No              Yes
Eastern     Lundazi              --                   Yes              No              No
Northern    Chinsali             --                   Yes              No              Yes
Eastern     Chadiza              --                    No              No              No
Eastern     Nyimba               --                    No              No              Yes




                                                19
ANNEX   2:   Budget
