Developing Islamic Finance in the Philippines
The report is prepared as part of the Islamic Finance and Financial Inclusion (P153163) project by Nataliya
Mylenko (World Bank) and Zamir Iqbal (World Bank). The project received financial support from the Korean
Trust Fund for Economic and Peace-building Transitions.




Copyright Statement:

.

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.



For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.



All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                                               1
This report was prepared as part of the World Bank engagement in the Philippines to support Islamic
Finance and Financial Inclusion. It provides an overview on the context for the development of Islamic
finance in the Philippines and is accompanied by two focused reports providing further detail and
suggestions on enhancing financial inclusion in the Philippines through Islamic microfinance and
assessment of the status of financial inclusion in ARMM and the proposed Bangsamoro territory.

I. Islamic finance: background and global trends

The term Islamic finance is used to refer to financial activities conforming to Islamic Law (Shari‘ah). One
of the main principles of the Islamic finance system is the prohibition of the payment and the receipt of
ribā (interest) in a financial transaction. The term ribā covers all forms of interest and is not limited to
usury or excessive interest only. The most critical and significant implication of banning interest is the
indirect prohibition of a “pure” or unsecured debt security. This is based on Islamic law which doesn’t
recognize money and money instruments as a commodity but merely as a medium of exchange. Hence
any return on financing must be tied to an asset, or participation and risk-taking in a joint enterprise such
as partnerships. A pure debt security is replaced with an “asset-based” security, direct financing of a real
asset, and different forms of partnerships of which equity financing is the most desirable.

The following key principles guide Islamic Finance: i) Prohibition of interest on transactions (ribā); ii)
Financing must be linked to assets (materiality); iii) Engagement in immoral or ethically problematic
businesses not allowed (e.g., gambling or alcohol production); iv) Returns must be linked to risks. Table 1
provides a summary description of basic financial instruments.

Table 1. Key financial instruments of Islamic Finance
 Murābaḥah Trade with        The purchase of an asset is financed for a profit margin, with the asset purchased on
 markup or cost-plus         behalf of client and resold at a pre-determined price. Payment could be in lump sum
 sale.                       or in installments and ownership of the asset remains with bank till full payments
                             are made.
 Ijārah Operational or       Bank purchases asset on behalf of client and allows usage of asset for a fixed rental
 financial leasing           payment. Ownership of the asset remains with the financier but may gradually
 contracts.                  transfer to the client who eventually becomes the owner (ijārah wa-iqtina’).
 Muḍārabah Trustee           One party contributes capital while the other contributes effort or expertise. Profits
 financing contract          are shared according to a predetermined ratio and the investor is not guaranteed a
                             return and bears any financial loss.
 Mushārakah Equity           Different parties contribute capital and profits are shared according to a pre-
 participation contract      determined ratio, not necessarily in relation to contributions, but losses are shared
                             in proportion to capital contributions. The equity partners share and control how the
                             investment is managed and each partner is liable for the actions of the others.
 Bay‘ mu’ajjal and bay‘      Deferred-payment sale (bay‘ mu’ajjal) and deferred-delivery sale (bay‘ al-salam)
 al-salam                    contracts, in addition to spot sales, are used for conducting credit sales. In a
 Sales contracts             deferred-payment sale, delivery of the product is taken on the spot, but delivery of
                             the payment is delayed for an agreed period. Payment can be made in a lump sum
                             or in installments, provided there is no extra charge for the delay. A deferred-
                             delivery sale is similar to a forward contract where delivery of the product is in the
                             future in exchange for payment on the spot market.
 Sukūk                       Sukūk are certificates of equal value representing undivided shares in ownership of
 Certificates of             tangible assets, usufruct and services, or (in the ownership of) the assets of particular
 Ownership


                                                                                                                         2
                          projects. The returns on the certificates are directly linked to the returns generated
                          by the underlying assets.


The Islamic finance industry has expanded rapidly over the past decade, growing at 10-12% annually. In
many Muslim majority countries, Islamic banking assets have been growing faster than conventional
banking assets (figure 1). There has also been a surge of interest in Islamic finance from non-Muslim
countries such as the UK, Luxembourg, South Africa, and Hong Kong. Today, Sharia-compliant financial
assets are estimated at roughly US$2 trillion, covering bank and non-bank financial institutions, capital
markets, money markets and insurance (“Takāful”). As seen in figure 2, Sukūk issuances increased steadily
until 2011 and peaked in 2012 at approximately US$130 bn. It is important to note that government
issuances have driven the high growth as sovereign Sukūk dominate the market. In 2015 Sukūk issuances
declined due to the slowdown in economies and the reduction in oil prices. The World Bank, recognizing
the importance of Islamic finance, has been engaged in the development of the Sukūk market, issuing its
first Sukūk in 2005 in Malaysia. Recently in 2015, the World Bank issued a $500 million Sukūk to help fund
an immunization program.

 Figure 1. Growth rates of banking assets of Figure 2. Total Sukūk issuance have increased
 Islamic banks surpass those of conventional dramatically
 banks




 Source: EY World Islamic Banking                     Source: IFSB Islamic Financial Services Industry
 Competitiveness Report 2016                          Stability Report 2016



Indonesia and Malaysia - ASEAN’s first and third largest economies respectively have been actively
developing Islamic finance. Malaysia is the largest Islamic finance market in the world with Islamic assets



                                                                                                                   3
amounting to US$415.4bn1, and is the world’s Sukūk leader in terms of number of issuances and value of
Sukūk issued (US$72.2), as well as value of Sukūk outstanding (US$167.2).2 Malaysia is also a host of over
300 Islamic funds. The Islamic finance sector in Indonesia is gaining momentum with a market size of
US$22bn in Islamic banking assets and Sukūk issuances worth US$18bn in 2014. Brunei – another Muslim
majority country in ASEAN has a market of US$6.3 billion in Islamic banking assets. There are also Islamic
finance activities in Thailand catering to Muslim populations in the south and in Singapore where focus is
on issuances of Sukūk, including cross-border issuances.

Over the past decade Islamic finance has emerged as an effective tool for financing development
worldwide, including in non-Muslim majority countries. Discussion and interest in Islamic finance has also
appeared on G20 discussions. Major financial markets are discovering solid evidence that Islamic finance
has already been mainstreamed within the global financial system – and that it has the potential to help
address the challenges of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity.

In summary, Islamic finance is equity-based, asset-backed, ethical, sustainable, environmentally- and
socially-responsible finance. It promotes risk sharing, connects the financial sector with the real economy,
and emphasizes financial inclusion and social welfare.

II. Philippines context

The Philippines Development Plan 2011-2016 identified the development of Islamic finance framework
as one of priorities. Interest in developing Islamic finance in the Philippines demonstrated in recent years
by Government, legislators and the private sector is driven by four main factors. The first is the desire to
address the needs of the Philippines Muslim population. The second is ASEAN integration. As a member
of ASEAN and a neighbor to Indonesia and Malaysia, Philippines looks to expand economic links with
neighboring countries and sees regional and global Halal market and linked financing as an important
component of its ASEAN integration strategy. The third is the opportunity to tap international financial
markets for both resource mobilization and investment diversification through Sukūk and equity markets.
And the fourth is the need to find a solution for Al Amanah Bank – an existing Islamic bank with a record
of poor performance.

Islamic finance, or to be precise Islamic banking, in the Philippines is presently defined by the law adopted
in 1990 establishing Al-Amanah Islamic Investment Bank of the Philippines. Al-Amanah bank is a sole
Islamic bank, state owned, and in its present form not financially viable. The existing framework for Islamic
banking in the Philippines must be understood in the context of the history of conflict in Mindanao.
Ongoing peace process, ASEAN integration, and globalization of Islamic financial markets offer an
opportunity to change course, move forward and develop effective Islamic finance in the Philippines.




1
 Data for 2014, from “ICD – Thomson Reuters Islamic Finance Development Report 2015”
2
 Data for 2014, from INDUSTRY AT CROSSROADS Thomson Reuters Barwa Sukuk Perceptions & Forecast
2016

                                                                                                           4
Historical context

Presently Muslim population in the Philippines accounts for 5-11%3 of the total population of about 100
million4. Approximately 60 percent of Muslims reside in Mindanao and nearby islands5. The Autonomous
Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM), with a population of 3.3million6, is a majority Muslim area.

Islam was an established religion in what is now Philippines prior to Spanish colonization in 1571 co-
existing with other belief systems7. Over 300 years under the Spanish rule Christianity spread through
Luzon and Visayas. At the time of transfer of the Philippines to American control in early 20th century
Mindanao remained majority non-Christian8. Rapid population growth and increase in migration over the
first half of the 20th century changed the demographics of Mindanao. With Philippines Independence in
1946 migration to Mindanao supported by national government policies continued eventually leading to
conflicts over land ownership which progressively escalated and contributed to the emergence of
organized political forces and armed groups. The Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) emerged as a
leading force for the separatist movement against Philippines government. Fighting erupted in 1972 after
President Marcos declared martial law. In 1976 Tripoli peace agreement was signed providing for the
principles of Muslim autonomy but the agreement was not fully implemented. After the overthrow of the
Marcos regime, In 1989 the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) region was created
through Republic Act No. 6734 providing for an autonomous area in Muslim Mindanao. But the conflict
was not resolved. In the past forty years Mindanao conflict has claimed over 120,000 lives and has
displaced 2 million people with estimated economic loss of US$10 billion between 1975 and 2002.

In October 2012, the Government of the Philippines signed a Framework Agreement with the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front (MILF), with the hope that the Agreement would meet the demands of the Muslim
population for genuine autonomy and contribute to improved security. The Agreement lays out a process
to establish “the Bangsamoro”9, a new autonomous political entity to replace the ARMM, and finalize a
peace agreement with the MILF. The Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro was then signed on
March 27, 2014. Two steps remain on the roadmap to establishing the Bangsamoro entity: the passing of
the new Bangsamoro Basic Law (BBL) and its ratification in a plebiscite. While Congress did not pass the
BBL before it adjourned (next session will be in July 2016, after the May 2016 elections), there is an
understanding that the Government of the Philippines-MILF peace process continues. The government
and the MILF also remain committed to implementing commitments in the Comprehensive Agreement

3
  Official statistics from 2000 census put Muslim population at 5%. 2012 estimate by the National Commission on
Muslim Filipinos (NCMF) states that there are 10.7 million Muslims. Difference is due to methodology used in
2000 census assigning religion based on ethnic characteristics.
4
  Estimates based on 2010 census and population growth. http://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/philippines-
population/
5
  http://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/irf/2013/eap/222161.htm.
6
  2010 Census
7
  This paragraph draws on analysis summarized in Thamas McKenna “Governing Muslims in the Philippines”
http://www.hcs.harvard.edu/~hapr/winter07_gov/mckenna.pdf
8
  Non-Christian includes Muslim and indegenous peoples following own belief systems
9
  The area will be determined based on the Bangsamoro Basic Law (BBL) ratification. For the purposes of the
project preparation and pending the approval and ratification of the BBL, the Bangsamoro area is preliminary
defined as: the present geographical area of the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (consisting of Basilan,
Lanao del Sur, Maguindanao, Sulu, Tawi-Tawi, and the City of Marawi); the Municipalities of Baloi, Munai,
Nunungan, Pantar, Tagoloan and Tangkal in the province of Lanao del Norte and all other barangays in the
Municipalities of Kabacan, Carmen, Aleosan, Pigkawayan, Pikit and Midsayap that voted for inclusion in the
ARMM during the 2001 plebiscite; the cities of Cotabato and Isabela. The existing ARMM constitutes about 90% of
the proposed Bangsamoro region in terms of geographical territory and population.

                                                                                                             5
such as opening up access to Islamic finance. The ongoing peace process provides an opportunity to
promote investment, economic development, and poverty reduction in Muslim Mindanao10.

Amanah Bank

The roots of Al-Amanah bank go back to the early days of martial law and escalation of conflict in
Mindanao in early 1970s. In 1972 Presidential Decree (PD) 264 established the Philippine Amanah Bank
(PAB) “to promote and accelerate the socio-economic growth and development of Mindanao, particularly,
the economically depressed provinces of Cotabato, Lanao del Sur, Lanao del Norte, Zamboanga del Sur,
Zamboanga del Norte, and Sulu”. It is important to note that PD 264 did not make explicit references to
serving the Muslim population or applying Islamic finance practices in its operations. A year later, in 1974
PD542 revised the earlier statute stating that “it is necessary that the religious beliefs and practices of the
Muslim citizens of the Philippines, be followed and respected, unless otherwise it is contrary to law, good
morals and public policy” and formulating that “The Philippine Amanah Bank shall be based on the Islamic
Concept of Banking, following the no-interest and partnership principles”. Largely a political creation and
operating with poor governance and management characteristic of the period, PAB failed.

With political transformation of the Philippines following overthrow of the Marcos Regime, Al-Amanah
Islamic Investment Bank of the Philippines (AAIIBP) was created in 1989 by the Republic Act No. 6848,
repealing PD264 and PD542. AAIIBP was established as the sole Islamic bank in the country, with a primary
purpose to promote and accelerate the socio-economic development of the Autonomous Region by
performing banking, financing and investment operations based on the Islamic concept of banking. With
a license of a universal bank, Amanah Bank was capitalized with PhP 50 million which were held mostly
by the National Government, Social Security System (SSS), Government Service Insurance System (GSIS),
and the Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP).

AAIIBP performed poorly (see Annex 1). From 1990 to 2006, the bank showed cumulative operating losses
of PhP 554million, bringing down its total capital base to negative PhP 510 million by 2006. During those
years the bank was losing an annual average of PhP 33 million from its operations or 64% of its initial
capital per year. Given these annual losses, the bank relied on advances from the National Government
for expenditures. A total of PhP 458 million was advanced to Amanah Bank by the Bureau of Treasury
from 1990 to 2007. These advances were booked as special deposits, and ballooned the liabilities beyond
total assets of the bank.

In 2008 AAIIBP started a new chapter when it was acquired by the Development Bank of the Philippines
(DBP) – a state owned bank - and recapitalized through an additional capital infusion of PhP 1.0 billion. A
five-year rehabilitation plan for the bank was put in place but the legal framework for Islamic bank
operations was not revised. Under this plan, it was envisaged that the bank will continue performing
Islamic and conventional banking dealings before converting to a full Islamic Bank by end of 2014. From
incurring staggering losses in the previous decade, losses were expected to decrease during the
rehabilitation with the reintroduction of its financing services under the stewardship of DBP.

The DBP infusion of additional capital reversed the negative capital of the bank upon its acquisition.
However, net losses persisted in the operations of Amanah Bank until the current years. Even with
revenues steadily increasing during its rehabilitation period of 2010 to 2014, operating costs remained in
excess of earnings. With both loan portfolio and deposit base stagnant, revenues of Amanah Bank

10
  Please see World Bank (2016) “Financial Inclusion in ARMM and proposed Bangsamoro region” for the
assessment of the status of financial inclusion in ARMM and proposed Bangsamoro region.

                                                                                                             6
remained insufficient to reach positive net earnings. Consequently, capital base continues to decline
every year. From 2007 to 2014, total net losses amounted to PhP 436 million, or an annual average net
loss of PhP 45 million.

Presently Amanah Bank predominantly provides conventional financial services. In 2014 Islamic deposits
accounted for 25% of total deposits or about US$1.5 million. The Bank provides no Islamic financing
services. The challenges facing Amanah Bank reflect fundamental regulatory and institutional weaknesses
for Islamic finance in the Philippines and make a strong case for reforming the overall regulatory
framework and approach:

      Legal and regulatory: the charter of AAIIBP is the only piece of legislation guiding Islamic banking
      in the Philippines. The Charter does not address key issues such as tax neutrality for Islamic and
      conventional products, resulting in higher cost for Islamic products. In addition, the unavailability
      of deposit guarantee/insurance by the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation has raised
      apprehensions over Islamic deposit accounts offered by the bank.

      Market instruments: the absence of Islamic trading accounts either for liquidity management or
      investment instruments affects the ability of Amanah Bank to attract Islamic funds. The BSP does
      not have a lending or repurchase facility for Islamic investments in the Philippines, regardless of
      tenor. This means that even if Amanah Bank attracts Islamic deposits or funds, there is no avenue
      to earn from basic Shari‘ahShari‘ah-compliant securities that are otherwise available to
      conventional banks. Amanah Bank can opt to invest these funds outside the country, but the
      required volume of foreign investments is beyond the level that the bank can afford. There is also
      no clear framework on the treatment of Sukūk .

      Institutional: At the level of operations of the bank, difficulties are identified on several fronts –
      undercapitalization, technical capacity, and Shari‘ahShari‘ah oversight. Amanah Bank is
      considered a universal bank, with core capital of PhP 200 million (post acquisition by DBP) where
      prescribed minimum capitalization for universal banks by the Monetary Board is PhP 6.0 billion.
      After cumulative losses consumed Amanah Bank’s capital in the last decade, the infusion made by
      DBP remained inadequate for rehabilitation efforts such as hiring technical personnel, as well as
      setting up of basic banking services such as automated teller machines, and strategic partnerships
      for foreign exchange remittance services. In the effort to control risk, lending is constrained and
      the bank is slowly draining its capital on operating expenses.

      Expertise: the management of Amanah Bank lacks technical Islamic finance expertise. DBP as a
      parent bank does not have experience in Islamic banking, and the workforce employed by Amanah
      Bank does not have the requisite proficiency to purposely promote, manage and develop
      Shari‘ahShari‘ah-based financial transactions. In addition, supervision and Shari‘ahShari‘ah
      oversight of the bank’s operations has remained weak. Since the start of its rehabilitation in 2010,
      the chairmanship of Amanah Bank Board had four turnovers. The prescribed Shari‘ah advisory
      board in its charter continue to be inapplicable, with only one advisor currently providing Shari‘ah
      compliance approval. Annual reports of Amanah Bank provided by Commission on Audit (COA) do
      not mention any Shari‘ah audit or contain clearance from the Shari‘ah advisor(s).

      Market: Amanah bank is tasked to operate in the poorest and least banked region of the Philippines
      where persistent conflict severely constrains economic activity. Due to history of implementation



                                                                                                          7
        of Islamic finance in the Philippines there is minimal public awareness and financial literacy for
        Islamic finance, even among the Muslim population.

In the effort to resolve some of these challenges, the government considered privatization including sale
to a qualified international Islamic finance bank. However interest has been limited, not the least in the
face of fundamental constraint for future operations that inadequate legal framework poses. Recognizing
these challenges and in line with the objectives identified in the Philippines Development Plan the
government embarked on an effort to transform Islamic finance landscape in the Philippines.



III. Considerations for Developing Islamic Finance in the Philippines

Although, Philippines is one of the earliest countries who introduced an Islamic banking institution as early
as in 1973, no supporting infrastructure was developed since then. A renewal of interest in Islamic finance
is motivated by changing realities in the country as well as in the region given rapid growth and
advancement in Malaysia, Indonesia, and Brunei.

Due to growth over the last three decades, Islamic finance has grown beyond basic banking services and
now includes well-developed investment banking, capital markets, insurance, and non-banking financial
institutions. This growth has been accompanied by development of eco-system and necessary regulatory
and supervisory framework and institutions. Accounting and Auditing Organization of Islamic Financial
Institutions (AAOIFI) and Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) are responsible for accounting, Shari‘ah
governance, regulatory, and supervisory standards.

Introduction of Islamic finance in a non-Muslim majority country and without any prior infrastructure is a
challenge which requires effort and political will which needs to be evaluated against potential benefits
and demand for the services. It is difficult to make good assessment of the potential demand and
potential size of the market. Discussions with stakeholders have indicated demand and interest in bank
deposits/investments and micro-finance lending which is leading the policy makers to consider making
Islamic finance available to achieve financial deepening and financial inclusion. There is also potential
demand for developing Islamic finance instruments for attracting investments to the Philippines through
Shari‘ah compliant securities or banking sector.

In absence of a clear indication of solid and sustainable demand for Islamic banking services, it is suggested
that a phased approach is taken allowing for experimentation and incorporating learnings into the formal
framework as market develops.

Phase 1 - Introduction

In this phase basic Islamic banking transactions are introduced and institutions are enabled to begin
offering Islamic finance products and services.

   I.   Pave the way for establishing Islamic banks and windows through necessary legal changes.
  II.   Review regulatory and supervisory framework to make necessary adjustments to issue licenses
        and to supervise activities of the banks providing Islamic financial services.
 III.   Build capacity of the regulators and stakeholders on products and risks of Islamic banks.
 IV.    Enhance financial awareness and literacy of Islamic financial products.

                                                                                                            8
Phase 2 – Expansion

Given the response and demand from the market after introduction of Islamic banking, an expansion
phase can begin consisting of the following activities:

   I.   Full development of legal, regulatory, and supervisory framework based on best practices and
        recommendations of international standard setting bodies including IFSB and AAOIFI.
  II.   Development of Shari‘ah governance and compliance framework.
 III.   Development of Lending of Last Resort (LOLR) framework compliant with Shari‘ah.
 IV.    Capacity building of stakeholders.
  V.    Introduction of Islamic capital markets and insurance (Takaful) services.


Phase 3 – Maturity

After successful expansion and market size reaching a certain threshold, i.e. 5-7%, advance steps can be
taken to provide full support and infrastructure for advance products and services. This could include:

   I.   Development of Shari‘ah-compliant money market instruments for liquidity facility and monetary
        policy interventions.
  II.   Development of capital markets to support risk-sharing and securitized products.
 III.   Development of advance supervisory and compliance frameworks.
 IV.    Development of regulatory and supervisory frameworks for Islamic capital markets and insurance.

The more detailed considerations for actions envisaged in Stage 1 are outlined below

Legal and regulatory framework and supervision

A draft bill amending RA 6848, known as the Charter of Al-Amanah Islamic Investment Bank of the
Philippines and providing for the regulation and organization of an expanded Islamic banking system in
the Philippines with a short title of “The Philippines Islamic Finance Act” was submitted to Congress in
August 2015 (HB5989) and Senate in January 2016 (SB3150).

The Bill seeks to strengthen Al-Amanah Bank to service a broader market, while enabling both the
establishment of other Islamic banks and engagement in Islamic banking arrangements by conventional
banks under the supervision and regulation of BSP.
The proposed bill also mandates government to provide programs for increased consumer awareness and
capacity building.

The bill provides BSP with the authority to authorize the establishment of Islamic banks or authorize banks
providing conventional services to offer Islamic financial products and services through an Islamic banking
unit or “window” within a bank. The BSP may also authorize Islamic banking operations by foreign banks
in line with existing legislation on foreign banks operation in the Philippines. The bill envisages the
establishment of Islamic banks with a range of functions and capitalization requirements in line with those
of universal banks. BSP is tasked to issue implementing rules and regulations and provide necessary
regulatory guidance for the establishment and operation of Islamic banks and windows.


                                                                                                         9
The bill includes an important provision on tax neutrality requiring the Government to ensure neutral tax
treatment between Islamic banking transactions and equivalent conventional banking transactions. The
bill empowers BIR to issue policies and guidelines to ensure tax neutrality.

The bill provides a basis for deposit insurance for Islamic banks through the establishment of an insurance
mechanism on takaful principles.

The drafting of the bill included active consultations among BSP, NCMF, Amanah Bank, DBP, PDIC, BIR and
other key agencies. The drafting was informed by international practice, including from the World Bank.
There is generally a broad-based support for the bill among the regulators and business community and
it is expected to be passed into a law. The effective implementation of the law will depend on the issuance
of appropriate implementing regulations and guidance by BSP, BIR and other concerned agencies as well
as the establishment of the necessary institutional support through bank supervision and bank resolution
processes, Shari‘ah Councils and accounting and auditing.

BSP is working on identifying specific steps to enable effective implementation of the provisions of the
proposed bill if passed into a law. BSP has already initiated work on drafting supervisory guidance within
the existing legal framework for minimum prudential standards and expectations relative to Shari’ah-
compliant debt-type Sukūk investments of universal and commercial banks. The authorities intend to build
on the international experience available to inform the development of regulatory framework and
supervisory standards for Islamic finance in the Philippines. The BSP also plans to strengthen the capacity
of the supervisory staff in terms of their understanding of Islamic finance concepts and supervisory
practices to design and implement appropriate supervisory process for Islamic banking in the Philippines.
Such capacity building efforts would potentially involve engaging qualified international experts to work
with BSP supervisory staff to develop implementing regulations, principles and supervision manual,
attending training courses on Islamic finance supervision, and working with qualified experts to fine-tune
supervisory practices once Islamic banks or windows are authorized to operate in the Philippines.

Education and capacity building

The successful introduction of Islamic banking and finance in the Philippines requires a substantial
capacity building, financial education and awareness effort. Broadly there are three core audiences for
capacity building and education each requiring a different approach: (1) Policymakers, regulators and
supervisors (2) Providers of financial services, and (3) Clients of Islamic finance.

       1) Policymakers, regulators and supervisors. As discussed in the section on the legal and regulatory
       framework there is an interest and a need to improve the understanding of the key policy makers,
       regulators, supervisors and staff of involved government agencies on the issues of Islamic finance.
       The work in this respect has started. BSP and NCMF and organized a number of learning events,
       including with experts from the World Bank, Islamic Development Bank, and a number of others
       as part of the effort to draft legal amendments. The next step is to continue focused and targeted
       training and capacity building to help relevant agencies prepare for the implementation of the
       Islamic Finance Act if passed. There may also be a need to provide technical briefings for legislators
       on Islamic finance drawing on international and regional experience.

       2) Providers of financial services. Providers of Islamic finance products and services would need to
       build capacity to develop and deliver products relevant for the Philippines market. In the banking
       sector in the short term the learning is likely to take several forms including through entry of


                                                                                                          10
       foreign banks with experience in Islamic banking, bank staff attending training courses available
       internationally, banks engaging advisors to help develop Islamic banking and deliver training. In
       parallel and with the view to medium to long term there is a need to develop training programs
       and courses on Islamic banking and finance by universities and professional financial learning
       institutions in the Philippines. NCMF already plays an important role as a promoter and facilitator
       of Islamic finance through the organization of industry conferences and promotional events.
       Scaling up such efforts and continuing encouraging collaboration between banks, training
       institutions and other key stakeholders is important. This could include for example (1) partnership
       between NCMF, BSP and Department of Education on encouraging learning institutions to offer
       Islamic finance courses, (2) partnerships between Philippines and foreign universities for student
       and faculty exchange programs, (3) scholarships for researchers and students to access
       international programs and build knowledge base for the Philippines.

       Beyond banking, it is expected that Islamic microfinance can play an important role to improve
       financial inclusion. The accompanying paper “Enhancing Financial Inclusion in the Philippines
       through Islamic Microfinance” provides detailed discussion on the opportunities for the
       Philippines. Unlike banking, the capacity building for Islamic microfinance requires support to
       NGOs, community organizations and relevant government agencies to integrate Islamic
       microfinance training with other community support programs.

       3) Clients of Islamic finance. The National Strategy for Financial Inclusion (NSFI) identifies improving
       financial education and awareness as one of the priority areas to support financial inclusion the
       Philippines. Interviews with various stakeholders show that there is lack of understanding and
       awareness of Islamic finance concepts, even among Muslim communities. The successful
       introduction of Islamic finance requires improving awareness of the potential clients of Islamic
       finance products. This could be achieved through a range of public awareness and targeted
       financial education and training initiatives. There is a broad range of financial education and
       awareness programs in the Philippines implemented by various government agencies, financial
       service providers and NGOs. The experience from these programs can help design effective
       delivery models for Islamic finance education and awareness. Available research suggests that
       financial education programs are more effective when delivered at “teachable moments” and
       combined with the use of financial products and services. The implementation of such initiatives
       would require collaboration of government agencies including NCMF, BSP, Department of
       Education, CDA and financial service providers, NGOs and community organizations and leaders.

Targeted solutions - Islamic microfinance.

While the lack of legal framework currently limits banks in providing Islamic finance products, there is an
opportunity to offer Shari‘ah compliant microfinance products by non-banks such as NGOs or
cooperatives. Accompanying papers11 provide an assessment of the status of financial inclusion in ARMM
and proposed Bangsamoro region and an outline for a potential Islamic microfinance pilot program
drawing on international experience. The Islamic microfinance is practiced globally in varied models,
which may be broadly divided into two broad categories – (i) replicating commercial conventional
microfinance with Islamic financial instruments; and (ii) based on Islam’s redistributive instruments built
on the principles of solidarity, benevolence, and philanthropy. In addition, there are hybrid models which


11
  World Bank (2016) “Enhancing Financial Inclusion in Bangsamoro through Islamic Finance” and World Bank
(2016) “Financial Inclusion in ARMM and proposed Bangsamoro region”

                                                                                                            11
are primarily based on commercial operations but supplemented by one or more of redistributive
instruments.

The accompanying paper elaborates a proposed set of interventions designed to: (i) introduce Islamic
micro-finance to support economic activity; (ii) enhance capacity of public and private sector to
understand and provide enabling environment for Islamic micro-finance; and (iii) lay the foundations for
enhancing inclusion through use of Islamic instruments of redistribution. Implementation of such pilot
projects would define product characteristics suitable in the Philippines context and help validate
feasibility of applying various models. Moreover, piloting Shari‘ah compliant microfinance in parallel with
capacity building and financial education and awareness would help prepare the ground for broader
adoption and integration of market based and social models of Islamic microfinance.




                                                                                                        12
