                                                 APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




                            Water Resource
                                  Software
                      APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




By Carter Borden, Anju Gaur and Chabungbam R. Singh                        March 2016




                                                                                        1
    Water Resource Software




2
                               APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




         Water Resource
               Software
     APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




By Carter Borden, Anju Gaur and Chabungbam R. Singh

                                                March 2016




                                                                 3
    Water Resource Software




    Acknowledgements

    Many individuals and organization have supported this analysis. Specific contributions of
    note include water resources software developers Deltares, DHI, eWater, NIH, SEI, and USGS
    responded to a software questionnaire outlining the functionality and applications of their
    products. Individuals at the Government of India’s Central Water Commission and National
    Institute of Hydrology provided valuable comments on their experience of WRS applications in
    India. Kees Bons provided further clarification of the Deltares software functionality. Apruban
    Mukherjee and Anil Vyas provided additional information on USACE HEC software. Finally, Dr.
    Daniele Tonina provided a thorough and comprehensive review of the document.


4
                                                                    APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




OVERVIEW

The National Hydrology Project (NHP) is an initiative by the Government of India’s Ministry
of Water Resources and the World Bank to develop hydro-meteorological monitoring systems
and provide scientifically-based tools and design aids to assist implementing agencies in the
effective water resources planning and management (http://www.hydrology-project.gov.in/,
http://indiawrm.org/). The NHP consists of four components: A) Water Data Acquisition Systems;
B) Water Resource Information Systems; C) Water Resources Operation and Management
Applications; and D) Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building. The objective of
Component C is to ensure the usefulness of monitored and remotely sensed data sets through
the implementation of planning applications for decision support systems (DSS) for river basin
planning, water balance assessments, climate risk assessments (for example, climate change,
drought management), groundwater resource management, water quality management,
scenario analysis for investment planning, and community based water management. Thus,
water and water quality modeling software (WRS) for planning and real-time applications will be
required to support this initiative.

As many WRS exist to support management a variety of water resources issues, selection of the
proper software by water managers with limited experience in these tools can be daunting and
confusing. To aid water managers in their selection, this document provides an overview of how
WRS are used to manage water resources issues, criteria for WRS selection, and a high level
review of WRS currently available that central and state governments of India can use for water
management. The water resource issues covered include water allocation and planning, flood
management, groundwater management, conjunctive use, water quality, and sediment transport.
Selection criteria discussed includes computational functionality, user interface ease or use and
capabilities, licensing requirements, and software support. Twenty-two WRS from Aquaveo,
Colorado State University (CSU), Deltares, DHI Water Environment Health (DHI), eWater, India’s
National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Rockware, Stockholm Environmental Institute (SEI), U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and U.S. Geological
Survey (USGS) were evaluated based on the selection criteria as well as their application to water
resource issues in India and globally. In addition, three DSS for flood warning were evaluated.
This review is based on software developers’ responses to a questionnaire and a desktop review
of technical manuals, user guides, tutorials, and studies related to the WRS. No testing was
performed on WRS to validate performance as described in the literature. With this information,
it is envisioned that water managers can perform a detailed review on a limited set of WRS for
determining the package that best suits their unique water resource issue, hydrologic setting,
intended use, and institutional setting.




                                                                                                      5
                   Water Resource Software


     ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

     AWBM	         Australian water balance model             NHP		      National Hydrology Project
     API		         Application Programming Interface          NIH		      National Institute of Hydrology
     BBMB	         Bhakra Beas Management Board               PGM		      Pasture Growth Model
     CAVI		        Control and Visualization Interface        PRMS	      Precipitation-Runoff Modeling System
     CBOD	         carbonaceous biological oxygen 		          QPF		      quantitative precipitation forecast
    		             demand
                                                              RBM 		     river basin model
     COD		         chemical oxygen demand
                                                              ReSyP	     Reservoir Systems Package
     CSU		         Colorado State University
                                                              RR		       rainfall-runoff
     C2VSim	       California Central Valley Groundwater-	
                                                              RTC		      real time control
    		             Surface Water Simulation Model
                                                              RTDAS	     real-time data acquisition system
     CVPM	         Central Valley Production Model
                                                              RTDSS	     real-time decision support system
     CWC		         Central Water Commission
                                                              RTFWS	     real-time flood water system
     CWMS	         Corps Water Management System
                                                              SEI		      Stockholm Environmental Institute
     DB		          dam break
                                                              SimHYD 	   Simplified Hydrology Model
     DHI		         DHI Water Environment Health
                                                              SMARG	     Soil Moisture Accounting and 			
     DHgM 	        distributed hydrogeological models
                                                             		          Routing Model
     DHM		         distributed hydrologic model
                                                              SMM		      Soil Moisture Model
     DRiFt 	       Discharge River Forecast
                                                              SO		       structure operations
     EAC		         elevation-area-capacity
                                                              ST		       sediment transport
     EGS       	   ecosystem goods and services
                                                              sq km	     square kilometer
     ELOHA	        Ecological Limits of Hydrologic 		
                                                              USACE	     U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
    		             Alteration
                                                              USDA	      U.S. Department of Agriculture
     ESPA		        Eastern Snake Plain Aquifer
                                                              USGS	      U.S. Geological Survey
     FEH		         Flood Estimation Handbook
                                                              WICC	      Watershed Information Center and 		
     GIS		         geographical information system
                                                             		          Conservancy
     GUI		         graphical user interface
                                                              WQ		       water quality
     GSSHA	        Gridded Surface Subsurface Hydrologic 	
                                                              WRM		      water resource management
    		             Analysis
                                                              WRS		      water resources software
     HRU		         hydrologic response unit
     IDWR	         Idaho Department of Water Resources
     kaf/year	     kilo acre feet per year
     MFP		         Meteorologic Forecast Processor
     mm		          millimeter




6
                                                 APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW


        Table of Contents

Overview	                                                               5
Introduction	                                                           9
Modeling in Water Resource Management	                                 11
     Water Resource Software Types	                                    11
     Water Resource Modeling Application Examples	                     14
           Water Allocation and Planning	                              14
           Managing for Climate	                                       15
           Drought Planning	                                           15
           Flooding	                                                   15
           Groundwater	                                                17
           Water Quality	                                              18
           Ecological Modeling	                                        18

WRS Selection Considerations	                                          21
    Considerations for WRS Selection	                                  21
          Defining the Problem	                                        21
          Planning versus Real-Time Applications	                      22
          Simulation versus Optimization Algorithms	                   22
          Spatial and Temporal Scales	                                 22
          Parameterization and Measuring Impacts	                      24
          Institutional Consideration	                                 25
    Criteria for Model Selection	                                      25
          Software Functionality	                                      25

Review of Existing Software Packages	                                  29
     Water Allocation and Planning	                                    30
          RBMs	                                                        30
          DHMs	                                                        37
     Flood and River Water Quality Management	                         42
          Flood Planning	                                              42
     Flood Warning	                                                    47
     Water Quality and Sediment Transport	                             51
     Groundwater and Conjunctive Use Management	                       53
          DHgM: General Groundwater Management	                        54
          DHgM: Conjunctive Management	                                58

Conclusions	                                                           61
References	                                                            62
Annex. WRS Review Criteria	                                            66

List of Tables
Table 1. WRS types use in addressing to water resources issues
Table 2. Questions to address when selecting the WRS model type
Table 3. WRS evaluated and their relevance to water resources issues managed 	
	        in India
Table 4. General features of MIKE HYDRO Basin, MODSIM-DSS, RIBASIM, 	
	        Source, and WEAP

                                                                                   7
    Water Resource Software




    Table 5. Evaluation criteria for RBMs to support water allocation and planning
    Table 6. Algorithms and spatial resolution of the hydrologic processes available in the DHMs
    Table 7. Evaluation criteria for DHMs to support water allocation and planning
    Table 8. Algorithms and functionality of Flood Planning/Warning WRS
    Table 9. Evaluation matrix for the flood planning WRS.MIKE21C not include for flooding 		
    	       analysis
    Table 10. Evaluation matrix for the water quality and sediment transport WRS
    Table 11. Evaluation matrix for the distributed hydrogeological model WRS
    Table A1. Metrics for the RBMs in Water Allocation and Planning in Table 5
    Table A2. Metrics for the DHMs in Water Allocation and Planning in Table 7
    Table A3. Metrics for the Flood Planning in Table 9 and Water Quality and Sediment Transport 	
    	       in Table 10
    Table A4. Metrics for the Groundwater in Table 11

    List of Figures
    Figure 1. A conceptual river basin (A) and schematized node and branch version typical of a 	
    	        RBM (B)
    Figure 2. A conceptual river basin (A) and schematized grid based solution typical in a DHM 	
    	        (B)
    Figure 3. Cross-sections (black lines) define the river channel and flood plain in a 1-D 		
    	        hydraulic model
    Figure 4. Flood hazard map for Boulder Creek, Boulder, Colorado
    Figure 5. Spatial scales for hydrologic, ecologic, economic systems
    Figure 6. Spatial and temporal scale of meteorological and hydrological systems




8
                                                                    APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Introduction
Freshwater is a resource crucial to man’s existence, affecting all human life. Human need for
freshwater resources includes basic consumption such as drinking and sanitation for good
health and combating disease; assisting in the production of food and goods humans consume;
providing a foundation for cultural services such as community connectivity, spirituality, and
recreation; and supporting the ecosystems upon which humans rely.1,2 Despite the importance
of water, freshwater resources are on the decline. The UN Millennium Assessment3 reports about
5-25 percent of global freshwater use exceeds long-term accessible supply and that freshwater
availability is declining due to severe, anthropogenic pollution. An estimated 50 percent of
inland waterways have been degraded in the 20th century, and the decline of inland waterways
has led to a decrease in the ecosystem goods and services (EGS) for supporting human well-
being. This decline in the availability and access to freshwater resources will “lead to problems
with food production, human health, and economic development”.3

Wise management of water resources must take into account hydrologic conditions as well
as how the flow and storage of water affects the ecological, social, and economic systems.
Due to the complexity of the hydrologic cycle its interaction with socioeconomic and ecological
systems in a basin, using numerical model technologies to assist managers in understanding
risks and developing water management alternatives greatly adds to the ability to develop and
implement water management decisions. Water resources software (WRS) such as hydrologic,
hydraulic, hydro-geologic, and water quality simulation and optimization model provide a
means to quantitatively test and evaluate the concepts and management strategies addressing
water resource issues. Specifically, WRS support water resource management in the following
manner:

l Illustrating the fundamental function and operation of systems;
l Identifying and displaying data availability and deficiencies;
l Identifying and quantifying the functional and operational limitations in systems (what is the
  problem);
l Determining the optimal design for systems;
l	Providing water managers a means of testing design, policy, and management strategies
  prior to implementation; and
l Communicating results for better understanding of water managers, interested stakeholders,
  and the general public.

Thus, the use of WRS to understand the systems, organize data, predict future conditions, and
communicate information is a powerful tool when managing water resources.

Important elements of effective water resource management include the ability to address
specific water resource issues, provide a relevant representation of the systems being evaluated,
output simulation results related to key indicators in management decisions, and be capable
of evaluating a range of decisions (from simple to complex). Thus, the desirable attributes for
WRS include the organization of data used in evaluating alternatives; a flexible structure to
accommodate evolution of decisions, issues, data, scenarios, and model; and production of
reliable and transparent output. Furthermore, the output should be linked to relevant indicators
used in evaluating policies and decisions that, directly or indirectly, affect water resources in a
basin. This document provides an overview of WRS types, examples of WRS as applied to water
management issues, criteria of WRS selection, and review of current WRS available to help water
managers in India make more informed decisions.
                                                                                                      9
     Water Resource Software




10
                                                                    APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Modeling in Water Resource Management
Planning, designing, and managing water resources systems involves estimating future conditions.
These future scenarios often involve complex relationships between physical conditions and
anthropogenic activities that dictate the movement and quality of water. For these complex
problems, WRS can be used to predict future changes in a water system given changes in climate,
physical conditions, or anthropogenic activities. A range of WRS exists to address different water
resource issues and conditions. Correct WRS selection involves matching the software functionality
to the water resources issue being addressed, physical conditions and anthropogenic activities of
the watershed, available data, expertise of the technical staff, computational capacity, and the
institutional role it plays in an organization’s water management efforts. Proper selection of the
WRS given the issue being addressed, available data, and its role in the management process can
make WRS an important tool in water manager’s arsenal when managing water resources.

Water Resource Software Types
Four classes of WRS are considered: water resource management (WRM), hydraulic, groundwater,
and water quality models. Below is a brief description on each model class.

WRM models simulate the spatial and temporal distribution of water in a basin, given
hydrometeorologic conditions and anthropogenic activities, to assist in water resource planning.
WRM models provide:

l	Water     managers and stakeholders with a common understanding of the major active
    hydrologic processes;
l   Illuminate spatial and temporal magnitude of water related issues;
l   Forecast the state of water given pressures and drivers such as climate change, drought, or
    water management strategy scenarios;
l   Act as a repository for existing data and illuminate data gaps to guide further collection;
l   Provide input data for the analysis of critical ecological, economic, and social systems; and
l   Target future, more in-depth research where greater investigation is required.

Therefore, WRM models must simulate the climatic and natural hydrologic cycle as well as
the socioeconomic activities that impact human-built infrastructure that store, allocate, and
deliver water. WRM models typically support planning and management of water allocation
and hydrologic response, thus they tend to be developed over a watershed to basin scale,
simulate longer periods to capture meteorological variability, and provide output that is easily
understood by water managers and stakeholders. The issues addressed by planning WRM models
include surface water distribution considering supply and demand, land-use change impacts,
quantification and development of surface water supply, climate change impacts, drought
management, infrastructure operations, water quality, and groundwater and conjunctive use
studies (Table 1).

WRM models can be further classified into river basin models (RBMs) and distributed hydrologic
models (DHMs). RBMs simulate the water distribution and use in a basin using a network
comprised of branches and nodes (Figure 1). In general, nodes represent on-stream water
accounting (diversions, bifurcations, catchment inflows, and reservoirs) and off-stream water
use activities (domestic, municipal, commercial, industrial, agriculture, and poweruse). Branches
route water between nodes and represent rivers, canals, and pipelines. In several packages,


                                                                                                      11
      Water Resource Software




     Table 1. WRS types use in addressing to water resources issues
                                               Time Water Resource Issue
                                               Frame
      WRS Types




                                                                                                                                 Reservoir Operations


                                                                                                                                                                     River Flows Routing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sediment Transport
                                                                                            Land Use Change

                                                                                                              Water Allocation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Socio-Economic,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Conjunctive Use
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Real-time Flood
                                             Planning/Design




                                                                                                                                                                                           Flood Mapping




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Water Quality
                                                                           Climate Issues




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Groundwater
                                                               Real-Time




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ecological
                                                                                                                                                        Irrigation




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Warning
      WRM Models                               X                x            X                X                  X                  x                    X              x                    x              -                  x             x                 x                x                  A
      River Basin Model (RBM)                  X                x            X                -                  X                  x                    X              -                    -              -                  -             -                 x                -                  A
      Distributed Hydrologic Model (DHM)       X                -            X                X                  -                  -                    X              x                    x              -                  x             x                 x                x                  A
      Groundwater Models                       X                             x                X                  -                  -                    -              -                    -              -                  X             X                 X                -                  A
      Hydraulic Models                         X                X            x                -                  x                  X                    -              X                    X              X                  -             -                 X                X                  A
      Water Quality Models                     X X                           x                X                  x                  -                    -              -                    -              -                  X             -                 X                X                  A

     Note: X = primary applicable, x = secondary applicable, and A = additional analysis.

     Figure 1. A conceptual river basin (A) and schematized node and branch version
     typical of a RBM (B)
         A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B




     Note: Water uses in A and B include domestic, industrial, agriculture, hydropower, and a reservoir. The blue arrows
     denote the flux direction of water in the system.

     polygons representing catchments are also used to simulate lumped processes (for example,
     surface runoff, groundwater). While simpler, RBM structures can be very effective at planning
     water resources as they tend to be easy to operate, have short simulation times, and are
     conceptually easy to understand.

     DHMs are deterministic, fully distributed, physically based modeling system for describing the
     major flow processes of the hydrological cycle. Generally, the modeling domain is divided into
     grid cells where the water movement within each hydrologic process is solved (Figure 2). In
     general, as modeling complexity increases so do the data required and the computational
     power. As water resource issues and available data vary, software package are available that
     offer several different approaches for numerically simulating water movement ranging from
     simple, lumped conceptual models to advanced, distributed, and physically based solutions.
     Simple and advanced approaches may be combined, which enables the user to compromise
     between result resolution, time, and data availability constraints.

     Hydraulic models simulate the flow of surface water in the riverine systems, lakes and reservoirs,
     wetlands, floodplains, and canal systems using physical characterization of the channels.
     Hydraulic model are used in planning as well as real-time water resource management when


12
                                                                                    APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Figure 2. A conceptual river basin (A) and schematized grid based solution typical in
          a DHM (B)

 A                                                                                                                          B




Note: Water uses in A and B include domestic, industrial, agriculture, hydropower, and a reservoir. The blue arrows
denote the flux direction of water in the system. Note, only a representative few of the water fluxes are representing by
blue arrows in the figures above as the same calculation is made within each grid cell.


physically based flow estimates are required. Planning issues include, but are not limited to,
flood mapping, irrigation networks, river channel and infrastructure design, reservoir planning,
emergency management planning, and environmental management (Table 1). Real-time
applications include flood warning systems, reservoir operations, and irrigation operations.
Hydraulic model can be used in conjunction with hydrologic and groundwater model to provide
a more comprehensive view of the hydrologic system.


Figure 3. Cross-sections (black lines) define the river channel and floodplain in a 1-D
          hydraulic model




Note: Blue area is the water surface profile.4


                                                                                                                                13
     Water Resource Software




     Hydraulic models apply numerical equations that compute the physical movement of water over
     river, canal, and lake bathymetryas well as floodplain topography to simulate flow (Figure 3).
     Algorithms are characterized as 1-dimensional (1-D), 2-dimenssional (2-D), and 3-dimensional
     (3-D). For 2-D hydraulic models, the surface is characterized using a 2-D grid and the vertical
     dimension as a single layer. Hydraulic WRS used for routing flows and flood mapping are
     typically 1-D, 2-D, or a combination of both. Lakes and reservoirs may use 3-D hydraulic models
     where the vertical water movement is important to simulate.

     Water Quality models are concerned with the fate and transport of chemicals and sediment
     movement in water systems. Typical water quality issues include the point source introduction to
     a water systems through effluent discharge; non-point source contribution to water bodies from
     surface runoff; eutrophication of lakes and reservoirs; quality of water available for drinking,
     commercial industrial, and agricultural use; and saline intrusion of groundwater in coastal areas
     (Table 1). Sediment modeling can further be concerned with changes in the physical dimensions
     of the river bed or lake leading to increased flooding, channel instability through erosion, or
     siltation of reservoirs. Typically, water quality algorithms are coupled with the water quantity
     algorithms as the movement of water is an important component in predicting water quality.

     For more in-depth assessment of WRS use in water resource management, Loucks et al.5 provides
     a comprehensive volume outlining the use of WRS to support water management.

     Water Resource Modeling Application Examples
     Modeling applications have been developed to support the management of issues that include
     water planning, climate change/drought, flooding, reservoir operations, groundwater, water
     quality, and ecological impacts. Note, that while examples of modeling application may be
     presented under a single water resource issue, these modeling applications often are used to
     address multiple issues.

     Water Allocation and Planning
     Watershed allocation and planning address the allocation of surface water and groundwater
     supply given demands from domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, power,
     and ecological uses within a watershed. An example of WRS supporting basin planning is from
     the Napa County, California.6 Napa Valley hosts one of the premiere wine growing regions in
     the United States. As such, there has been pressure to convert nature forests and grasslands
     to vineyards, raising concerns about how the land use change might affect potential flooding,
     flows that support irrigation and anadromous fish, and the loading of dissolved chemicals and
     sediment to the Napa River. To provide an overview of baseline conditions by which planning
     programs can assess the benefits, constraints, and environmental impacts of future development,
     the Napa County Baseline Data Report was written. Underlying the surface water, groundwater,
     and water quality sections of the Baseline Data Report was a fully distributed, physically based
     DHM that simulated precipitation, evapotranspiration, overland flow, unsaturated flow, stream
     flow, flow in lakes and reservoirs, groundwater flow, and anthropogenic water use (for example,
     irrigation to vineyards, surface water diversions, and groundwater abstractions). Water quality
     analysis was conducted usinga geographical information system (GIS)-based non-point source
     and erosion calculator, which incorporated the DHM runoff results, to assess loading of chemicals
     and sediment to the Napa River. Once loaded, a hydraulic model was used to predict the fate
     and transport of these chemicals and sediment within the Napa River.

     The modeling outcome was the baseline characterization of surface water, groundwater, and
     water quality conditions of 181 sub-basins throughout Napa County. In addition to characterizing

14
                                                                    APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




existing water quantity and water quality conditions in Napa County, the DHM was used to
assess impacts of proposed regional and site-specific changes in land use for the Napa County’s
General Plan. For each sub-basin, the General Plan provided the recommended threshold of
acceptable land development. Results were presented in public meetings and the project report
and model data made available at the County Watershed Information Center and Conservancy
(WICC) http://www.napawatersheds.org/.

Managing for Climate
Precipitation drives the hydrologic system in watersheds, thus changing climate or drought greatly
affect how water is managed. For example, the Okanagan River Basin, British Columbia, Canada
receives the preponderance of precipitation in winter. Though the Okanagan Basin currently has
sufficient water supply, it is believed that climate change and increased water use may cause
future water shortages.7 In response, the Province of British Columbia and the Okanagan Basin
Water Board initiated a project to investigate how projected population growth, agricultural land
based expansion, reduction of water supply due to climate change, and mountain pine beetle
infestation could affect future water supply and management. A DHM was used to model 23
scenarios of varying projections of population growth, climate impacts, agricultural expansion
and irrigation efficiency, and mountain pine beetle infestation. The results showed changes in
supply to agricultural land, reduction of water supply due to climate change, and a shift in timing
of the spring runoff due to mountain pine beetle infestation and climate change. The DHM
results were also used as the inflow time series in a RBM; a model used for rapidly assessing
proposed policies and management plans.8 The Okanagan Basin Water Board used results from
both DHM and RBM to plan infrastructure, improve operations, and inform policy decisions.

Drought Planning
Use of WRS in drought planning is important in creating and testing action plans, reservoir
operation strategies, and drought mitigation policies to implement during lean periods of
precipitation. California’s Central Valley supports 2.8 million hectares of farmland producing
crops that are worth 10 percent of the U.S. total cash farm receipts. The irrigation water supply
source for farmland is predominately surface water, but is augmented with groundwater during dry
periods. Given climate change, there is an increased likelihood of the occurrence of prolonged
drought that could have adverse effects on the sustainability of groundwater aquifers and crop
production. In order to predict how prolonged drought would impact groundwater supply and
crop production, state water managers and federal researchers responsible for water supply
in the Central Valley developed CalSim-II (a water allocation and flow model), the California
Central Valley Groundwater-Surface Water Simulation Model (C2VSim), and Crop Adaptation
Equations derived from the Central Valley Production Model (CVPM).9 The modeling team ran
a series of scenarios with decreased precipitation to determine the impacts on crop acreage,
groundwater pumping and level, crop water use, and aquifer recharge. The study found that
Central Valley agriculture is resilient to prolonged drought.9 A 40 percent cut in deliveries to
irrigators resulted in only a 10 percent decrease in irrigated area. That said, locally different
aquifers within the Central Valley were impacted with varying severity, which could ultimately
create locally water stressed areas and may cause land subsidence. State water agencies are
using these finding to inform their drought planning efforts.

Flooding
Flooding management has two time horizons: flood planning and real-time flood operations.
Planning models are used to develop and map flooding extent, test infrastructure design, and
develop emergency action plans to be implemented during flooding events. A model to simulate


                                                                                                      15
      Water Resource Software




     the hydrologic response to rainfall (rainfall-runoff model) and a coupled 1-D (channel)/2-D
     (floodplain) hydraulic model were used to generate potential flooding maps of Boulder Creek
     and South Boulder Creek through the City of Boulder, Colorado, U.S. (Figure 4). The model
     supported the city’s flood mitigation planning,which includes floodplain management and
     emergency response. Over a five-day period in September 2013, a slow-moving cold front stalled
     over Colorado, clashing with warm humid monsoonal air from the south and dropping 661
     millimeter (mm) of rain in a city that averages 525 mm in year. The 1,000-year event10 caused
     extensive flooding throughout the city and surrounding counties. Due to the modeling effort, it
     is likely that flood damage was significantly reduced during this event.

     Real-time operations systems are used to help reservoir and gate operators along with emergency
     responders determine the flooding timing extent in order to prepare flood defense and evacuate
     at risk populations. For example, the Bhakra and Beas Reservoirs have been constructed to
     generate hydroelectricity and supply water to over 40,000 square kilometer (sq km) of irrigated
     command areas in Punjab, Haryana, and Rajasthan, India, during non-monsoon period and
     provide downstream flood protection of lives, property, crops, and infrastructure during the

     Figure 4. Flood hazard map for Boulder Creek, Boulder, Colorado




     Note: The map shows the 100-year floodplain (light blue), 500-year floodplain (dark blue), and high hazard areas as
     generated from a coupled 1-dimensional/2-dimensional hydraulic model. The map is available for water managers,
     community planners, and interested stakeholders.11


16
                                                                    APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




monsoon period.12 During heavy rainfall periods, operators adjust reservoir gates to increase
releases prior to the arrival of a flood wave, creating space in the reservoir in order to retain
floodwaters and limit excessive downstream releases. If too little storage water is pre-released,
then the flood wave will not be sufficiently retained and downstream flooding will occur.
However, if operators release too much storage water in anticipation of a flooding event that
does not happen, the remaining storage water will be insufficient to satisfy irrigation demands
during the non-monsoon periods. Thus, knowing the quantity and timing of floodwaters arrival
to reservoirs improves the operators’ abilities to adjust gates to minimize downstream flooding
while maintaining sufficient storage to support irrigation during dry periods.

In 2013, a real-time data acquisition system (RTDAS) and a real-time decision support system
(RTDSS) were developed for the BBMB system to improve reservoir operations.12 The RTDAS
is a telemetric network of rainfall and snow gages in upstream catchments as well as water
levels sensors along rivers, reservoirs and canals that provide inputs to the RTDSS. The RTDSS
processes the data and provides decision makers with easily understandable information on the
state of their water resources. Flood forecast models within the RTDSS provide predications of the
quantity and timing of water discharge that reservoir operators use in gate operations and water
managers and emergency responders use to issue flood warnings to downstream communities
in order to minimize flood damages. The system is also used to help water managers schedule
deliver irrigation water during the Kharif and Rabi seasons. The system has been operated by
local officials since 2014.

Groundwater
Groundwater model are used for assessing water quantity and quality issues in aquifers. As
groundwater movement is typically much slower than surface water, groundwater models address
longer-term planning issues such as inventorying groundwater distribution in aquifers, assessing
declining and rising of groundwater levels in irrigated and industrial areas, and identifying of
artificial recharge. The Eastern Snake Plain Aquifer (ESPA) extends over a plain 200 miles long
by 60 miles wide in southeast Idaho. The aquifer is primarily comprised of fractured basalt lavas
with sedimentary interbedded towards the aquifer boundaries13 and stores 200-300 million
acre-foot in the upper 500 feet. The ESPA is the primary drinking water source for many and
hosts 809,000 hectares of agricultural lands that, as rainfall ranges between 200-280 mm
annually over the aquifer, requires irrigation from surface water diversions and groundwater.13
The ESPA is hydraulically connected to the Snake River along its eastern and southern boundary,
thus groundwater pumping, canal seepage, and irrigation recharge affect river flows that supply
water for irrigation, hydropower, industrial, recreation, and ecological use.

Increased groundwater pumping, decreased surface water diversion, increased use of sprinkler
irrigation, and changing climate patterns have decreased water levels in the ESPA and flows in
the Snake River. To assist in its management, a distributed, hydraulic groundwater model for
the ESPA was developed in MODFLOW. The ESPA model has been coupled with a surface water
algorithm that simulates how irrigation practices influence groundwater recharge, thus providing
a tool for conjunctively managing surface and groundwater. The ESPA model has been used by
the Idaho Department of Water Resources (IDWR) to understand the hydrogeological system,
delineate areas for water pumping restrictions during dry periods, identify areas to develop
recharge zones, and support aquifer planning. A simpler, web-based version of the ESPA model
was also developed to assist stakeholders in assessing impacts of water right transfers, saving
IDWR staff time in evaluating proposed transfers. IDWR used the model to develop the ESPA
Comprehensive Aquifer Management Plan for long-term sustainability of the aquifer.14 The plan


                                                                                                      17
     Water Resource Software




     recommends converting 100 kilo acre feet per year (kaf/year) of groundwater use to surface
     water use; increasing aquifer recharge of 105-205 kaf/year; reducing demand by 250-350
     kaf/year by purchasing irrigated land, subordinate agreements, fallowing crop change mixes,
     and other mechanisms; and conducting a pilot weather modification program such as cloud
     seeding.

     Water Quality
     Water quality modeling simulates the fate and transport of chemicals and sediment movement
     in water systems. Water quality modeling supports planning as demonstrated in the Napa Valley
     County BDR project where modeling was used to identify and quantify potential pollutant point
     and non-point sources throughout the county. The City of Bangkok, Thailand is an example of
     a real-time water quality application. Throughout Bangkok flows the Chao Phraya River and
     a network of canals that provide drainage, navigation, and conveyance for irrigation water to
     northern areas. To monitor and forecast water quality conditions in the Chao Phraya River and
     the main canals, the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration installed a network of 12 real-time
     monitoring stations.15 All stations measure water temperature, water level, conductivity, dissolved
     oxygen, pH and turbidity with select station measuring chemical oxygen demand (COD), nitrate,
     chlorophyll-A, and trace elements. The real-time monitoring data is transmitted to a RTDSS that
     allows water managers to visualize water quality conditions and posts conditions on the internet.
     In addition, water quality models in the RTDSS forecast general water quality conditions and
     predict the fate and transport of measured chemicals.14

     Ecological Modeling
     Hydro-ecological models assist in understanding and predicting how hydrological conditions
     influence aquatic and riparian ecosystems and species. Types of hydro-ecological models include
     aquatic habitat models, agent based models, systems dynamic models, and biologic models.
     In addition, integrated modeling frameworks link discipline specific models for holistically
     grasping ecological systems, environmental thresholds (for example, carrying-capacities), and
     the role of biodiversity in resilience.16,17 The Ecological Limits of Hydrologic Alteration (ELOHA)
     is a framework for developing regional environmental flow standards in water resources
     management.18 ELOHA uses hydrologic and hydraulic modeling to quantify natural and human
     altered discharge conditions. Ecologists determine how local species and/or ecosystems respond
     to a range of discharges. These ecological responses are combined with the natural and altered
     discharges to determine the flow limiting factors and develop strategies to improve ecological
     flow conditions.

     ELOHA is being applied to the Middle Potomac River (USA) to determine environmental flow
     needs for rivers and streams that are generally more impaired by land use change than by
     withdrawals or impoundments.19 The goals of the project are to:

     l Estimate current and future water withdrawals, given population, land use, and climate change
        projections; 
     l	Determine impacts of water withdrawals, discharges, impoundments, land use, and climate
        change on flow; 
     l	Characterize flows needed to support healthy biotic communities in smaller streams and
        rivers; and 
     l Provide data, information, and analyses to support water and land use planning and decision
        making at the state level.
     To assess flow conditions, the project is using a combination of statistical analysis of gage data


18
                                                                  APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




and a DHM. Scenario output from the DHM is being post-processed through the Indices of
Hydrologic Alteration20 and the Hydroecological Integrity Tool21 software to quantify impacts of
water management alternatives. The flow alteration-ecological response relationships are being
shared with state-level resource managers to support technical assessments and recommendations
for protecting and restoring environmental flows and stream health throughout the watershed.




                                                                                                    19
     Water Resource Software




20
                                                                    APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




WRS Selection Considerations
WRS selection is a balancing act between complexity of the water resource issue, data availability,
computing and technical staff capacity, time, and economic resources. This section provides a
brief discussion on the elements and selection criteria to consider when selecting a WRS package
to support WRM. A review of individual WRS packages is presented in the Review of WRS Packages
section below.

Considerations for WRS Selection
Defining the Problem
WRS are intended to support decision-making, thus the WRS type must be selected to address
the problems to be addressed. Therefore, the objectives and outputs must first be clearly defined
as failure to do so can lead to the adoption of a WRS that does not address the issue or, worse,
provides misleading information. Questions to answer include what is the overarching problem,
what is causing change, how might the model help in understanding, and what information is
needed to make a decision (Table 2). Defining the problem is an important step in identifying
how the model will assist water mangers in the business of making decisions, thus making a
relevant and useful tool.

Table 2. Questions to address when selecting the WRS model type
Formulating Questions             Example Responses
What is       the   overarching The region is experiencing industrial growth. To successfully
problem?                        manage future water supply and demand, a planning report
                                is needed to assess allocation and supply development
                                requirements
What are the pressures driving Industrial production in the basin is expected to increase
the change in the hydrologic 25% by the year 2030. Industrial production and employed
system?                        population will increase water demand for industrial and
                               domestic water sectors
What elements need to be          The WRS selected must be able to predict the change in
simulated to   understand         allocation (in time and space) of water in the study area,
the impact of the water           given changes in domestic and industrial demands. Thus,
management decision being         demand time series need to be editable. To be in compliance
assessed?                         with environmental laws, river flows will also need to be
                                  reflected in the WRS
What output determines the Annual delivery, water deficits, instream flows
impact of increasing demand?
How will the results be used Results will be used in planning documents for dissemination
to address the water resource within the planning department as well as public presentations
issue?                        to local communities




                                                                                                      21
     Water Resource Software




     Planning versus Real-Time Applications
     Temporal applicability of WRS types ranges from real-time to long-term planning over decades.
     As the name implies, real-time WRS assist managers with immediate decisions ranging from
     minutes to hours. Examples include reservoir operators controlling floodgates, flood warning
     systems, and irrigation scheme managers allocating water. These simulations need fast solutions
     as operators and managers do not have time to wait for long simulations to make a decision.
     Planning applications range from short-term to long-term with short-term simulating several
     days (operational) into the future and long-term simulating up to hundreds of years (planning).
     The time horizon of the decisions dictates the WRS selected.

     Simulation versus Optimization Algorithms
     WRS using optimization algorithms (optimization WRS) are used to determine the maximum
     benefit or minimum liability given a set of constraints. For example, an optimization WRS could
     be used to compute the greatest economic output from water allocation to different water sectors.
     Optimization WRS types are commonly based on optimization algorithms including linear and
     dynamic programming methods. The limitation with optimization WRS is that assumptions used
     to formulate and constrain optimization solution can be restrictive. Simulation WRS are more
     flexible and are used to address “what-if” scenarios. Simulation WRS address what will likely
     happen at more locations throughout the domain under more varied conditions as they are not
     as constrained with assumptions as with optimization WRS.

     Spatial and Temporal Scales
     In WRS consideration, spatial extent (the domain) as well as the internal discretization of
     processes must be mapped to fit water resource issue complexity, data availability, computational
     power required, and time and resources available. Domains define what is endogenous and
     exogenous to the system and include the spatial domain as well as non-spatial elements such
     as demographic groups, economic sectors, government agencies, and species (Figure 5). The
     domain extent needs to be large enough to encapsulate the relevant processes, but not so large
     as to render the system insignificant.22 For example, if population growth within a watershed is of
     interest, a reach analysis would be too small as it does not account for development throughout
     the watershed and a regional analysis would be too large because the watershed population
     would be lumped into a single figure. For natural resource analyses, the analytical domains
     are often spatially delineated. For example, hydrologic and ecological processes are tied to
     the landscape and thus are typically delineated within a watershed boundary. Economic and
     social systems are generally less directly tied to physical location and thus less likely to follow
     geographic features.22

     Different processes operate over different domains within a river basin. How a WRS discretizes
     the modeling domain to represent the physical processes dictates the issues to be resolved, data
     requirements, and computer and technical staff capacity required. Often a simpler model can
     be developed to gain knowledge of the importance of fundamental processes to be considered
     when modeling with a more sophisticated algorithm, where data is known or missing, and
     identify spatially and temporally where the limitations in the system occur.

     Factors to consider when selecting appropriate temporal scales include the time step and duration
     of the analysis. Processes operate on different temporal and spatial scales in the fundamental
     process (for example, computational cell size) and are often linked with finer spatial resolution
     dictating smaller time steps. Greater variability within a process can also dictate smaller time
     step length in order to capture rapid change. For example, base flow conditions with constant


22
                                                                                            APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Figure 5. Spatial scales for hydrologic, ecologic, economic systems23



                             Ecological
                            Economics
                 Water resources systems
                       Ecological systems
                 Hydrologic/watershed
                                   Snow
                                     Fish
                                   Algae
                           Water quality
                 Thermal stratification
                    Evapotranspiration
           Groundwater/surface water
                         Groundwater
                          Vadose zone
                     Vegetation/canopy
                          Atmospheric
                                 People
                                                            Watershed


                                                                        Lake/Reservoir


                                                                                         River Reach

                                                                                                       River or River/Reservoir
                                            Sub-watershed




                                                                                                                        System

                                                                                                                                  Regional


                                                                                                                                             Global




flows can be simulated on a daily or weekly basis, whereas flooding events need to be simulated
on a minute to hourly basis. In addition, several time scales may be necessary when analyzing
multiple processes in a system. For example, in the hydrologic cycle, water movement in a river
may be computed on a five-minute time step, the unsaturated zone on a six-hour time step, and
the saturated zone on a daily time step (Figure 6). Selecting the fundamental process time step
is important for the system’s analysis as well as the exchange of data between ecological and
socioeconomic systems.

Determining the duration of analysis period includes the disturbance being evaluated and
variability of the system. The analysis period needs to encompass both the occurrence and
propagation of a disturbance as well as the potential recovery of systems that have been
affected.19 For example, the lag time associated with pumping from a well in an aquifer may


                                                                                                                                                      23
     Water Resource Software




     Figure 6. Spatial and temporal scale of meteorological and hydrological systems24




     not affect river flows until the following year. To account for different conditions that systems may
     encounter, the analysis period should consider the internal and external variability in driving
     forces and system behavior. Variability to be considered includes random drivers (for example,
     annual precipitation amounts) and cycles of processes (for example, decadal cycles in weather
     patterns).

     Important functionality for WRS software is the ability for users to alter input time series and
     parameters that represent pressures on the hydrologic system and are sensitive to both the
     changes posed on the hydrologic systems and outcomes to enable decisions. Towards this,
     conceptual model should be developed to understand the key elements that need to be addressed
     prior to WRS development.

     Parameterization and Measuring Impacts
     Output from WRS needs to reflect how the decisions are made towards planning and policy
     strategies and operations. Therefore, the WRS output must provide relevant results that are
     easily understandable and pertinent towards the policy or water management scenario being
     evaluated. WRS outputs are often time series or maps of water quantity and quality distribution
     within the model domain. To be useful to water managers, these require post-processing to

24
                                                                        APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




meaningful statistics, graphs, and maps that inform the decision process. For example, in judging
the influence of the policy being evaluated, the magnitude and duration of deficits experienced
by each city during the scenarios simulation is calculated. In selecting RBM for this application,
the software package must generate time series of water delivered to cities throughout the
simulation period in order to calculate deficiencies.

Institutional Consideration
WRS is intended to help water managers in their decisions based on information as well as to
communicate the results within their organizations and to other agencies, key stakeholders,
and the general public. In selecting a WRS, consideration regarding the business, social, and
technical infrastructure supporting the WRS must be taken into account. More specifically:

l  Business infrastructure focuses on how the software supports the decision making process
  within the organization used to communicate results. Typical questions involve determining
  who will define the scenarios to be evaluated, who will use the results, how the WRS supports
  the decision making process, the communications associated with results, how the software
  will be maintained and funded, and the measurement feedback on WRS performance;
l Social infrastructure concentrates on the staffing requirements supporting the model. Typical
  considerations are recruiting, training, and retention of technical staff, as well as contingency
  plans for staff turnover; and
l	Technical infrastructure involves the hardware, facilities, network connection, and technical
  support available to support the WRS.

Failure to consider these infrastructures when selecting and implementing software can result in
limited or failed application of the WRS.

Criteria for Model Selection
The following set of general criteria should be considered when selecting a software package to
support the WRM effort. Each application is different in issue complexity, user needs, technical
staff capability, data availability, and this specific criterion will have to be further refined and the
degree of importance considered for each application. Provided below is a general list to be
considered, which may need to be expanded based on WRS’ application and purpose.

Software Functionality
Computing Functionality
To be effective, the WRS package being used to address the issue(s) needs to be adjusted to
reflect the policies, plans, designs, or conditions to be evaluated; elements of the hydrologic
systems (natural and anthropogenic) essential to addressing the issue; and output required to
determine the impact of the adjustment (Table 2). Thus, the selected WRS have the following
functionality:

l   Input parameters and time series: In order to test policies, plans, and conditions, the
    WRS input must be sensitive to the changes to simulate the impacts. For example, if land use
    change is to be evaluated, parameters such as runoff coefficient, vegetation evapotranspiration
    rates, and impervious surfaces should be adjustable in the model to reflect changes in the
    watershed.
l   Simulations: The constructed system must replicate important components of the hydrologic
    system. For example, if reservoir operations are important to delivery of water, then these must
    be simulated in the model



                                                                                                           25
     Water Resource Software




     l   Output: Results must be applicable to the issue being addressed in a format by which water
         managers typically make decisions. Note, post-processing of raw time-series output may be
         necessary to present the desired information. WRS should be evaluated if post-processing
         functionality is available, as it may save time and effort when processing results.
     l    Simulation and optimization: The WRS algorithms tend to support either simulation or
         optimization. Simulation algorithms are more appropriate for running “what-if” scenarios,
         whereas optimization algorithms are best for designing systems or optimizing system
         performance.
     l   Complexity: WRS range from simple to complex representation of the hydrologic, hydraulic,
         and hydrogeologic systems. In general, the more complex the representation, the more data
         and computational capacity required. Aspects that define complexity include spatial-temporal
         scale, modeling domain extent, data requirements, and computational complexity. It is
         important to note that there is often a tendency to start with a more complex WRS package.
         However, unless it is very clear that a more complex representation of the hydrologic system
         is required and that the data to support a more complex model is available, a more prudent
         method of WRS development is to begin with a simpler model and build complexity when more
         is known about the system, additional data has been collected, and alternative management
         solutions are further defined.
     l    Automated routines: Autocalibration, batch and ensemble simulations, pre-processed
         input data, and post-processed model output are all examples of functionality that make the
         construction and use of the model easier and more powerful.

     User Interface
     l	User interfaces: WRS interfaces range from basic code line prompts to sophisticated
       graphical user interfaces (GUI). GUIs can greatly expedite model development, simulation
       execution, and review of output, thus saving time, reducing errors, and reducing human
       resource usage. A well-designed GUI can lead technical staff through model development
       and calibrations as well as, depending on the model type, allow individuals unfamiliar with
       modeling to run simple scenarios and view results.
     l Input data: Input data is required for model construction as well as developing scenarios.
       Data used in model construction must be checked, cleaned, and formatted before entering
       into a model. To expedite this effort, WRS packages can have pre-processing routines. For
       developing scenarios, input parameter and time series need to reflect the plans, policies,
       designs, or conditions being evaluated. If a data acquisition system is used, compliance with
       data exchange protocols should be reviewed.
     l Output format: Depending on the type of WRS application, the fundamental output can be
       a time series of points, lines, maps, and animations. The format of the output data can either
       expedite or limit post-processing, statistical analysis, and use in further analytical models or
       decision support systems. In addition, post-processing routines within the WRS allow for the
       automatic calculation of statistics (for example, mean annual flow, map of maximum ground
       depth, probability of reservoir filling). Output format is very important in presenting meaningful
       WRS data to support decisions by water managers or communicating with stakeholders and
       the public.
     l GIS capability: The ability to use spatial data in model construct as well as display output in
       relation to other map data is especially beneficial for spatially based issues such as land use
       change. Functionality for importing, viewing, and exporting GIS data should be considered.
     l	Result distribution (web-based, player version): For modeling applications where
       stakeholder and public involvement is important, the ability to post results to the internet is


26
                                                                     APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




  very useful in the dissemination of simulation results. For some WRS packages, a simplified
  version of the model (a player version) can be distributed allowing stakeholders to control a
  limited set of inputs to run a select series of simulations and present output in a useful and
  intuitive display. The player version is very educational for non-modeling water managers and
  stakeholders and can encourage trust in the model if the results are deemed reasonable.

Additional Software Consideration
l Licensing cost and maintenance fee: Proprietary and commercial WRS packages require
  the purchase of a license. Licensed versions are generally available for either single seat or
  network licenses, with prices per seat decreasing as more seats are purchased. Prices can
  differ based on the institution purchasing the software (for example, discounted rates for
  government or academic institutions). Often, annual maintenance agreements are available
  for WRS packages allowing access to software updates and limited technical assistance. Non-
  proprietary and open-source WRS packages do not require users any purchases, but there is
  a difference between the two. Open-source WRS indicates that the source code for the WRS
  is available to access, view, and modify. Non-proprietary WRS is free to use (and may need a
  license), but access to the source code is restricted. If the modeling application is likely to be
  legally challenged, then non-proprietary WRS packages with restricted access to source code
  modification is advantageous as the code is known and, thus, investigations of modifications
  to the underlying computations do not need to be evaluated separately.

	 WRS cost should be balanced against functionality and expediting pre-processing, simulation,
  and post-processing. An inexpensive WRS with limited GUI functionality can require extensive
  time and effort to format data, calibrate models, formulate scenarios, and run simulations.
  As such, the cost savings in the aforementioned software purchase may be insignificant
  when compared to the resources and time to ultimately obtain results. Therefore, the full cost
  (software plus the effort to obtain results) should be considered in the acquisition and upkeep
  of the software.
	
	 The intended user group is also a consideration when considering license and maintenance
  fees. A WRS application that is likely to be used by many departments, agencies, and interested
  stakeholders is more likely to be widely adopted if the initial cost and maintenance fees are
  free or inexpensive. For example, flood planning in the United States is primarily conducted
  using HEC-RAS, freely available hydraulic modeling software. For rivers and streams, the
  government develops and calibrates “master” flood models in HEC-RAS that are then made
  available to the public. Individuals interested in simulating flooding for current conditions or
  proposed development in the channel or floodplain can acquire the “master” model and
  run analyses in HEC-RAS. As there is no cost barrier for entry, these HEC-RAS models are
  community-based solutions from which all can evaluate flooding and proposed development.
  The widespread adoption of these HEC-RAS models has the added benefit of saving regulatory
  officials time in evaluating the proposed developments as a common WRS is used.
l	Support: Considerable time can be saved and robust solutions developed if support is
  available for WRS packages. Types of support include consultation, online support groups,
  training manuals and classes, and instructional videos. For well-established WRS, this support
  is often well developed. For newly developed or research software, these support systems are
  less developed and thus time and effort may be required to learn, apply, and troubleshoot
  software.
l Existing application: Ideally, the WRS has been applied to situations with similar water
  resource issues; physiographic and hydrologic conditions; regulatory acceptance; and

                                                                                                       27
     Water Resource Software




      stakeholder interest. Furthermore, WRS packages that have been in existence for a longer
      period of time and applied over a wide range of applications are likely to have been vetted
      both in functionality (for example, free of bugs) and in legal settings. Previous applications
      of the WRS can provide a roadmap from which to learn during the development and use
      applying the technology to new water resource issues.




28
                                                                                                                                                                      APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Review of WRS Packages

To identify software packages available for managing India’s water resources issues, 22 WRS
from 12 software developers were evaluated to provide a high level overview of WRS currently
available (Table 3). The software developers include Aquaveo, Colorado State University (CSU),
Deltares, DHI Water Environment Health (DHI), eWater, India’s National Institute of Hydrology
(NIH), Rockware, Stockholm Environmental Institute (SEI), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE), U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). WRS were
evaluated based on computational functionality, user interface ease or use and capabilities,

Table 3. WRS evaluated and their relevance to water resources issues
managed in India

                                                 Water Resources Applications
Software            Software Package
                                                                                                                               Reservoir Operations




Developer
                                                                                                          General Hydrology*
                                                                                    River Flows Routing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sediment Transport
                                                                 Water Allocation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Conjunctive Use
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Groundwater**
                                                                                                                                                                   Flood Mapping

                                                                                                                                                                                   Flood Warning




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Water Quality
                                               Rainfall-Runoff




                                                                                                                                                      Irrigation




Aquaveo             GMS                          -                  -                  -                     -                    -                    -             -               -               X               -                 X                -
CSU                 MODSIM-DSS                   -                 X                  X                     -                    X                     -            -               -               -                -                -                -
Deltares            Delft3D Suite                X                 -                  X                     -                    X                     -            X               X               -                -                X                X
Deltares            iMod                         -                 -                  -                     -                    -                     -            -               -               X                -                X                -
Deltares            RIBASIM                      X                 X                  X                     -                    X                     X            -               -               -                -                X                -
Deltares            SOBEK v2.14                  X                 X                  X                     -                    X                     -            X               X               -                -                X                X
DHI                 MIKE11                       X                 X                  X                     -                    X                     -            X               X               -                -                X                X
DHI                 MIKE SHE-MIKE11              X                 X                  X                     X                    X                     X            X               -               X                X                X                -
DHI                 MIKE FLOOD                   X                 -                  X                     -                    X                     -            X               X               -                -                X                X
DHI                 MIKE21C                      -                 -                  X                     -                    -                     -            -               -               -                -                X                X
DHI                 MIKE HYDRO Basin             X                 X                  X                     -                    X                     X            -               -               -                -                X                -
eWater              Source                       X                 X                  X                     X                    X                     X            -               -               X                X                X                -
NIH                 ReSyP                        -                 -                  -                     -                    X                     -            -               -               -                -                -                -
RockWare            Groundwater Vistas           -                 -                  -                     -                    -                     -            -               -               X                -                X                -
SEI                 WEAP                         X                 X                  X                     -                    X                     X            -               -               -                -                X                -
USACE               GSSHA(WMS)                   X                 X                  X                     X                    X                     X            X               -               X                X                X                -
USACE               HEC-RAS, HEC-HMS,            X                 -                  X                     -                    X                     -            X               X               -                -                X                X
                    HEC-RESSIM
USDA                SWAT                         X                  -                 X                     X                    -                     X            -               -               X                X                X                X
USGS                MODFLOW                      -                 -                  -                     -                    -                     -            -               -               X                X                X                -
USGS                GSFLOW                       X                 -                  X                     X                    -                     -            -               -               X                -                X                 -
USGS                MODFLOW-OWHM                 -                 X                  X                     X                    -                     X            -               -               X                X                X                -
Waterloo            Visual MODFLOW               -                 -                  -                     -                    -                     -            -               -               X                -                X                -
Hydrogeologic
* Simulates the full hydrologic cycle beyond lumped conceptual rainfall-runoff models.
** Simulates groundwater movement using physical equations applied to a discretized grid.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          29
     Water Resource Software




     licensing requirements, and software support. The water resource issues considered were water
     allocation and planning, flood management, groundwater management, conjunctive use,water
     quality, and sediment transport. Additionally, three DSSs for flood warning were evaluated. This
     review was based on software vendors’ responses to a questionnaire and a desktop review of
     technical and user manuals, tutorials, and scientific articles related to the WRS. No testing was
     performed on WRS to validate performance as described in the literature. As WRS applications
     are unique in hydrologic setting, intended use, and institutional setting, it is recommended that a
     detailed review of a WRS’s functionality and appropriateness for managing the water resources
     issue be performed before its acquisition.

     Water Allocation and Planning
     Selection of a WRM model used to support water resource planning is a function of the scale
     and complexity of the issue to be addressed, acceptable amount of uncertainty, data to support
     model development, computational capacity, duration of the study, and capacity and availability
     of the individuals developing, maintaining, and conducting simulations. As stated, types of WRM
     models used for water allocation and planning range from node and branch models (RBMs) to
     fully distributed, physically based hydrological models (DHM). RBMs simulate water distribution
     and use conceptually and therefore require less data, are easier to operate, and experience
     shorter computational times. However, they are limited in applications that involve impacts of
     local influences on hydrology. DHMs solve physically based algorithms on a semi-distributed or
     distributed grid and thus can address more complex, local issues such as land use change. The
     trade-offs for the increased complexity of DHMs include greater data requirements, increased
     operational complexity, and considerably more computational time and resources. It is often wise
     to start with a simple model and build complexity into a WRM model as greater understanding
     of the issues, hydrologic processes, and available data become revealed. It makes little sense
     to choose a more complex WRM model if the supporting data, computing power, and technical
     staff capacity are insufficient to support the increased analytical complexity. Furthermore DHMs
     and RBMs do not have to be mutually exclusive as both can be applied to provide a more
     robust solution. For example, a DHM can be used to address fundamental hydrological changes
     associated with landuse or climate with the RBM incorporating the DHM output to provide a
     tool for rapidly investigating water distribution and management strategies (see Managing for
     Climate example). As much of the data used to create a DHM is required for an RBM, the effort
     to construct a RBM comes in construction and calibration rather than in the arduous task of data
     collection.

     RBMs
     The RBM software evaluated includes MIKE HYDRO Basin, MODSIM-DSS, ResSyP   , RIBASIM, Source,
     and WEAP (Tables 4 and 5). A general description of each package is described below:

     l MIKE HYDRO Basin (DHI) is a multipurpose, map-based decision support tool for integrated
     water resources analysis, planning, and management in river basins.25 MIKE HYDRO Basin
     is designed for analysing water sharing issues at international, national and local river basin
     levels. This RBM is a comprehensive, easy to use product for those who work in solving water
     resources and water allocation challenges. MIKE HYDRO Basin compliments the DHI’s suite of
     WRS. MIKE BASIN, the predecessor to MIKE HYDRO Basin, was used in the HP-II DSS (Planning)
     project. Primary informational sources: DHI vendor response,25 MIKE HYDRO Basin Technical
     Manual.26 Further information regarding MIKE HYDRO Basin can be found at: http://www.
     mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mike-hydro-basin27

     l   MODSIM-DSS (CSU) is a river basin DSS and network flow model designed specifically for

30
                                                                     APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




developing improved basin wide and regional strategies for short-term water management, long-
term operational planning, drought contingency planning, water rights analysis and resolving
conflicts between urban, agricultural, and environmental concerns.28 Primary informational
sources: MODSIM 8.1: River Basin Management Decision Support System User Manual and
Documentation.28 Further information regarding MODSIM can be found at: http://modsim.engr.
colostate.edu/29

l   ReSyP (NIH), which stands for Reservoir Systems Package, was developed for analyzing
reservoir operations.30 The package includes reservoir capacity computation using sequent peak
analysis, storage-yield-reliability analysis, determination of dependable flows, derivation of trial
rule curve levels, simulation of operation of a multipurpose multireservoir system for conservation
and flood control purposes, hydropower analysis, reservoir routing, reservoir sedimentation, and
approximation of elevation-area-capacity (EAC) table.30 NIH developed ReSyP specifically for the
management of Indian reservoirs. Primary informational sources: NIH vendor response.30

l RIBASIM (Deltares) is a generic model package for simulating the behavior of river basins
under various hydrological conditions.31 The software is a comprehensive and flexible tool that
links hydrological water inputs at various locations with specific water-uses in the relevant basin.
RIBASIM enables users to evaluate a variety of measures related to infrastructure, operational,
and demand management as well as see the results in terms of water quantity, water quality, and
flow composition. RIBASIM computes water distribution and water balances that provide a basis
for detailed water quality, sedimentation, and ecological analyses in reaches and reservoirs.
RIBASIM compliments Deltares’s suite of WRS. Primary informational sources: Deltares vendor
response,31 RIBASIM Manual.32 Further information regarding RIBASIM can be found at: https://
www.deltares.nl/en/software/ribasim/33

l  Source (eWater) is a river basin and catchment modeling platform with three primary modes of
execution: catchment, planning, and “river operations.”34 Across these modes of implementation
is a wide range of choices for component model (for example, choice of rainfall-runoff model,
nutrient and sediment generation and transport model, groundwater interaction model, crop
water use model, and so on) and water management rules (including water sharing rules,
resource allocation, environmental flow requirements, and so on). Results of water quantity,
water quality, and flow composition are presented in time series plots, plotting data against
model, scatter graphs, volume curves, residual mass, and a wide range of statistical tools for
analyzing outputs. The full version of Source includes modules for water “Resource Assessment”
and “Ownership” to simulate Australian water management practices.34 Primary informational
sources: eWater vendor response,34 SourceUsers Manual.35 Further information regarding Source
can be found at: http://www.ewater.org.au/products/ewater-source/36

l WEAP (SEI) operates on the basic principle of a water balance and can be applied to municipal
and agricultural systems, a single watershed, or complex transboundary river basin systems.37
Moreover, WEAP simulates a broad range of natural and engineered components within these
systems, including rainfall runoff, base flow, and groundwater recharge from precipitation;
sectoral demand analyses; water conservation; water rights and allocation priorities; reservoir
operations; hydropower generation; pollution tracking and water quality; vulnerability
assessments; and ecosystem requirements. A financial analysis module also allows the user to
investigate cost-benefit comparisons for projects.37 Primary informational sources: SEI vendor
response,37 WEAP User Guide.38 Further information regarding WEAP can be found at: http://
weap21.org/39


                                                                                                       31
     Water Resource Software




     Computational overview: MIKE HYDRO Basin, MODSIM-DSS, RIBASIM, Source, and WEAP
     are network models in which the rivers and their main tributaries are represented by a network
     of branches and nodes (Table 4). Branches represent individual stream sections or canals
     while nodes represent confluences, diversions, and locations where certain water activities
     may occur, or important locations where model results are required (for example, diversions,
     channel bifurcations, gage locations). Supply sources that can be simulated include surface
     water, groundwater, and reservoirs. Rainfall-runoff models available in each package (except
     MODSIM-DSS) can be used to compute surface water runoff from precipitation and evaporation
     records. Demand nodes represent municipal, industrial, reservoir, irrigation, and hydropower
     water uses (Table 5). All RBMs, including ReSyP, simulate reservoir geometry, infrastructure (for
     example, gates, canals, spillways), operating rules, and hydropower production. Though these
     models are primarily surface water accounting models for river basins, they have been applied
     across a variety of water resource planning issues and are applicable at scales ranging from
     watershed to transboundary basins.

     The primary model inputs to MIKE HYDRO Basin, MODSIM-DSS, RIBASIM, Source, and WEAP
     are time series data for surface water runoff, diversion, and allocation of water for the off-river
     nodes. No physical data are required for network construction, though maps are often used in
     network development as background for spatial representation. Surface runoff is introduced at
     input or catchment nodes as gage data or simulated hydrologic model results. Water demand
     time series are required for all nodes representing consumptive water use. For facilitating
     planning scenarios, WEAP and RIBASIM have calculators that compute the demand from pre-
     processed modular input, or directly during simulations (for example, if one specifies the number
     of people and per capita consumption rate, the algorithm generates the demand). Output from
     MIKE HYDRO Basin, MODSIM-DSS, RIBASIM, Source, and WEAP include maps, time series, and
     statistics of water availability, movement, and use. MIKE HYDRO Basin, MODSIM-DSS, RIBASIM,
     Source, and WEAP have additional summary statistical functionality that allows results to be
     presented by water use sector.

     MIKE HYDRO Basin, RIBASIM and Source operate in simulation mode with user defined time steps
     that are typically single day, 10-day, or monthly (Table 4). WEAP solves optimization simulations
     based on monthly time steps; MODSIM-DSS solves optimization simulations on monthly, weekly,
     or daily time steps; and MIKE HYDRO Basin solves optimization simulations on a user defined
     time step. In the full version, Source has additional functionality to allocate water via modules
     for water “Resource Assessment” and “Ownership”. The Resource Assessment module allows
     modellers to assess all available water resources for several groups of water users at the start
     of a water year and, from this assessment, allocate water volumes to all water users using a set
     of rules. This additional functionality was developed to support Australian water management
     policies. MODSIM-DSS is adept at simulating complicated, rule-based water allocation such as
     those found with water rights allocation under the prior appropriation doctrine, storage contracts,
     rental pools, water service contracts, and exchanges.

     Rainfall-runoff algorithms accompany MIKE HYDRO Basin, RIBASIM, Source, and WEAP to
     predict inflows due to precipitation (Table 4). These algorithms simulate runoff, groundwater
     recharge, and for some WRMs, contribution to irrigated areas that can thus adjust irrigation
     requirements. MIKE Hydro Basin employs NAM (a lumped conceptual model), the Unit
     Hydrograph Method, SMAP      , Urban, Flood Estimation Handbook (FEH), and Discharge River
     Forecast (DRiFt) to pre-calculate inflow hydrographs at catchment nodes for import to the model.
     RIBASIM dynamically incorporates the U.S. National Weather Service’s Sacramento Soil Moisture


32
                                                                   APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Table 4. General features of MIKE HYDRO Basin, MODSIM-DSS,
RIBASIM, Source, and WEAP

 Detail      MIKE BASIN            MODSIM28       RIBASIM31,32       Source34,35         WEAP37,38
             Hydro25,26
Allocation   Simulation,           Optimization   Simulation         Simulation          Optimization
Algorithm    Optimization
Time Step    User defined.         Day, week,     Month, half    User defined.           Monthly
             Typical daily to      month          month, decade, Typical daily to
             monthly                              week, day.     monthly
Rainfall-    Lumped: NAM,     None                Lumped:            Lumped:             Lumped:
Runoff       Unit Hydrograph,                     Sacramento         Sacramento          Simplified
             SMAP , Urban,                        RR Model           RR Model,           FAO, MABIA,
             FEH, DRiFt                           Distributed:       GR4J, SimHYD,       PGM, SMM
                                                  WFlow              SMARG, AWBM
Demand       None                  None           Demand             None                Demand
Calculator                                        calculator                             calculator
                                                  dynamically                            dynamically
                                                  linked                                 linked
Irrigation   Algorithm based        None          •	 Fixed           Demand              Algorithm
             on FAO56                                affirmation     computed on         based on
                                                     demand,         soil moisture       FAO56
                                                  •	 Variable        deficiency
                                                     irrigation
                                                     demand,
                                                  •	 DelftAGRI
                                                     module
Groundwater Conceptual             •	 None        •	 Conceptual      •	 Conceptual       •	 Conceptual
            Reservoir                 internal       Reservoir          Reservoir           Reservoir
            (Individual)           •	 MAPSIM         (Linked)        •	 1-D                 (Individual)
                                      links to    •	 Links to           Groundwater      •	 Links to
                                      MODFLOW        MODFLOW            Model,              MODFLOW
                                                                     •	 Links to
                                                                        MODFLOW
Water        •	 Water Quality      None           DELWAQ/WLM         •	 Built-in fully   •	 Built-in
Quality         Module                            Module                mixed            •	 QUAL2k
             •	 ECO Lab                                              •	 Built-in         •	 User plugin
                Module                                                  particle
                                                                        tracking
                                                                        method
Sediment     Built-in (reservoir   None           RibSERES           Dynamic             •	 None
             sedimentation)                       (reservoir         SedNet
                                                  sedimentation)




                                                                                                           33
      Water Resource Software




     Table 5. Evaluation criteria for RBMs to support water allocation and planning




     Note: Criteria values are defined in Annex Table A1.


     Accounting model (a.k.a. Sacramento RR Model) (a lumped conceptual model) or can use WFlow,
     an open source, command line driven, distributed WRM model to compute effects of land use
     change within catchments on hydrographs for import into the model.83 Source provides a variety
     of lumped conceptual solutions including Sacramento RR Model, GR4J, Simplified Hydrology
     Model (SimHYD), Soil Moisture Accounting and Routing Model (SMARG), and Australian water
     balance model (AWBM). WEAP offers the simplified FAO, MABIA, Pasture Growth Model (PGM),
     and the in-built Soil Moisture Model (SMM). In SMM, effective precipitation is partitioned into
     evapotranspiration, overland runoff, lateral flows, and vertical flow, by solving an ordinary
     differential equation for soil moisture. MODSIM-DSS does not have an internal rainfall-runoff
     module.

     Groundwater can be represented using conceptual subsurface reservoirs to illustrate the water
     available within an area for MIKE HYDRO Basin, RIBASIM, Source, and WEAP (Table 4). All
     models account for storage, groundwater pumping, groundwater recharge, and base flow
     to a river network. The lumped conceptual method is effective at assessing the general water
     availability as a supply source, but cannot be used to evaluate physical groundwater conditions
     within the area represented by the reservoir. WEAP and MIKE HYDRO Basin represent basins
     as individual storage reservoirs, while RIBASIM allows for water to be exchanged between
     subsurface reservoirs thus providing greater flexibility in characterizing subsurface flow. Source
     has an option to incorporate a 1-D numerical algorithm based on Darcy’s law to represent flow
     in the groundwater system adjacent to, and interacting with a particular river reach. MODSIM-
     DSS, RIBASIM, Source, and WEAP can be linked to MODFLOW groundwater model for more
     accurate simulation of the groundwater system (see the Groundwater section). The difficulty and
     practicality of linking these WRMs with MODFLOW was not evaluated. MODSIM-DSS does not
     have internal groundwater functionality.


34
                                                                     APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




The methods for computing irrigation requirements vary across compared RBMs. In MIKE HYDRO
Basin and WEAP     , irrigation timing can be determined by soil moisture thresholds, dates, or days
since last irrigation based on the FAO56 method. Irrigation amounts can be calculated based on
soil moisture thresholds or specified by user. Source computes the irrigation demand based on the
daily soil water deficit. RIBASIM has three approaches: 1) fixed irrigation node using explicit time
series of net irrigation water requirements and irrigation efficiency; 2) variable irrigation node
using explicit time series of gross irrigation water requirements, the actual rainfall time series,
and irrigation efficiency; and 3) DelftAGRI which accounts for irrigation requirements based on
farming and irrigation practices, physical parameters related to soils and hydro-meteorological
characteristics, and crop damage and production costs. Source computes irrigation demand
from daily soil water deficit. MODSIM-DSS does not have an internal irrigation module.

All packages, except MODSIM-DSS, have the ability to compute water quality (Table 4). MIKE
HYDRO Basin uses ECO Lab, a generic water quality module that allows users to define
the water quality algorithm.25 ECO Lab templates are available for common water quality
situations.40 RIBASIM links with the DELWAQ/WLM41 to compute water quality. Source offers built-
in functionality to account for water quality either as fully mixed, or using a particle tracking
method. WEAP has built-in routines for standard water quality parameters and dynamically
links to either QUAL2K or a user-defined routine. For sediment, Source incorporates sediment
transport and MIKE HYDRO Basin and RIBASIM (using RibSERES) can simulate the impact of
reservoir sedimentation.

Finally, RIBASIM, Source and WEAP have economic functionality to assess infrastructure, water
demand, hydropower production, and irrigation practices. MIKE HYDRO Basin, RIBASIM, Source,
and WEAP can represent environmental demand using a flow requirement at a node. Source has
an interface with four rule types for calculating environmental demands. In output, WEAP exports
the Indices of Hydrologic Alteration,20 ecological metrics for estimating impairment to ecosystem
based on changes in flow regime.

ResSyP is a package specifically created to assist reservoir operators with reservoir operations
specific to needs in India. It takes into account reservoir geometry, infrastructure (for example,
gates), operating rules, and downstream demands. Output is in a format that supports reservoir
planning and operations in India.

l GUI: MIKE HYDRO Basin, MODSIM-DSS, RIBASIM, Source, and WEAP have professional GUIs
for data formatting, model development, simulation, and result viewing. These interfaces make
changing model inputs to represent water resource scenarios and extracting maps and statistical
analyses for displaying outcomeseasy. While free versions are available for Source and WEAP
for government officials, no RBM has a “player” versions for distribution to the public with limited
functionality; preset scenarios; buttons, dials, sliders, and bars to guide input; and customized
output interfaces. WEAP has a Scenario Explorer that allows users to design a group of summary
graphs to highlight key system indicators for quick review and comparing of scenarios. While
not explicitly developed within MIKE HYDRO Basin, an example of a player version with guided
input and a predefined output supporting decision makingis MIKE BASIN embedded within the
HP-II DSS(P)42 software interface. Other packages likely have DSS interfaces to develop player
versions.

ReSyP has a simple but functional interface developed in Visual Basic. Input are detailed working
tables for each reservoir in the system as well as the time and volume required for meeting
different types of demands. Outputs are time series and approximation of EAC tables.

                                                                                                       35
     Water Resource Software




     l Licensing and support: All RBMs evaluated are proprietary and require a license. At the
     time of reporting, the prices of the basic license (no additional modules) are:

     WRS                       Basic Package (lakh INR)              Indian Government (lakh INR)
     MIKE HYDRO Basin25        2.90                                  2.90
     MODSIM-DSS           28
                               0.00                                  0.00
     ReSyP   30
                               0.00                                  0.00
     RIBASIM      31,43
                               0.00                                  0.00
     Source   34
                               1.95                                  0.00
     WEAP    37
                               1.95 (2 year license)                 0.00


     ReSyP, RIBASIM, Source, and WEAP licenses are freely available for government agencies in
     India. Full priced licenses for MIKE HYDRO Basin, RIBASIM, and Source come with one year
     of support, and WEAP with two years of support. Additional support can be purchased for an
     additional fee. All packages have tutorials, reference manuals, and training courses. Contact the
     software developers for available training courses.

     MIKE HYDRO Basin, RIBASIM, and WEAP have been widely used globally as well as in India.
     In India, MIKE HYDRO Basin (formerly MIKE BASIN) was used to manage water allocation,
     conjunctive use, reservoir operations, drought, and water quality in nine Indian states as part of
     Hydrology Project-II DSS Planning.25,42 RIBASIM was used under Hydrology Project-I to allocate
     water in the Sabarmati Basin, Gujarat, and the Upper Godavari Basin, Maharashtra; for
     planning water structures in the Orissa Water Resources Consolidation project; for the analysis
     of alternative cropping patterns and the introduction of Delft DSS-OMIS software (presently
     component DelftAGRI) at the Command Area Development Authority and Irrigation Department
     of the Tungabhadra Irrigation Project; and as a DSS for river basin planning studies to simulate
     rainfall-runoff, water demand allocations, water quality, and economics for the Mahanadi
     Basin.31 Source has been applied in Australia and is being tried within Australian Government
     funded projects on the Upper Godavari Sub-Basin (in Maharashtra), the Brahamani-Baitarni
     River Basin, Koshi River Basin, and by the Indian Institute of Technology-Delhi and CWC in the
     Narmada, Palar, Mahi, and Yamuna Basins.34 With over 18,000 licenses issued, WEAP has
     been applied worldwide to assist in water resource planning.37 In India, WEAP has been used
     to address water allocation and influence of canals in the Indus and Ganges Basins and in
     Rajasthan.37 MODSIM-DSS has been applied to basins in the U.S., the Philippines, South Korea,
     Egypt, and Brazil.28 In India, it has recently been applied to the Bhakra and Beas Reservoirs
     System.44



        Water Allocation and Planning (RBM) Conclusions: MIKE HYDRO Basin, MODSIM-
        DSS, RIBASIM, Source, and WEAP support water allocation and planning from a local
        catchment to international basins, use node and branch network to illustrate flow and
        use of water, simulate surface and groundwater sources, evaluate demand from multiple
        sectors, and link with water quality analyses. All can be used to assess a wide variety
        of water allocation issues on a basin-wide, planning level. None of the applications
        address changes in water quality and quantity associated with changes in land use, as
        they are lumped conceptual solutions and not physically based algorithms.



36
                                                                   APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




   WEAP has been used extensively for optimization problems having over 18,000
   licenses with applications in India. For applications interested in optimizing allocation,
   infrastructure, conservation measures or policy, irrigation, and groundwater, this is the
   preferred package. With optimization applications with very complicated rule structures,
   MODSIM should be considered. MIKE HYDRO Basin has both optimization and simulation
   capabilities, offering flexibility in the algorithm selected.

   MIKE HYDRO Basin, RIBASIM, and Source are simulation routines with a wide breadth of
   capabilities desirable in the India water planning process. RIBASIM incorporates demand
   calculators into demand nodes for rapidly evaluating population growth, crop changes,
   and increased industrialization. MIKE HYDRO Basin offers similar functionality minus the
   economics and demand calculators. Source has more powerful tracking and accounting
   for water usage in basins, as well as a 1-D built-in groundwater model; however, this
   functionality is overly complicated for use in most water management decisions in India.
   Given its widespread use, functionality, ease of use, cost, and support, RIBASIM deserves
   a good first look in selecting an RBM.

   If reservoir planning and operation is the sole focus for the RBM, NIH ReSyP is a good
   alternative as it supports output tables familiar to reservoir operators in India.



DHMs
As stated, DHMs simulate hydrologic processes on a more detailed, physical basis and thus
can be used to assess climate change, land use practices within a watershed or basin, and
for several packages, the impact of groundwater recharge and pumping. Five DHM packages
were evaluated: GSFLOW, GSSHA (WMS), MIKE SHE, and SWAT (Tables 6 and 7). A general
description of each package is given below:

l	GSFLOW    (USGS) is a coupled groundwater and surface-water flow model that integrates
  MODFLOW and the Precipitation-Runoff Modeling System (PRMS).45,46 GSFLOW simulates
  coupled groundwater/surface-water flow in watersheds by simultaneously computing flow
  across the land surface and within streams and lakes as well as within subsurface saturated
  and unsaturated materials. Climate data consisting of measured or estimated precipitation,
  air temperature, and solar radiation, as well as groundwater stresses (such as withdrawals)
  and boundary conditions are the driving factors for a GSFLOW simulation. The model is
  appropriate for evaluating effects of land-use change, climate variability, and groundwater
  withdrawals on surface and subsurface flow for watersheds. Primary informational sources:
  USGS vendor response,45 GSFLOW Technical and Methods Report 6-D1.46 Further information
  regarding GSFLOW can be found at: http://water.usgs.gov/ogw/gsflow/index.html47

l	GSSHA    (USACE), which stands for Gridded Surface Subsurface Hydrologic Analysis, is a
  physically based, distributed-parameter, structured grid, WRM model that simulates the
  hydrologic response of a watershed subject to given hydrometeorological input.48 Major
  components of the hydrologic cycle simulated in GSSHA include snowfall accumulation and
  melting, precipitation interception, infiltration, evapotranspiration, surface-water retention,
  surface runoff routing, channel flow routing, unsaturated zone modeling, and saturated
  groundwater flow. Typical applications of GSSHA apply to watershed runoff, flash flooding,



                                                                                                     37
     Water Resource Software




       soil moisture predictions, hydraulic design, determining the effects of wetlands on floods,
       and land use change. The GUI interface for GSSHA is Aquaveo’s WMS software.49 Primary
       informational sources: GSSHA Software Primer48 Aquaveo’s WMS website http://www.
       aquaveo.com/software/wms-watershed-modeling-system-introduction.49 Further information
       regarding GSSHA can be found at http://chl.erdc.usace.army.mil/gssha50
     l	MIKE  SHE (DHI) is an integrated hydrological modelling system for simulating surface water
       flow and groundwater flow.25 MIKE SHE simulates the entire hydrologic cycle and allows
       components to be used independently and customized to local needs. MIKE SHE can be
       used for the analysis, planning, and management of a wide range of water resources and
       environmental problems related to surface water and groundwater, especially surface-water
       impact from groundwater withdrawal; conjunctive use of groundwater and surface water;
       wetland management and restoration; river basin management and planning; and impact
       studies for changes in land use and climate. MIKE SHE can be used at multiple scales (local
       to basin wide) and simulates detailed water management operations. Primary informational
       sources: DHI vendor response,25 MIKE SHEUser Guide.51 Further information regarding MIKE
       SHE can be found at: http://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mike-she52
     l	SWAT    (USDA) is a river basin scale hydrological transport model that simulates the following
       components of the hydrologic cycle: weather, surface runoff, return flow, percolation,
       evapotranspiration, transmission losses, pond and reservoir storage, crop growth and
       irrigation, groundwater flow, reach routing, nutrient and pesticide loading, and water
       transfer.53 SWAT is a public domain model supported by the USDA Agricultural Research
       Service at the Grassland, Soil and Water Research Laboratory in Temple, Texas, USA. SWAT
       is used worldwide to quantify the impact of land management practices in large, complex
       watersheds. Primary informational sources: SWAT Theoretical document,53 SWAT user software
       document.54 Further information regarding SWAT can be found at:http://swat.tamu.edu/55


     Computational Overview: All packages dynamically simulate components of the hydrologic
     cycle including evapotranspiration, overland flow, river and lake network, unsaturated zone flow,
     saturated zone flow, and anthropogenic use (for example, irrigation, ground water pumping,
     irrigation drains). MIKE SHE and SWAT can also simulate water quality and sediment transport.
     Differences between these DHMs arise in the algorithm used to simulate the process and
     the spatial resolution employed. Most DHMs offer multiple algorithms for each hydrological
     component to match the appropriate complexity level of the water resources issues and data
     available in simulating the process (Table 6).

     GSFLOW, GSSHA (WMS), MIKE SHE, and SWAT use hydrologic response units (HRUs) to compute
     evapotranspiration, water movement overland flow, and unsaturated zones (Table 6). HRUs
     are characterized by areas with homogeneous physical characteristics, land use, management
     practices, and soil types. When combined, the HRUs aggregate to a subwatershed, which
     then aggregate to form the watershed. In GSFLOW, GSSHA (WMS), MIKE SHE, and SWAT
     changes in land use or management practices are performed on the HRU through a change in
     vegetation, soil, or management practices as guided from an extensive documentation on the
     parameterization.

     GSSHA (WMS) and MIKE SHE can also simulate overland flow and unsaturated zone flow using
     a gridded discretization. For overland flow, both packages solve a finite difference solution and
     link dynamically with a 1-D hydrodynamic model for simulating the river network (Table 6). For


38
                                                                               APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Table 6. Algorithms and spatial resolution of the hydrologic processes available in the DHMs
Hydrologic         GSFLOW45,46            GSSHA(WMS)48,49,50             MIKE SHE/MIKE1125,51              SWAT53,54
Process
Evapo-             Canopy              •	 Priestley-Taylor Method        Plant transpiration, soil         Canopy interception,
transpiration      interception, plant    (G)                            evaporation (HRU*, G)             plant transpiration,
                   transpiration, soil •	 Penman-Monteith                                                  soil evaporation
                   evaporation (HRU*)     with seasonal canopy                                             (HRU*)
                                          resistance (G)

Overland           3-layer soil model:    2-D lateral diffusive wave     2-D Finite Difference (G)         •	 SCS runoff (HRU*)
Flow               preferential flow      (G) (options: Explicit,                                          •	 Green-Ampt
                   reservoir layer        Alternating Direction                                               infiltration
                   (HRU*)                 Explicit, Alternating                                               equation (HRU*)
                                          Direction Explicit with
                                          Prediction-Correction
Rivers/Lake        •	 Steady-flow and     •	 1-D longitudinal            •	 Kinematic Wave (1-D),          •	 Time of
Network               kinematic-wave         (options: Explicit,         •	 Steady-state (1-D),               Concentration
                      approaches             Up-gradient, Diffusive      •	 Fully dynamic, 1-D Saint          (HRU*)
                      (1-D),                 wave)                          Venant equations (1-D)         •	 Kinematic-wave
                   •	 Diffusive wave      •	 Lakes: Level pool                                                approaches (1-D)
                      approaches             routing (1-D)
                      (1-D),              •	 Wetlands: Mixed
                   •	 Continuity based       Darcian and Manning’s
                      lake simulation        Flow (1-D)
                      (1-D)
Unsaturated                        •	 Green & Ampt (G)
                   3-layer soil model:                                   •	 2 layer water balance, (G)     3-layer soil model:
Zone (UZ)/         capillary reservoir(options: basic,                   •	 Gravity equation, (G)          capillary reservoir
Infiltration       layer, gravity     multi-layered, with                •	 Richard’s equation (G)         layer, gravity
                   reservoir (HRU*)   redistribution),                                                     reservoir (HRU*)
                                   •	 1-D vertical Richards’
                                      equation (G)
Saturated     3-D Finite           •	 2-D lateral Finite                 •	 Linear Reservoir (SD)          •	 Linear
Zone (SZ)     Difference (G)          Difference (G)                     •	 3-D Finite Difference (G)         Reservoir (SD)
Anthropogenic Change HRU*          •	 Land use change (G)                •	 Land use change (G)            Change HRU*
              parameters for land •	 Irrigation through                  •	 Irrigation (SD, G)             parameters for land
              use, vegetation,        precipitation (HRU*, G)            •	 Structure operations (1-D)     use, vegetation,
              nutrient application •	 Structure operations                                                 nutrient application
                                      (1-D)
Water Quality Unknown              •	 WQ: Unknown                        •	 WQ: River/lakes, UZ, SZ        •	 WQ: Extensive
(WQ)                               •	 ST: Loading: Modified                 water quality using ECO           computations
Sediment (ST)                         Universal Soil Loss                   Lab (G). External program         of chemical
                                      Equation (HRU*).                      computes loading (HRU*)           processes
                                      Routing: River/lakes               •	 ST: Loading: Modified             associated with
                                      using ST module.                      Universal Soil Loss               the storm runoff
                                                                            Equation (HRU*). Routing:         and return flows
                                                                            River/lakes using ST              (HRU*).
                                                                            module in MIKE11. (1-D)        •	 ST: Modified
                                                                                                              Universal Soil Loss
                                                                                                              Equation (HRU*)


Note: Spatial discretization is in parentheses: G = gridded, HRU* = hydrologic response unit, and 1-D = one
dimensional. *Each HRU is assumed to be homogeneous with respect to hydrologic and physical characteristics and
to its hydrologic response.




                                                                                                                                    39
     Water Resource Software




     Table 7. Evaluation criteria for DHMs to support water allocation and planning




      Note: Criteria values are defined in Annex Table A2.



     the unsaturated zone, GSSHA (WMS) uses Green & Ampt (algorithm options include: basic,
     multi-layered, and with redistribution) to determine infiltration, and a 1-D vertical Richards’
     equation for computing soil moisture. The unsaturated zone gridded solution in MIKE SHE can
     use a two-layer water balance, gravity equation, or Richard’s equation.

     GSFLOW and MIKE SHE employ 3-D finite difference algorithms to simulate groundwater
     movement. GSSHA (WMS) uses a horizontal 2-D finite difference algorithm to simulate
     groundwater movement. The finite difference algorithms require data to characterize the
     subsurface geology and its hydrogeological characteristics. SWAT uses linear reservoirs to
     predict baseflow contributions to streams. MIKE SHE also can use linear reservoirs if the data to
     characterize hydrogeological conditions is scant, or if a detailed groundwater simulation is not
     important for the management issue being addressed.

     SWAT’s strength is its ability to model and assess the impact of land use and management
     practices on water, sediments, and agricultural chemicals in irrigation return flows. The model
     has proven to be an effective tool in assessing non-point source pollution for a wide range of
     scales and environmental conditions. For MIKE SHE, computations for non-point source loading
     to the river network, or into the unsaturated zones, are performed with an external calculator that
     uses hydrologic output from MIKE SHE. A similar tool is available to compute sediment delivery
     to the river network. MIKE SHE uses ECO Lab,40 a water quality module for simulating fate and
     transport in rivers/lakes, unsaturated zone, and saturated zone. For GSFLOW, it is unclear from
     reviewing the documentation on the water quality and sediment transport capabilities.

     GUI Overview: GSFLOW and SWAT historically command line models, but visualization software
     products for pre-processing and post-processing tools are available through the developer or
     third party. ArcSWAT has been developed in ESRI’s ArcView to support SWAT, MWSWAT, and
     VIZSWAT are available to visualize SWAT results.55 GSFLOW uses the USGS ModelMuse and
     Model Viewer.45,46 Groundwater portions can be viewed with commercial interfaces, including
     Groundwater Vistas, GMS, and Visual MODFLOW (see Groundwater Models section). The

40
                                                                      APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




GSSHA (WMS) GUI has robust pre-processing and post-processing tools for formatting model
input, running simulations, and viewing results. WMS Premium, the version required for GSSHA,
also supports HEC-1, HEC-RAS, HEC-HMS, TR-20, TR-55, NFF, Rational, MODRAT, HSPF, CE-
QUAL-W2, SMPDBK, and XP-SWMM.49 MIKE SHE incorporates the DHI suite of pre-processing
and post-processing tools and provides a clear workflow for model development, simulation,
post-processing, and result visualization. Post-processing tools allow for computation of water
budgets, statistics, and animations.51


Licensing: GSFLOW and SWAT are public domain software that are free to download and use.
GSFLOW GUIs are offered through third party vendors for a fee. The basic MIKE SHE license
starts at INR 5.5 lakh/seat for government agencies and INR 7.8 lakh/seat for general purchase
excluding the water quality module.25 With the license fee comes limited support with additional
consultation hours available for purchase. The WMS Premium license fee, the version required
for running GSSHA, comes for INR 3.7 lakh/seat.49 All packages have posted their user manuals
and tutorials online. Training courses are available for all WRS with listings on the software
website.

 WRS                          Basic Package (lakh INR)      Indian Government (lakh INR)
 GSFLOW          45,47
                              0.00                          0.00
 GSSHA      50
                              0.00                          0.00
 GSSHA (WMS)             49
                              3.70                          3.70
 MIKE SHE        25
                              7.80                          5.50
 SWAT  55
                              0.00                          0.00

SWAT has 30 years of experience and the software’s website boasts the publishing of 1,000
peer reviewed articles using SWAT.53 SWAT was developed to assess the impact of land use
and management practices on water, sediments, and agricultural chemicals in irrigation return
flows. The model has proven to be an effective tool for assessing nonpoint source pollution for
a wide range of scales and environmental conditions.56 A few applications of SWAT in India
include the estimation of water and sediment yield in the Damodar-Barakar basin,57 mapping
of agricultural water productivity in the upper Bhima Catchment,58 and impact assessment of
agricultural water management interventions in Jaldhaka Watershed.59 Gassman et al.56 provide
an extensive review of SWAT applications.

GSFLOW has been applied by the USGS to simulate surface and ground water hydrology60,61as
well as climate change impacts,62 evaluate management alternatives,63 identify recharge zones
in basins,64 and identify hydrology in a hardrock basin in Spain.65 The package has also been
used to estimate impacts of climate change on stream temperatures.66 The author is unaware of
GSFLOW applications in India.

MIKE SHE has been applied globally for the past 30 years on projects involving a wide range of
planning and design applications scaling from local to basin wide,with both surface water and
groundwater issues.25 Applications in India include modelling the impact of irrigation infrastructure
on the groundwater regime; studying the impact of waste water on the groundwater quality for
the Musi wetland area; using MIKE SHE-MIKE11 to design area drainage and safe ground for
the Himavath Thermal Power Station; and assessing impacts of tanks on local groundwater
levels in the Vaippar Basin, Tamil Nadu.ibid


                                                                                                        41
     Water Resource Software




     GSSHA (WMS) has been used around the world for hydrologic and land use projects with
     applications reported in the U.S., Europe, and the Middle East.50 The authors are unaware of
     GSSHA applications in India.



         DHM Conclusions: All applications can be used to assess land use change at scales
         ranging from watershed to basin. SWAT has had numerous applications in India to
         model water availability, sediment runoff, and water quality (point source and non-
         point source). For the purpose of evaluating land use and climate changes on stream
         flow, water quality, and sediment runoff, SWAT is the most widely used of the software
         evaluated, with many applications and detailed documentation. The downfall is the
         lumped nature of the HRUs. If land use change within the HRUs cannot be adequately
         characterized, DHMs using gridded surface algorithms provide a better alternative.

         If impacts from land use and management strategies on groundwater are of primary
         interest, GSFLOW, GSSHA (WMS), and MIKE SHE are more appropriate. MIKE SHE and
         GSSHA (WMS) offer more capabilities to simulate surface water processes in the routing
         and operation of water. However, for generalized basin scale changes associated with
         climate change, GSFLOW is a good option. More detailed operations of surface water
         networks (for example, canal systems and localized irrigation) are not well suited for SWAT
         and GSFLOW. MIKE SHE, GSSHA (WMS), and MODFLOW-OWHM (see Conjunctive Use
         section) are more suitable tools for assessing these applications.

         Of the five packages, GSSHA (WMS) and MIKE SHE incorporate the most sophisticated
         GUI for pre-processing, running simulations, viewing, and post-processing results. The
         GUIs for these packages guide the workflow making model development straightforward
         and potentially save time in model development and evaluation of scenarios. If cost is a
         consideration, GSSHA (WMS) is the more desirable package.




     Flood and River Water Quality Management
     Flooding in India is a major issue every year, forcing the evacuation of many communities as
     well as threatening lives and damaging crops, infrastructure, and property. Flood management
     involves both planning (preventive) and real-time warning (operational response). This section
     reviews hydraulic WRS for applications and several flood-warning systems to support real-time
     applications. This section also reviews the water quality and sediment transport simulation
     capabilities of these hydraulic WRS.

     Flood Planning
     Flood planning requires WRS to be able to simulate rainfall-runoff, route floodwaters, and
     compute water levels throughout the river network. Results from the flooding analysis are used to
     develop inundation maps for different flooding frequencies; develop emergency management
     plans; establish regulatory guidelines for development (for example, flooding zones); develop
     operational strategies of dams and other flow control structures; and inform policy makers,
     stakeholders, and general public of the risk of flooding. WRS software must be able to simulate
     the propagation of floodwaters as well as effectively map results illustrating the extent of
     flooding.


42
                                                                     APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




In this review, five WRS packages are evaluated that support flood management including
Delft3D Suite, HEC-RAS, MIKE11, MIKE Flood, and SOBEK (Table 9). A general description of
each package is provided here:

l    Delft3D Suite (Deltares) is a hydrodynamic model that simulates storm surges, typhoons/
    hurricanes, tsunamis, detailed flows and water levels, waves, sediment transport and
    morphology, water quality and ecology.31 In addition, the software is capable of handling
    interactions between these processes. The software can be configured to simulation flow
    using either a 1-D, 2-D, or 3-D finite difference algorithm. Delft3D is useful for producing
    local, regional, and multi-regional risk profiles if local risk data are unavailable or of poor
    quality. Delft3D can be linked to Delft FEWS to perform real-time flood warnings and D-Water
    Quality for simulating water quality conditions. Primary informational sources: Deltares
    vendor response,31 Delft3D FlowUser Manual,67 D-Water Quality Water Quality and Aquatic
    Ecology User Manual,68 D-Water Quality Sediment Water Interaction User Manual.69 Further
    information regarding Delft3D Suite can be found at: https://www.deltares.nl/en/software-
    solutions/70

l	HEC-RAS      (USACE) is a 1-D hydraulic model developed by the USACE’s Hydrologic
    Engineering Center to perform hydraulic calculations for natural and constructed channels.
    Though developed in the U.S., HEC-RAS is used extensively around the world to perform
    open channel river hydraulics work. The HEC-RAS system contains four 1-D river analyses:
    (1) steady flow water surface profile computations; (2) unsteady flow simulation; (3)
    movable boundary sediment transport computations; and (4) water quality analysis. Other
    applications used with HEC-RAS include HEC-HMS (rainfall-runoff model), ResSim (reservoir
    simulation model), and FIA (flood impact analyses). HEC-RAS 5.0 Beta includes 2-D hydraulic
    simulation capabilities, but is not considered in this analysis. HEC-RAS is a component
    in HEC-WAT system (comprehensive flood planning) and HEC-RTS system (real-time flood
    warning and systems operations). Primary informational sources: HEC-RAS, River Analysis
    System, Hydraulics Reference Manual,71 HEC-WAT Watershed Analysis Tool User’s Manual,72
    HEC-RTS/CWMS User's Manual Version 3.0.73 Further information regarding HEC-RAS can
    be found at: http://www.hec.usace.army.mil/software/hec-ras/74

l	MIKE     HYDRO River (DHI), formerly MIKE11, is a 1-D river modelling software that has
    been used around the world on application regarding flooding, navigation, water quality,
    forecasting, sediment transport, a combination of these, or other aspects of river engineering.
    Modules allow users to expand the simulation capabilities to include rainfall-runoff (RR), water
    quality (WQ and ECO Lab), sediment transport (ST), structure operations (SO), and dam
    break (DB). MIKE HYDRO River is dynamically coupled with MIKE21 (a 2-D hydrodynamic
    package) in MIKE FLOOD, and is the riverine component of the hydrologic cycle in MIKE SHE.
    MIKE HYDRO River is also used in real-time operations and flood warning systems. Primary
    informational sources: DHI vendor response,25 MIKE11 User Manual Manual.75 Further
    informationregarding MIKE HYDRO River can be found at: http://www.mikepoweredbydhi.
    com/products/mike1176

l   MIKE FLOOD (DHI) is a 1-D and 2-D hydrodynamic software package that can be applied to
    virtually any flood problem, whether it involves rivers; floodplains; street flooding; drainage
    networks; coastal areas; dam, levee and dike breaches; or any combination of these. MIKE
    FLOOD dynamically couples MIKE11 and MIKE21(a 2-D flood simulation) to assess flows.
    In MIKE FLOOD, water quality can be simulated using ECO Lab. The MIKE11 and MIKE21

                                                                                                       43
     Water Resource Software




         sediment transport modules can be used independently, but do not apply to MIKE FLOOD. Of
         note, MIKE21C ST incorporates a curvilinear grid particular suited for sediment transport and
         river morphologies. Primary informational sources: DHI vendor response,25 MIKE FLOOD
         User Manual Manual,77 MIKE21C ST Manual.78 Further information regarding MIKE FLOOD
         can be found at: http://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mike-flood79

     l   SOBEK (Deltares) is an integrated software package for river, urban, or rural management.
         Seven program modules work together to give a comprehensive overview of waterway systems
         that allows users to link river, canal, and sewer systems for a total water management solution.
         SOBEK incorporates 1-D algorithms for rivers, canals, and sewers, and 2-D for overland
         flow. Built-in functionality allows users to expand the simulation capabilities to include RR,
         water quality (1DWAQ, 2DWWAQ, Emissions), sediment transport (1DMOR), and real-time
         control (RTC). Primary informational sources: SOBEK Technical Manual.80 Further information
         regarding SOBEK can be found at: https://download.deltares.nl/en/download/sobek/81

     Computational Overview: All packages offer 1-D, hydrodynamic simulation for characterizing
     the flows in rivers and canal systems (Tables 8 and 9). In general, 1-D model are reasonable
     for rivers with simple floodplain flows and/or simple floodplain topography (e.g. floodplains
     which only provide storage or flow paths that can be readily predicted). For rivers where flow
     is more complicated and floodplain topography is known, Delft3D, MIKE FLOOD, and SOBEK
     have the capability to dynamically couple 1-D and 2-D models which allows the flexibility to
     model the river in 1-D and floodplains in 2-D.82 For the 2-D schematization, Delft3D and MIKE
     FLOOD allow users to employ a flexible mesh for varying the analytical resolution of flow in
     areas of importance. HEC-RAS 5.0 Beta includes 2-D hydraulic simulation capabilities, however
     the functionality is still being tested. All packages come with a variety of options to simulate
     bridges, culverts, dams, gates, pumps, siphons, weirs, and user defined structures. In addition,
     all packages can simulate operational structures allowing users to vary water control structures
     with additional logic. Aside from HEC-RAS, these packages require separate modules when
     simulating operational structures.

     Delft3D, MIKE HYDRO River, MIKE FLOOD, and SOBEK are capable of using multicore to decrease
     computational time. This is important for larger models with more computational points, small
     time steps, and longer simulation periods. As HEC-RAS is a 1-D code with simpler computational
     requirements, the ability to access multicores is less important. DHI software are capable of
     using cloud services to run simulations saving computational time on local resources.

     Delft3D, SOBEK, MIKE HYDRO River, and MIKE FLOOD dynamically link with RR modules,
     allowing for rapid testing of different rainfall events (Table 8). Delft3D and SOBEK dynamically
     incorporate the U.S. National Weather Service’s Sacramento Soil Moisture Accounting model
     (a lumped conceptual model) or WFlow (an open source, command line driven, distributed
     DHM model) to compute runoff.83 MIKE HYDRO River and MIKE FLOOD use NAM (a lumped
     conceptual model) or the Unit Hydrograph method to pre-calculate inflow hydrographs. MIKE11
     is dynamically coupled with MIKE SHE to represent the riverine component of the DHM (see DHM
     Section). HEC-HMS is a rainfall-runoff module used for computing runoff from precipitation,
     however, it does not dynamically link to HEC-RAS and thus the pre-run rainfall-runoff results
     must be transferred for use in HEC-RAS. The transfer can be automated to eliminate manually
     transferring results between models using HEC-DSS (Data Storage System), HEC-WAT, or
     HEC-RTS.



44
                                                                                                    APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




All packages have external modules and programs to calculate the flood damages associates
to property and infrastructure.

GUI Overview: All software packages have professional GUIs for model development,
simulation, and result viewing. Supporting 1-D model construction, model builders in GIS allow
users to create and import the model geometry. For 2-D packages, mesh generators are available
to aid mesh creation. All packages have internal or modular tools to pre-process the time series
and DEM data. In addition, all packages have project management systems to manage files. Of
note, HEC-FRA Compute Option and Life-Cycle Cost within HEC-WAT allows users to evaluate
uncertainty analysis throughout the entire computation process (rainfall-runoff, hydraulics, food
damage impact) using the Monte Carlo Methos.85

Creating flood maps and animations is crucial for understanding the flooding extent and
conveying its extent to water managers and stakeholders (Table 8). For 1-D applications, HEC-
RAS, MIKE HYDRO River, and SOBEK have external GIS programs to build flood maps. For 2-D
applications, Delft3D, SOBEK (1-D/2-D) and MIKE FLOOD all have internal mapping features
to develop flood maps and animations; 2-D animations are a very convincing format to present
flooding results to water managers, interested stakeholders, and the general public.

Licensing and Support: HEC-RAS is a non-proprietary package that requires no license
and can be freely downloaded over the Internet. Similarly, Delft3D is open source software for
downloading over the Internet, but requires a license that can be acquired through registration

Table 8. Algorithms and functionality of Flood Planning/Warning WRS
Function          Delft3D                    HEC-RAS69,70              MIKE HYDRO                MIKE FLOOD25,74 MIKE 21C25,75                          SOBEK77
                  Flow29,65,66,67                                      River25,72
Mesh              1-D,2-D,3-D:               *1-D, Psuedo 2-D          1-D, Psuedo 2-D           Coupled 1-D/2-D:          2-D Curvilinear grid         *1-D, Psuedo 2-D
                  Curvilinear and            with loops                with loops                Cartesian and                                          with loops
                  sephirical grids           *Couple 1-d/2-D                                     flexible grid                                          *Coupled 1-D/2-D:
                                              (in beta testing)                                                                                         rectilinear grid
Discretization    Finite Difference          Finite Difference         Finite Difference         Finite Difference         Finite Difference            Finite Difference
Rainfall-Runoff   *Sacramento RR             HEC-HMS                   *NAM, Uniti               *NAM, Uniti               NAM, Uniti Hydrograph,       *SOBEK RR Model
(RR)              Model                                                Hydrograph, SMAP,         Hydrograph, SMAP,         SMAP, FEH, DRiFit            *Sacramento
                  *WFLOW                                               FEH, DRiFit               FEH, DRiFit                                            RR Model
                                                                       *MIKE SHE                 *MIKE SHE
Structure Types/ *Barrier, bridge,           *Bridge, culvert, dam,    *Bridge, culvert, dam,    *Bridge, culvert, dam,    *Barrier, bridge, culvert,   *Barrier, bridege,
Logic Structures culvert, deflection         gate, pump, siphon,       gate, pump, siphon,       gate, pump, siphon,       deflection wall, floating    culvert, deflection
(LS)             wall, floating structure,   weir, user defined        weir, user defined        weir, user defined        structre gate, pump,         wall, floating
                 gate, weir, user            *LS: Rule structure       *LS: Structural           *LS: Structural           siphon, weir, user defined   structure, gate, weir,
                 defined                                               Operation (SO) Module     Operation (SO)            *LS: Structural              user defined
                 *LS: Delft3D (RTC)                                                              Module                    Operation (SO) Module        *LS: Delft3D (RTC)
Output            *Water levels, water       *Water levels, water      *Water levels, water      *Water levels, water      *Water levels, water         *Water levels, water
                  surface profiles, flow     surface profiles, flow    surface profiles, flow    surface profiles, flow    surface profiles, flow       surface profiles, flow
                  velocity, flow quantity    velocity, flow quantity   velocity, flow quantity   velocity, flow quantity   velocity, flow quantity      velocity, flow quantity
                  *Flood maps                *Flood maps (GEO-         *Flood maps               *Flood maps               *Flood maps                  *Flood maps
                  *2-D animations            RAS)                      *Frequency analysis       *2-D Animations           *2-D Animations              *Frequency analysis
                  *Frequency analysis        *Frequency analysis                                 *Frequency analysis       *Frequency analysis
                                             (HEC-SSP)
Program           PM/RT: Delft-FEWS          *PM: HEC-WAT              *PM: MIKE HYDRO           *PM: MIKE HYDRO           PM: MIKE HYDRO               PM/RT: Delft-FEWS
Manager (PM)/                                *RT: HEC-RTS              Interface                 Interface                 Interface
Real-Time (RT)                                                         *RT: MIKE 11 RT           *RT: MIKE 11 RT
Water Quality     D-Water Quality            Built-In                  Advection-Dispersion Advection-Dispersion           Advection-Dispersion         SOBEDK 1DWAQ
                  Module (Formerly                                     (AD) Module, ECO Lab (AD) Module, ECO               (AD) Module, ECO Lab
                  DELWAQ)                                              Module               Lab Module                     Module
Sediment          DELFT3D-Sed Module Built-In                          Sediment Transport        None                      Sediment Transport (ST)      Bulit-in (limited
                                                                       (ST) Module,                                        Module,                      functionality)
                                                                       Advection Dispersion                                Advection Dispersion
                                                                       (AD) Module                                         (AD) Module
Ecological        Delft3d-ECO Module         HEC-FIA                   ECO Lab Module            ECO Lab Module            ECO Lab Module               None



                                                                                                                                                                            45
      Water Resource Software




     Table 9. Evaluation matrix for the flood planning WRS.MIKE21C not include for
     flooding analysis




     Note: Criteria are defined in Annex, Table A3.

     with Deltares.31,67 When downloaded as open source code, Delft3D must be compiled before
     using the software; a task that can be complicated depending on the computer’s configuration.
     A fully compiled version is provided with the purchase of the Basic Service Package that costs
     INR 2.4 lakhs.31 Non-proprietary water quality and sediment transport modules are available
     for both packages.

     MIKE FLOOD, MIKE HYDRO River, MIKE21C, and SOBEK are proprietary hydraulic WRS that
     require the purchase of a license.

      WRS                           Basic Package (lakh INR) Indian Government (lakh INR)
      Delft3D   31
                                          Uncompiled: 0.00,       Uncompiled: 0.00, Compiled: 2.4
                                           Compiled: 2.4
      HEC-RAS74                                       0.00                     0.00
      MIKE HYDRO River         25
                                              0.00 – 12.9+                 0.00 – 12.9+
      MIKE FLOOD          25
                                     Single: 9.7, Network: 24.2     Single: 6.8, Network: 15.76
      MIKE21C        25
                                     Single: 6.6, Network: 16.4      Single: 4.6, Network: 10.7
      SOBEK    44
                                             Single: 2.3+                  Single: 2.3+

     In India, the basic SOBEK license is INR 2.3 lakh/seat with INR 2.1 lakh/seat for continued
     annual maintenance support.43 Network options and hydrology and water quality modules add
     additional fees. A single seat for the hydrodynamic module of MIKE HYDRO River requires no
     license, but only comes with very limited capabilities. Versions having greater capacity than
     the limited version and/or the use of add-on modules require additional fees. For example,
     the MIKE Hydro River DA Enterprise package which includes four seats of the MIKE11 HD,
     SO, DB, RR, Advection Dispersion, Auto-calibration, MIKE SHE including 2D overland flow, and
     Data Assimilation modules costs INR 12.9 lakh.25 For basic government licenses, MIKE FLOOD
     for a single seat and INR 15.76 lakh for a network license with optional annual maintenance
     agreement of INR 2.8 lakh.25 Modules for simulating rainfall-runoff, water quality, and sediment
     transport are available at an additional cost for MIKE FLOOD and SOBEK (excluding DELWAQ,

46
                                                                    APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




which is free). All packages are supported with manuals, tutorials, training courses, and user
groups. Training courses and consultancy support is available for an additional fee. The USACE
does not provide training courses for HEC-RAS, but third party private and educational firms
provide these courses.

All packages have applications in India. The USACE does not consult on projects in India, and
therefore, the authors are unaware of number of HEC-RAS applications in India. However, a
quick Internet search of HEC-RAS use in India revealed numerous instances of flood modeling
and dam break analysis (for example, Lower Tapi River,86 Mahanadi River,87 Somb River,88
Godavari River89). In India, Delft3D has primarily been used in 2-D coastal applications of
Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu; in Bangladesh it has been used in the Surma River.31 MIKE
FLOOD has been applied for DB analysis for the Ukai Dam and mitigation planning for the
downstream Kakrapara weir.25 MIKE HYDRO River (MIKE11) has been used for evaluating flood
risk and determining the safe guard level at the Himavat Thermal Power Plant.25 SOBEK was
used in the Burhi-Gandak, Bihar and Brahmani-Baitarani, Odisha to examine integrated flood
management under climate change.90


     Flood Planning Recommendation: All packages support flood planning and
     mapping. For systems with simple hydraulics and limited data, HEC-RAS, MIKE HYDRO
     River (MIKE11) and SOBEK are best applied. Given the widespread use, user-friendly
     GUI interface, non-proprietary status, and large user community, HEC-RAS is the
     recommended tool for assessing flood planning in simple systems.

     For more complicated systems and where floodplain topography is known, Delft3D
     Flexible Mesh, MIKE FLOOD and SOBEK are applicable. MIKE FLOOD and SOBEK
     offer 1-D/2-D modeling of river and floodplain that can provide a more efficient
     computational solution but have licensing fees for governments of INR 6.8 and 2.3
     lakh/seat, respectively. Budget, user familiarity, and support should be considered
     when choosing between these packages. Delft3D Flexible Mesh is primarily a 2-D/3-D
     code and thus better suited for 2-D flood mapping, though it can be employed using
     a 1-D grid. Once HEC-RAS 5.0 has been officially released, the software will handle
     these complicated systems and be available as a non-proprietary, freely downloadable
     option to MIKE FLOOD and SOBEK.


Flood Warning
Real-time flood warning systems (RTFWS) require the automation of retrieving and verifying
the quality of hydrometeorologic data; incorporation of the data into hydrologic and hydraulic
models; determination of the magnitude and timing of flooding; and dissemination of warnings
to water resources managers, emergency personnel, hydraulic structure operators, interested
stakeholders, and the public. In addition, a RTFWS allows water resource managers to quickly
and efficiently test alternative scenarios for managing flooding events. Specific functionality
required in RTFWS includes:91
l   Data Acquisition and Storage.The RTFWS automates data collection, verification and storage
    from real-time sensors, radar information, forecasts, and other data sources. For sensor data,
    the RTFWS provides quality checks to determine if the values received are within reason and
    not a function of an erroneous sensor reading. If data signify a potential event, the system
    can trigger flooding analysis as well as a warning. Real-time and historic data are stored for
    viewing, analysis, and dissemination.

                                                                                                      47
     Water Resource Software




     l    Simulation Models. Within the RTFWS, WRS are used to predict future conditions and run
         alternative scenarios. RR models are used to predict the inflows from given precipitation events.
         Hydraulic models are used to predict flood propagation downstream, providing a prediction of
         magnitude and timing of waterelevations and volumes. Finally, algorithms are used to simulate
         the effects and operations of major hydraulic structures, such as reservoirs, which influence
         river flows. As timing is critical when managing a flooding event, these WRS need to be fast, yet
         detailed enough to provide relevant information for use in determining scenarios.

     l	DSS.    Software is employed for coordinating the data acquisition and validation, providing
         a means of viewing and evaluating the data, coordinating the transfer of data, controlling
         simulation runs, and disseminating warnings to water managers, stakeholders, and the public.
         The DSS must be powerful in capabilities, but not overly complicated to operate, as important
         decisions are made quickly and efficiently during flooding events. Viewing capabilities need
         to be customized to fit the varying conditions, as well as the need of the individuals and
         organizations using the information.

     Though RTFWS are designed for assisting in flood management, the data collected, analytic
     capabilities, and viewing and process functionality make them valuable tools for water
     management beyond flood warning systems.

     Several RTFWS developed to support flood warning systems incorporating these principles are
     available. The RTFWS reviewed include Delft FEWS, HEC-R RTS, and MIKE11Real-Time Enterprise
     Package (MIKE11 RT). A general description of each system is given below:

     l   Delft FEWS (Deltares) provides an open shell system for managing forecasting processes and/
         or handling time series data. The software incorporates a wide range of general data handling
         utilities, while providing an open interface to any external forecasting model. The modular
         and highly configurable nature of Delft FEWS allows it to be used effectively for data storage
         and retrieval tasks, simple forecasting systems, and in highly complex systems utilizing a full
         range of modeling techniques. Delft FEWS can either be deployed in a standalone, manually
         driven environment, or in a fully automated, distributed client-server environment. Primary
         informational sources: Deltares vendor response.31 For information regarding Delft FEWS,
         please visit: https://www.deltares.nl/en/software/flood-forecasting-system-Delft FEWS-2/92

     l	HEC-RTS     (USACE) is the public version of USACE’s Corps Water Management System (CWMS)
         – Control and Visualization Interface (CAVI), a comprehensive data acquisition and hydrologic
         modeling system used for short-term decision making regarding water control operations in
         real-time to support the water control management mission. HEC-RTS accompanies HEC’s
         suite of software that encompasses data collection, validation and transformation, data
         storage, visualization, real-time model simulation for decision-making support, and data
         dissemination. HEC-RTS is the publicly available, PC version that runs independently of the
         CWMS database. Primary informational sources: HEC-RTS/CWMS User's Manual Version
         3.0 – Draft.73 For information on HEC-RTS go to: http://www.hec.usace.army.mil/software/93

     l   MIKE11RT (DHI) is a subset of DHI software that has been combined into a RTFWS. The suite
         includes a database, rainfall-runoff model, hydraulic model, data assimilation functionality,
         and DSS system for viewing data, running simulations, and disseminating information.
         MIKE11 RT has been implemented around the world with several applications in India. Primary
         informational sources: DHI vendor response.25 Information regarding MIKE11 can be found
         at: http://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mike1194

48
                                                                     APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Computational and GUI Overview: All RTFWS include a DSS that allows coordination
between monitoring data, external forecasts, and simulation models to provide customized
output. To display conditions in space and time, all systems have map-based capabilities
and link to databases for a viewing of time series and capabilities to disseminate warnings to
water managers and emergency personnel. All systems require customization as each project
has different conditions and different audiences. The differences between these RTFWS are
the databases they support, WRS they incorporate, cost, and external support available for
customization and implementation.

Delft FEWS is a collection of standard displays, modules, and plug-ins that connect with external
databases and models to form a forecasting system. Delft FEWS is model agnostic in that it uses
model adapters to connect to a large range of hydrologic, hydraulic, and groundwater models.
Delft FEWS supports over 175 import formats and is able to export data in more than 60 export
formats.Within Delft FEWS, an Application Programming Interface (API) allows users to develop
their own Java plugins for imports, exports, displays, statistical functions, and transformations.
The Delft FEWS interface provides advanced graphical and map-based displays. Forecast results
can be disseminated through configurable HTML formatted reports, allowing communication to
relevant authorities and public through intranet and internet. Standard output formats such as
HTML formatted reports are available and can be customized to specific user requirements.

HEC-RTS is an integrated system that begins with the reception of hydro-meteorological data
that is then processed, stored, and made available through a user-friendly interface to the water
manager for evaluating and modeling hydrologic conditions within the watershed. For incorporating
simulation models, HEC-RTS supports the use of HEC software and other products developed by
the USACE. HEC-HMS is used to compute runoff based on gaged or radar-based precipitation,
quantitative precipitation forecasts (QPF), and other future precipitation scenarios that provide
forecasts of uncontrolled flows into and downstream of reservoirs. For loading data into HEC-
HMS, HEC-Meteorologic Forecast Processor (MFP) processes meteorological forecasts and HEC-
MetVue processes observed precipitation and temperature. Outputs are forecasted meteorological
time series formatted for compatibility with HEC-HMS. Slider adjustment options in HEC-HMS
allow for more rapid calibration.91 Data assimilation functionality is used to adjust model input to
reflect current conditions from real-time sensor (for example, rain gages, stream levels). Reservoir
operations simulations use either HEC-ResSim or CADSWES’s RiverWare. HEC-ResSim uses rule-
based description of the operational goals and constraints that reservoir operators must consider
when making release decisions. River hydraulics uses HEC-RAS to compute river stage and water
surface profiles. An inundation boundary and depth map of water in the flood plain can be
calculated from the HEC-RAS results using ArcInfo. Economic impacts of different flow alternatives
are computed by HEC-FIA. Model and processed data can be displayed and disseminated in
tabular, graphical, and/or geo-spatial formats, resulting in an effective DSS.

MIKE11 RT uses DHIs SCADA and geodatabases to receive, verify, store, and disseminate sensor,
radar, and forecast data. For predicting inflows, MIKE11 RT uses NAM, a lumped conceptual
algorithm solving moisture conditions and water balance in the surface water system, including
overland, unsaturated, and saturated zones. As input to NAM, MIKE11 RT supports observed
data (precipitation, temperature), remotely sensed data, and forecasts. To route flows through the
river systems and simulate reservoir operations, MIKE11hydrodynamic and structural operations
modules are employed. The data assimilation model is used to adjust model input to reflect
current conditions from real-time sensor (for example, rain gages, stream levels). A DSS interface
coordinates the modeling and allows users to view sensor data, maps, and simulation results in
standardised or customized interfaces.

                                                                                                       49
     Water Resource Software




     Licensing and Support: The Delft FEWS software is open source and freely available for
     download.31,92 Deltares supports FEWS through consulting services and has a field office in
     Delhi to support the Ganges Rejuvenation Project. HEC-RTS and all of the supporting software
     are public domain and free for download. Similar to HEC-RAS, the USACE does not provide
     training courses for HEC-RTS, but third party private and educational organizations provide
     courses and international consulting firms with water management experience using HEC-RTS
     have offices in India.94 MIKE11 RT costs INR 16 and 26.6 lakh for a single seat and network
     license, respectively.25 For government agencies, these are reduced to INR 11.2 and 17.3 lakh,
     respectively. Academic and research firms can get a single seat for INR 8.0 lakh and a network
     license for INR 13.3 lakh.ibid Annual software maintenance agreements are available for MIKE11
     RT. To support applications, DHI has offices in India.

     In India, MIKE11 RT has been the most widely used RTFWS. Applications include real-time stream
     flow forecasting and reservoir operation system for Krishna and Bhima Basins in Maharashtra,
     flood forecast and inundation modeling system in the Bagmati-Adhwara Basin, Bihar, flood
     forecasting and early warning system for Brahmaputra in Assam, and real-time DSS for
     operational management of the Bhakra-Nangal and Beas Reservoirs in Northwest India.25 In
     addition to India, MIKE11 RT has been applied worldwide to assist in flood management. Delft
     FEWS has been an operational flood forecasting tool in basins in the United States, England,
     Wales, Scotland, Ireland, Netherlands, Germany, Austria, Spain, Italy, Switzerland, Taiwan,
     Pakistan, the Zambezi basin, Ghana, Canada, Colombia, Indonesia, Bolivia and by the Mekong
     River Commission.31 In India, it is currently being used to coordinate the Ganga Rejuvenation
     Project. HEC-RTS and CWMS have been used extensively in the United States for operational
     water management and applied to the BBMB system.94



       Flood Warning Recommendation: All RTFWSs evaluated have DSS interfaces that link
       with databases and simulation modeling to support flood management and have been
       used in flood warning systems. Choice of RTFWS then depends on supporting simulation
       models, technical support, and license fee.

       Delft FEWS is a versatile software allowing for a wide variety of simulation models to be used,
       including existing models in a basin. Deltares and third party consultancy organizations
       can provide support for the application of both RTFWSs in India. Delft FEWS is free for
       government agencies.

       HEC-RTS employs a full suite of public domain software, including HEC-HMS, HEC-ResSim,
       HEC-RAS, HEC-FIA, HEC-MFP      , HEC-MetVue, HEC-QFP     , which are used to successfully
       manage water resources both in India and worldwide. HEC-RTS and supporting simulation
       models are public domain software that require no licensing fee, and thus should be
       considered when selecting a RTFWS under budgetary considerations.

       MIKE11 RTuses MIKE11 and NAM, two programs that have been used throughout India.
       DHI offices in India provide support for the RTFWS and have experience implementing it
       in four river basins around India. The primary limitation with MIKE11 RT is the license fee;
       however, if budgetary constraints are not of great significance then, MIKE11 RT is a proven
       tool in India. If budgetary constraints are a significant factor in RTFWS selection, Delft FEWS
       and HEC-RTS should be considered.



50
                                                                     APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Water Quality and Sediment Transport
Though typically not considered in flooding events, all of the hydrodynamic model packages
have the capability to simulate water quality (Tables 8 and 10). Delft3DD-Water Quality module
and SOBEK 1DWAQ simulates many water quality variables and their related water quality
processes. These modules are highly flexible due to the many standard options as well as user-
defined options, and have a library of 900 processes and substances, including eutrophication,
adsorption, desorption, nutrients, bacteria, oxygen, phytoplankton, heavy metals and micro-
pollutants. The interactive processes editor allows users to select the water quality variables
and processes to be modeled. Pre-defined sets of water quality variables and processes can
be used for particular problems or for the purpose of following the standard set of rules and
regulations for a specific region. To analyse the origin of pollutants in any water system, fraction
computations make it easy to trace water or a certain pollutant from to its source throughout the
network. The software displays mass balances and is fully integrated with the standard Delft3D
and SOBEK interfaces.

HEC-RAS incorporates the QUICKEST-ULTIMATE explicit numerical scheme to solve the 1-D
advection-dispersion equation using a control volume approach, with a fully implemented heat
energy budget. Transport and fate of a limited set of water quality constituents are available in
HEC-RAS. The currently available water quality constituents are: dissolved nitrogen (NO3-N,
NO2-N, NH4-N, and Org-N); dissolved phosphorus (PO4-P and Org-P); algae; dissolved
oxygen (DO); and carbonaceous biological oxygen demand (CBOD).

In MIKE HYDRO River, MIKE FLOOD, and MIKE21C, water quality is calculated through an
Advection-Dispersion module or ECO Lab, an open-ended ecological and water quality modeling
framework that allows for user-defined equations and water quality models to be defined. The
Advection-Dispersion module simulates the fate and transport of standard suite of chemicals
and ECO Lab permits the user to simulate the fate and transport of chemicals using user defined
equations, ecological processes, agent-based modeling, or other hydraulic influenced processes.
ECO Lab templates are available for standard water quality parameters. Both the Advection-
Dispersion module and ECO Lab are available for an additional fee. All packages, aside from
SOBEK, have modules that specifically conduct ecological analyses (Table 8).

All packages, except MIKE FLOOD, have functionality to compute sediment transport (Table
8). HEC-RAS, MIKE HYDRO River ST, and SOBEK compute 1-D sediment routing of the total
load. HEC-RAS and MIKE HYDRO River ST enable equations to calculate suspended sediment
and bedload transport loads, compute graded sediment transport (multiple size fractions), and
predict changes in riverbed elevation due to erosion or deposition (morphological mode). MIKE
HYDRO River can also compute cohesive sediment transport using the AD module. When MIKE
HYDRO River is coupled with MIKE 21 in MIKE FLOOD, sediment transport is not an option.

From the 2-D codes, Delft3D D-Water Quality, MIKE21 ST, and MIKE21C ST have multiple
equations to compute total load, suspended load, and bedload transport. These models can
compute both cohesive and non-cohesive sediment and can simulate morphological changes
associated with erosion and deposition. MIKE21 ST and MIKE21C ST also simulate graded
sediment classes, which better simulate transport in gravel bed rivers. In riverine environments,
Delft3D (curvilinear mode) and MIKE21C ST are specifically tailored for morphology applications
through the use of a 2-D curvilinear grid for river flow modelling. These packages simulate bank
erosion, scouring and shoaling brought about by activities such as construction and dredging,
and seasonal fluctuations in flow. For long stretches of rivers with many grid cells (computational
points), neither package is computationally practical.

                                                                                                       51
     Water Resource Software




     Table 10. Evaluation matrix for the water quality and sediment transport WRS




     Note: Criteria are defined in Annex, Table A3.

     Gravel dominated rivers provide additional challenge when simulating sediment transport. Delft3D
     D-Water Quality has been used to predict coastal sediment transport, where sand transport
     dominates, but has very limited applications in gravel bed rivers.97 The authors are unaware of
     riverine applications in India. MIKE21C ST has been used in river systems worldwide for both
     sand dominated and gravel bed rivers.98 In India, MIKE21C ST has been applied to the Master
     Plan for Flood and Sediment Management in Kosi River Basin, Amochhu Flood Management
     and Land Reclamation Project, Integrated Flood and Riverbank Erosion Risk Management Project
     in Assam, Morphological Study of Vansadhara River, and Design of Bank Protection Measures at
     Narmada River Crossing.25 The sediment transport module is an additional fee in MIKE21C ST.


        Water Quality and Recommendation: For standard analyses, all packages simulate
        water quality as a module in the software. For constituents not included in the HEC-RAS
        simulations, either Delft3D D-Water Quality Module; MIKE HYDRO River, MIKE FLOOD,
        or MIKE 21C with ECO Lab; or SOBEK 1DWAQ provide greater options. The choice of
        water quality model should be made with regard to the hydraulic model selected.

        Riverine Sediment Transport Recommendations: For 1-D applications, HEC-RAS
        and MIKE HYDRO River ST have multiple sediment transport equations from which to
        choose, can simulate mobile boundaries to account for aggradation and erosion along a
        bed, and can account for graded sediment. These are effective in simulating the loading
        of sediment to reservoirs from a watershed. Of these, HEC-RAS is the top choice due to
        the price point. If cohesive sediments are to be considered, MIKE HYDRO River ST should
        be considered.

52
                                                                     APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




    For 2-D applications, Delft3D D-Water Quality and MIKE21C ST can be used for sediment
    management, channel design, and bank erosion in riverine settings where bed and banks
    are mobile, and the user’s purpose is to determine stresses and potential erosion (design
    scenarios). On price, Delft3D-SED is open source and appropriate for sand dominated
    rivers. Given the ability to simulate graded sediment, MIKE21C ST better simulates transport
    in gravel bed rivers, having been successfully applied worldwide and in India.


Groundwater and Conjunctive Use Management
Groundwater management requires determining the quantity and quality of subsurface water
movement over time and space as influenced by natural processes and human activities. Unlike
surface water conditions, groundwater observations are limited to boreholes water levels and
pumping test, thus characterizing the hydrogeological system is more difficult due to a limited set
of observations. Therefore, the ability to characterize groundwater systems and to develop and
evaluate resource management strategies for sustainable water allocation is greatly enhanced
when using groundwater models. In India, groundwater models are used by water resources
managers for:

l Characterizing aquifer properties;
l Evaluating groundwater pumping impacts on groundwater levels;
l Quantifying sustainable yield;
l	Identifying groundwater recharge zones and determining the placement and design of
  groundwater recharge structures (for examples, check dams, tanks, recharge wells);
l Evaluating proposed policies and projects;
l Developing conjunctive management strategies;
l Developing aquifer storage systems;
l Determining the fate and transport of chemical solutes in groundwater;
l Computing the saline intrusion in coastal zones;
l Evaluating the economic impact of groundwater conditions; and
l	Communicating groundwater quality and quantity conditions to policy makers and
  stakeholders.

Often, groundwater models are developed to satisfy multiple uses.

Two types of WRS are used to characterize groundwater: distributed hydrogeological models
(DHgM) and RBMs. DHgMs are physically based distributed models that represent groundwater
movement using 2-D or 3-D gridded finite difference and finite volume solutions based on
Darcy’s equations. Simulations include both steady-state and transient simulations. Typical
data requirements for DHgMs include the aquifer thickness, hydrogeological parameters (for
example, hydraulic conductivity, transmissivity), boundary conditions (for example, constant flow,
fixed head, non-flow), groundwater recharge, and pumping rates. Typical DHgM output includes
groundwater heads, drawdown, flow magnitude and direction, and water budgets throughout
the modeling domain. If simulating water quality is required, capabilities include the fate and
transport of chemicals and, for some packages, the temperature and multi-density flow (saline
intrusion). DHgMs are applicable for the management issues listed above and have been
successfully applied to aquifers in India.

DHgMs, as applied to general groundwater management and conjunctive use, are evaluated in


                                                                                                       53
     Water Resource Software




     this section. RBMs are not reviewed in this section as groundwater is primarily regarded as supply
     source in water allocation models (see Water Allocation Model: RBM section).

     DHgM: General Groundwater Management
     Six DHgMs were evaluated including GMS, Groundwater Vistas, MODFLOW, iMOD,and MIKE
     SHE, and Visual MODFLOW (Table 11). General descriptions of each package are provided
     below:

     l	GMS      (Aquveo is a groundwater modelling system, based on MODFLOW code, which
         provides tools for every phase of groundwater simulation including site characterization,
         model development, post-processing, calibration, and visualization. GMS supports TINs,
         solids, borehole data, 2-D and 3-D geostatistics, finite element, and finite difference model.
         Currently, supported models include MODFLOW, MODPATH, MT3D, RT3D, FEMWATER,
         SEEP2-D, SEAM3D, PEST, UCODE and UTCHEM. Due to the modular nature of GMS, a
         custom version of GMS with desired modules and interfaces can be configured. Primary
         informational sources: Kumar,99 GMS website.100 Information regarding GMS can be found
         at: http://www.aquaveo.com/software/gms-groundwater-modeling-system-introduction100

     l	Groundwater     Vistas (Rockware) is a Windows modelling environment for the MODFLOW
         family of models that allows for the quantification of uncertainty. Groundwater Vistas includes
         a series of tools for assessing risk using a more complex and real-world groundwater
         model. Primary informational sources: Kumar,99 Groundwater Vistas website.101 Information
         regarding Groundwater Vistas can be found at:https://www.rockware.com/product/overview.
         php?id=147101

     l	iMOD     (Deltares) is an open source, easy to use graphical user interfacethat employs an
         accelerated Deltares-version of MODFLOW with fast, flexible and consistent sub-domain
         modeling techniques. iMOD facilitates very large, high resolution MODFLOW groundwater
         modeling and also geo-editing of the subsurface. iMOD also facilitates interaction with
         SEAWAT (for density-dependent groundwater flow) and MT3D (groundwater quality). Primary
         informational sources: Deltares vendor response,31 the iMOD website.102 For information
         regarding iMOD, visit: https://www.deltares.nl/en/software/imod/102

     l	MODFLOW         (USGS) is 3-D finite-difference groundwater model first published in 1984.
         Although originally conceived solely as a groundwater-flow simulation code, MODFLOW's
         modular structure has provided a robust framework for integration of additional simulation
         capabilities that build on and enhance its original scope. The family of MODFLOW-related
         programs now includes capabilities to simulate coupled groundwater/surface-water systems,
         solute transport, variable-density flow (including saltwater), aquifer-system compaction and
         land subsidence, parameter estimation, and groundwater management. The MODFLOW
         program is free, open-source software. The software can be used, copied, modified, and
         distributed without any fee or cost. Primary informational sources: Kumar,99 MODFLOW
         website.103 Information regarding MODFLOW can be found at: http://water.usgs.gov/ogw/
         modflow/103

     l   MIKE SHE (DHI): see DHM Section for description.

     l	Visual   MODFLOW (Waterloo Hydrogeologic Software) simplifies model development by
         providing a workflow driven GUI to guide construction and use of groundwater flow and

54
                                                                    APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




  contaminant transport model. Model development is broken into model development,
  simulation, and output modules guiding the modeller through the development. It comes
  with pre-processing and post-processing tools; MODFLOW-88, MODFLOW-96, MODFLOW
  2000, and MODFLOW-2005; MT3D, MT3DMS, RT3D and MOC3D; PMPATH 99; and
  UCODE and PEST-ASP   . Primary informational sources: Kumar,99 Visual MODFLOW website.104
  Information regarding Visual MODFLOW can be found at: http://www.novametrixgm.com/
  groundwater-modeling-software/visual-modflow-flex104

Computational Overview: All packages support a 3-D gridded finite difference model, allowing
for construction of multilayer models with varying hydrogeological parameters throughout the
domain that are able to simulate flows in confined and unconfined aquifers. The MODFLOW
engine based software enables modellers to vary grid cell sizes within the domain for greater grid
resolution in regions of interest (for example, proposed groundwater pumping area or chemical
spill). MODFLOW-USG simulates groundwater flow with finite volume solutions, allowing for
unstructured grids. iMOD uses an accelerated version of the MODFLOW engine. MIKE SHE uses
a 3-D gridded finite difference model based on the Darcy’s equations to simulate groundwater
movement. The grid in MIKE SHE is fixed throughout the model domain.

MODFLOW system consists of a core program that couples with a series of highly independent
subroutines called packages. Each package simulates a specific feature of the hydrologic
system (e.g. unsaturated zone flow, river flow), water quality (for example, solute transport),
or a specific method of solving equations that simulate the flow system. Packages supporting
calibration routines in PEST (model-independent parameter estimation and uncertainty
analysis) and Monte Carlo analysis are available for calibration and quantifying uncertainty.
MODFLOW’s use of packages allows users to examine specific hydrologic features of the
model independently as well as add new packages without modifying existing models. A list of
MOFLOW packages can be found at http://water.usgs.gov/ogw/modflow/MODFLOW.html.
The foundation code for GMS, Visual MODFLOW, and Groundwater Vistas use the MODFLOW
engine. iMOD can employ the MODFLOW packages or couples with WFlow, an open source,
command line driven, distributed WRM model to compute effects of land use change within
catchments on hydrographs for import into the model.83

MIKE SHE includes dynamically linked modules to compute saturated zone flow, evapotranspiration,
overland flow, river and lake flow, unsaturated zone flow, and anthropogenic use (for example,
irrigation, ground water pumping, irrigation drains) to allow for the examination of the full
hydrologic cycle. For each module, several numerical methods are available, granting flexibility
to adjust given the question being addressed and the data available (Table 6). MIKE SHE can
be coupled with the Autocalibration Module to assist in calibration of the groundwater model.
Within the Autocalibration Module is the ability to perform uncertainty analysis through several
methods.

Water quality applications in India include salinity in irrigation, fate and transport of chemical
spills, and the prediction of saline intrusion along coastal zones. MODFLOW, iMOD, and
MIKE SHE offer multiple means to compute water quality. Transport packages associated with
MODFLOW include:

l	MT3DMS:    three-dimensional transport model for simulating advection, dispersion, and
  chemical reactions of dissolved constituents;

l	MT3D99:    an enhanced version of MT3DMS, that includes support for implicit solver, TVD

                                                                                                      55
     Water Resource Software




         Solution scheme, dual-porosity advection-diffusion, non-equilibrium sorption and monod
         kinetics, and multispecies reactions, including first-order parent-daughter chain reactions,
         and instantaneous reactions among species;

     l	SEAWAT:     three-dimensional variable-density groundwater flow coupled with multi-species
         solute and heat transport;

     l   RT3D: reactive transport simulations; and

     l	PHT3D:     a multi-component transport model for three-dimensional reactive transport in
         saturated porous media.

     GMS, Visual MODFLOW, and Groundwater Vistas support the use of many of these packages.
     iMOD uses the D-WQ module that simulates almost any water quality variable and its related
     water quality processes. iMOD can also use SEAWAT and MT3D.

     MIKE SHE addresses water quality with ECO Lab, an open-ended ecological and water quality
     modelling framework that allows user-defined equations and water quality model to be defined.
     Templates are available for standard constituents to expedite water quality modeling. A full
     description of the iMOD D-Water Quality and MIKE SHE ECO Lab is provided in the Water
     Quality and Sediment Transport sub-section in the Flood and River Water Quality Management
     Section.

     GUI Overview: ModelMuse (USGS’s GUI for MODFLOW), iMOD, GMS, Visual MODFLOW,
     and Groundwater Vistas use the MODFLOW engine and modules as the simulation base,
     but have built tools for expediting and enhancing the modeling process. These include site
     characterization, model development, post-processing, calibration, and visualization. All
     applications are developed to work on Windows, though MODFLOW also works on OSX, Linux,
     and Unix platforms.

     All packages evaluated are well supported with sophisticated GUI interfaces for inputting data
     and viewing results. USGS has developed ModelMuse to support MODFLOW, an interface that
     provides the basics in editing and viewing function. Third party software, including GMS, Visual
     MODFLOW, and Groundwater Vistas, offer more sophisticated visualization and post-processing
     wrappers around the MODFLOW engine and modules, providing a workflow driven GUI to
     guide construction, use, and resulting presentation from the groundwater flow and contaminant
     transport model. Model development is broken into model development, simulation, and output
     modules, thus guiding the modeller through the development. A 3-D visualization and animation
     package, 3-D groundwater explorer, is also included.

     iMOD’s interface allows users to build large high resolution groundwater flow models based on
     a data set expandable to all possible future areas of interest, flexibility to generate high or low
     resolution models generate, maintain consistency between regional and inlying, and update
     your data set with the details added in a sub-domain model.31 All necessary pre- and post-
     processing tools to prepare, run and visualize input and output for a MODFLOW groundwater
     model. Subsurface tools allow users to edit 2-D and 3-D subsurface and included borehole
     information.

     MIKE SHE incorporates the DHI suite of pre- and post-processing tools and provides a clear
     workflow for model development, simulation, post-processing, and result visualization. Post-
     processing tools allow for computation of water budgets, statistics, and animations.51
56
                                                                     APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Table 11. Evaluation matrix for the distributed hydrogeological model WRS




Note: Criteria are defined in Annex, Table A4.


Licensing and Support: ModelMuse and iMOD are open source software packages for use
in developing groundwater models. Both are supported with manuals, online tutorials, and user
forums. Additional support from Deltares and training courses that can be purchased are offered
for using iMOD. The USGS does not provide training courses, but third party organizations offer
MODFLOW courses for a fee.

GMS, Visual MODFLOW, and Groundwater Vistas require licenses. License fees begin around
INR 1 lakh per seat for the basic model and increases with added interface functionality (pre-
processing, post-processing, visualization) and access to additional MODFLOW packages. All
packages have online tutorials and courses to promote faster learning. Vendors provide training
courses for a fee.

MIKE SHE requires a license that allows access to the core mode functionality listed above, pre-
processing and post-processing tools, and limited support during the year. Service maintenance
agreements can be purchased annually for additional support, and consulting services are also
available. Additional modules for water quality simulations, control structures, and autocalibration
routines are additional cost. The model is supported with manuals, tutorials, training courses,
and online materials. Starting at INR 5.5 lakh/seat, MIKE SHE is the most expensive option of the
DHgM packages evaluated.


   Groundwater Model Recommendation: All packages simulate groundwater quantity
   and quality using similar algorithms and offer support for users of their software packages.
   The difference between the evaluated software packages lies in the GUI interface and price
   of the software. iMOD, with the pre-processing and post-processing, strong visualization
   abilities, strong support, and open source availability, is the strongest candidate of the
   groundwater model evaluated and thus recommended for groundwater modeling.



                                                                                                       57
     Water Resource Software




        Experienced groundwater modellers, familiar with developing MODFLOW model
        natively or with using GMS, Visual MODFLOW, and Groundwater Vistas, will likely
        want to remain with the software with which they are familiar and can use efficiently.
        GMS provides a platform to support the modular nature of MODFLOW while Visual
        MODFLOW provides a GUI that guides groundwater model development through a
        straightforward workflow. While MIKE SHE simulates groundwater, its fixed grid system
        and licensing fee limits adoption for strictly groundwater simulations. MIKE SHE shines in
        situations where it is important to simulate the interaction between surface and ground
        water (see next section).


     DHgM: Conjunctive Management
     Conjunctive management is groundwater management that accounts for the dynamic
     interaction with surface and land use activities such as irrigation. In India, typical applications
     include command areas, exchange in wetlands/field drains, and influence of tanks and check
     dams on local infiltration to increase groundwater levels. Three packages support conjunctive
     management directly: MIKE SHE, MODFLOW-OWHM, and GSSHA (WMS). These packages
     dynamically link surface water, unsaturated zone, and groundwater activities.

     MIKE SHE is the dominant package for these applications due to its existence since 1993 and
     its worldwide application. As stated, MIKE SHE dynamically couples each component of the
     hydrologic cycle, making it an excellent tool for conjunctive management. Each module offers
     several algorithms to select based on the question being addressed in addition to available
     data. The pre-processing and post-processing tools are robust and make the workflow of model
     construction, simulation, and viewing straightforward. The model is scalable in its ability to
     address both local and regional problems.

     MIKE SHE and FEFLOW (not evaluated here) have been used in the Saph Pani-Enhancement
     of Natural Water Systems and Treatment Methods for the Safe and Sustainable Water Supply
     in India project.25 The project is a collaborative research project for 10 pilot study sites across
     India investigating the application of integrated surface and ground water modeling. One pilot
     study examined the efficacies of a water retaining structure, such as check dams/ponds near
     Chennai, to arrest or reduce the salinity ingress on groundwater system. A second study used
     MIKE SHE to examine the impact of irrigation infrastructure on groundwater regime as well as
     the impact of wastewater on the groundwater quality for the Musi Wetland.25 For demonstration,
     DHI created a MIKE SHE application to assess the impact of small tanks on surface and ground
     water availability in the Vaippar Basin, Tamil Nadu.25

     The USGS software package used for conjunctive use studies is MODFLOW-OWHM: an
     integrated hydrologic flow model for the analysis of human and natural water movement within
     a supply-and-demand framework.105 MODFLOW-OWHM dynamically simulates hydrologic
     process packages for evapotranspiration, surface water routing, rivers, lakes and reservoirs,
     wells, recharge, irrigation, drain and return flow, unsaturated zone, and seawater intrusion. The
     package has been largely applied in western U.S. for the conjunctive management of river and
     reservoir diversion as well as groundwater use for irrigation, most notably applied to the Central
     Valley in California.9 Water management in Central Valley is analogous to many Indian command
     areas in that storage water from reservoirs is routed through a distributary canal system to satisfy
     crop requirements, and farmers supplement irrigation deficiencies with groundwater.



58
                                                                    APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Coupling MODFLOW-OWHM with MODFLOW-LGR (a package for using a locally refined grid
to simulate groundwater flow) would be an effective tool for evaluating the local influence of
tanks and check dams on local infiltration in increasing groundwater levels.

GSSHA (WMS) is a physically based, distributed-parameter, structured grid, WRM model that
simulates the hydrologic response of a watershed subject to a given hydrometeorological
input.9 The software fully couples 2-D overland flow, 1-D stream flow, 1-D infiltration, and 2-D
groundwater to simulate flow between the groundwater, vadoze zone, streams, and overland
flow. The user interface for GSSHA is Aquaveo’s WMS, which provides pre-processing and
post-processing tools that make the workflow of model construction, simulation, and viewing
straightforward.

A major difference between GSSHA and MODFLOW-OWHM is that, in GSSHA, the groundwater
is simulated as a horizontal 2-D finite difference grid and thus not suitable for projects where
complex groundwater conditions are required to be simulated. Applications in India are unknown
at this time, but the software has been applied for conjunctive management of water and land
use in the Wadi El-Arish Watershed, Egypt.106

Although it is a powerful tool set, the disadvantage of using MODFLOW-OWHM over MIKE SHE
is that MODFLOW-OWHM has a more limited set of control structure options for application
to the distributary network, offering a time series of operations or fixed structures (for example,
weir) and the interface (as discussed above). In MIKE SHE, control structure options in MIKE11
allow for more nuanced control over the water control structure operations, which may be
important in simulating conditional logic. For the interface, ModelMuse and ModelViewer
supports MODFLOW-OWHM, but beyond the groundwater and unsaturated zone packages,
the other packages are not supported with iMOD, GMS, Visual MODFLOW, and Groundwater
Vistas. Experienced modellers may not be limited in the applications, but uninitiated modellers
may find it difficult to implement without training and experience.

In addition to the aforementioned WRS, MODFLOW models have been adapted to simulate
groundwater, surface water, and unsaturated zone interaction. IDWR has developed a
surface water flow, irrigation, and unsaturated zone module for the purpose of working with
MODFLOW in both planning and actively managing groundwater in the ESPA.107 The tool is
complex, requiring very detailed hydrogeological and water use data, but has proven to be
very effective in characterizing the aquifer’s hydrology, planning recharge augmentation zones,
evaluating proposed water rights transfers and groundwater well development, and determining
the curtailment of surface and groundwater operations during periods with low flow in rivers.
However, expertise in model development is required for building the model, and requires
continued attention to maintain and update the supporting software.

Several applications have illustrated how a DHgM can be used with an optimization algorithm
to optimize conjunctive use of ground and surface water. Czarnecki et al.108 optimized the
conjunctive use of surface water and groundwater in 9,910 km2 area in the Mississippi River
Valley in southeastern Arkansas, USA. The effort used MODFLOW-2000 to develop the physical
characterization of groundwater flow and a modified MODMAN 4.0 to determine the optimal
extraction rates to support maintenance of hydraulic heads and streamflow in both the Arkansas
River and Bayou Bartholomew.ibid The effort produced the optimal sustainable yield, unmet
demand, and groundwater level.




                                                                                                      59
     Water Resource Software




      Conjunctive Use Recommendation: GSSHA (WMS), MIKE SHE, and MODFLOW-
      OWHM are suitable for integrated surface and ground water simulations required for
      conjunctive management. MIKE SHE and GSSHA (WMS) have better GUI interfaces and
      more capabilities stemming from their more complex operations of surface water control
      structures. However, their limitations are the cost per license, which provides a barrier to
      their widespread adoption, and their inability to change the mesh density near areas of
      concern (for example, groundwater pumping wells, tanks and check dams for groundwater
      recharge). That being said, GSSHA (WMS) is significantly less expensive than MIKE SHE,
      but is restricted in simulating groundwater movement in 2-D.

      For the MODFLOW-OWHM, a sub-model model can be readily developed from the
      larger regional model, but the two are not dynamically linked. MODFLOW-OWHM offers
      a full suite of MODFLOW packages to simulate integrated surface and groundwater
      interactions. Due to the lack of a GUI interface for MODFLOW-OWHM, developing a
      conjunctive use model would require more modeling expertise.

      MIKE SHE and GSSHA (WMS) are preferred if budgets are not limited, technical staff have
      limited experience with modeling, or if complicated control of surface water is required.
      If technical staff are familiar with creating, calibrating, and using MODFLOW packages,
      the MODFLOW-OWHM is good solution.




60
                                                                   APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Conclusions

A variety of WRS are available to assist Indian water managers in managing the water resources
of their state or basin. Selecting the WRS that best suites this management of water resources
involves understanding the water resources issues being managed, alternative scenarios to be
evaluated, and outcomes from the model required to make decisions. These needs are matched
with the algorithm, spatial and temporal resolution, inputs/outputs, viewing functionality, data
requirements, cost, support, and experience of the available technologies reviewed to determine
the best alternative to employ when managing their water resources. Successful selection can help
inform water managers and support their decisions, and can ultimately significantly contribute to
successful management of the water resources within a state or basin.




                                                                                                     61
      Water Resource Software




     References
     1.	    Postel, S. and B. Richter. 2003. Rivers for Life, Managing Water for People and Nature. Island Press,
            Washington, D.C., 41 pages.
     2.	    MA (Millennium Assessment). 2003. Ecosystems and Human Well-being: A Framework for Assessment. Island
            Press, Washington, DC.
     3.	    MA (Millennium Assessment). 2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Current States and Trends.
            Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, Island Press, Washington, DC.
     4.	    GIS Water. Chapter 5. HEC-RAS User’s Guide. http://www.giswater.org/book/export/html/30. Viewed
            September 2015.
     5.	    Loucks, D.P., E. van Beek, J.R. Stedinger, P.M. Dijkman, and M.T. Villars. 2005. Water Resources Systems
            Planning and Management: An Introduction to Methods, Model and Applications. Studies and Reports in
            Hydrology; UNESCO Publishing.
     6.	    Napa County. Water Information Center & Conservancy Website (WICC)http://www.napawatersheds.org/.
            Viewed June 2013.
     7.	    Borden, C., P. Delaney, Q. Ying, J. Kobor, and B. Guy. 2010. A Modeling Approach to Evaluate the Impacts
            of Climate Change and Mount Pine Beetle Infestation on Water Resources in the Okanagan Basin, British
            Columbia. Western Snow Conference 2010 Presentation Papers, pp. 31-42.
     8.	    Qiao, Y., D. Lejbak, P. Delaney, L. Uunila, B. Guy, and C. Borden. 2013. Okanagan Hydrologic Connectivity
            Model in the Okanagan Basin, BC, Canada using the WEAP Model. 21st Canadian Hydrotechnical
            Conference, Banff, Alberta, May 14-17, 2013.
     9.	    Dale, L. L., E.C. Dogrul, C.F. Brush, T.N. Kadir, F.I. Chung, N.L. Miller, and S.D. Vicuna. 2014. Simulating the
            Impact of Drought on California’s Central Valley Hydrology, Groundwater and Cropping. British Journal of
            Environment & Climate Change, Vol. 3, No.3, pp. 271-291.
     10.	   NOAA. http://www.nws.noaa.gov/oh/hdsc/aep_storm_analysis/8_Colorado_2. Viewed August 2015.
     11.	   White Bayard White. Boulder Creek Flood Marker Project. http://weadartists.org/colorado-marking-floods.
            Viewed August 2015.
     12.	   World Bank. 2014. Innovative Real-Time Decision Support System for Water Resources and Flood Management
            in India Hydrology Project II. http://hydrology-project.gov.in/PDF/RTDSS.pdf.
     13.	   University of Idaho. Eastern Snake River Plain Surface and Ground Water Interaction. http://www.if.uidaho.
            edu/~johnson/ifiwrri/sr3/esna.html. Viewed May 2015.
     14.	   IDWR. 2009. Eastern Snake Plain Aquifer (ESPA) Comprehensive Aquifer Management Plan. Idaho
            Department of Water Resources Plan, January 2009, 35 pages.
     15.	   Madsen, M., J. Hartnack, and C. Skotner. 2006. Water Quality Surveillance and Early Warning in Surface
            Waters-Integration of Mathematical Model and On-line Monitoring into Decision Support System. Proceedings
            4th Asia Pacific DHI Software Conference, Shangha, China, 2001.
     16.	   World Bank. 2000. Economic development and environmental sustainability: policies and principles for a
            durable equilibrium. Edited by T. Belt and J.I. dos R. Furtado, World Bank Institute, WBI Learning Resources
            Series, Washington, D.C., February 2000, 123 pages.
     17.	   Russi, D., P. ten Brink, A. Farmer, T. Badura, D. Coates, J. Förster, R. Kumar, and N. Davidson. 2012. The
            Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity for Water and Wetlands. Final Consultation Draft, 105 pages.
     18.	   Poff, N. L., B.D. Richter, A.H. Arthington, S.E. Bunn, R.J. Naiman, E. Kendy, M. Acreman, C. Apse, B.P. Bledsoe,
            M.C. Freeman, J. Henriksen, R.B. Jacobson, J.G. Kennen, D.M. Merrit, J.H. O’Keeffe, J.D. Olden, K. Rogers,
            R.E. Tharme, and A. Warner. 2010. The ecological limits of hydrologic alteration (ELOHA): a new framework
            for developing regional environmental flow standards. Freshwater Biology, Vol. 55, pp.147-170.
     19.	   The Nature Conservancy. Middle Potomac River Basin Environmentally Sustainable Flows. https://www.
            conservationgateway.org/ConservationPractices/Freshwater/EnvironmentalFlows/MethodsandTools/ELOHA/
            Pages/Case-PR.aspx#sthash.arKJgm4q.dpuf. Viewed May 2015.
     20.	   Poff, N.L., J.D. Allan, M. Bain, J.K. Karr, K.L. Prestegaard, B.D. Richter, R.E. Sparks, and J.C. Stromberg. 1997.
            The Natural Flow Regime: A paradigm for river conservation and restoration. Biosciences, Vol. 47, No. 11,
            pp. 769-784.
     21.	   Henriksen, J.A., J. Heasley, J.G. Kennen, and St. Nieswand. 2006. Users’ Manual for the Hydroecological
            Integrity Assessment Process Software (including the New Jersey Assessment Tools). U.S. Geological Survey
            Open File Report 2006-1093, 80 pages.


62
                                                                                   APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




22.	   Bell, S. and S. Morse. 2008. Sustainability Indicators, Measuring the Immeasurable? Second Edition.
       Earthscan, Sterling, Virginia, 228 pages.
23.	   Tracy, John. Spatial scales for hydrologic, ecologic, economic systems. Personal Communication, 2013.
24.	   Blöschl, G. and M. Sivapalan. 1995. Scale issues in hydrologic modelling: a review. Hydrological Processes,
       Vol. 9, pp. 251-290.
25.	   DHI. 2015. Vendor Questionnaire Response. Personal communication, August 2015.
26.	   DHI. 2015. MIKE HYDRO Basin User Manual. DHI Water Environment Health.
27.	   DHI. MIKE HYDRO Basin website. http://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mike-hydro-basin. Viewed
       August 2015.
28.	   Labadie, J. 2010. MODSIM 8.1: River Basin Management Decision Support System User Manual and
       Documentation. Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, 130 pages.
29.	   CSU. MODSIM website. http://modsim.engr.colostate.edu/. Viewed February 2016.
30.	   NIH. 2015. Vendor Questionnaire Response. Personal communication, August 2015.
31.	   Deltares. 2015. Vendor Questionnaire Response. Personal communication, May 2015.
32.	   Deltares. 2009. RIBASIM Version 7.00 River Basin Simulation Model Quick Start Guide. Deltares/Delft
       Hydraulics publication, May 2009, 84 pages.
33.	   Deltares. RIBASIM website. https://www.deltares.nl/en/software/ribasim/. Viewed August 2015.
34.	   eWater. 2015. Vendor Questionnaire Response. Personal communication, August 2015.
35.	   eWater. 2012. Source Users Guides v3.7.0. eWater Publication, 2012, 366 pages.
36.	   eWater. Source website. http://www.ewater.org.au/products/ewater-source/. Viewed August 2015.
37.	   SEI. 2015. Vendor Questionnaire Response. Personal communication, August 2015.
38.	   SEI. 2015. WEAP Water Evaluation and Planning System User Guide for 2015. Stockholm Environmental
       Institute, August 2015, 400pages.
39.	   SEI. WEAP Website. http://weap21.org/. Viewed August 2015
40.	   DHI. ECO Lab website. http://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/eco-lab. Viewed August 2015.
41.	   Deltares. DELWAQ website. http://oss.deltares.nl/web/delft3d/delwaq. Viewed August 2015.
42.	   Ammentorp, H.C. and J.C. Borden. 2012. DSS(P) Customization Report, Volume 2. Report in the
       Development of Decision Support System for Integrated Water Resources Development and Management
       Hydrology Project-II. DHI Water and Environment Report, Hørsholm, Denmark.
43.	   Bon, Kees. Personal communication, January-February 2016.
44.	   Vyas, Anil. Personal communication, January-February 2016.
45.	   USGS. 2015. Vendor Questionnaire Response. Personal communication, August 2015.
46.	   Markstrom, S.L., R.G. Niswonger, R.S. Regan, D.E. Prudic, and P.M. Barlow. 2008. GSFLOW – Coupled
       Ground-Water and Surface-Water Flow Model Based on the Integration of the Precipitation-Runoff Modeling
       System (PRMS) and the Modular Ground-Water Flow Model (MODFLOW-2005). USGS Techniques and
       Methods Report 6-D1, 245 pages.
47.	   USGS. GSFLOW website. http://water.usgs.gov/ogw/gsflow/index.html#downloads. Viewed September 2015.
48.	   Byrd, Aaron. 2005. GSSHA Software Primer. http://chl.erdc.usace.army.mil/softwarex/gssha/Primer_20/
       wf_njs.htm.
49.	   Aquaveo. WMS website. http://www.aquaveo.com/software/wms-watershed-modeling-system-introduction.
       Viewed September 2015.
50.	   USACE. GSSHA website. http://chl.erdc.usace.army.mil/gssha.Viewed September 2015.
51.	   DHI. 2012. MIKE SHE User Guide. DHI Water and Environment Publication, 386 pages.
52.	   DHI. MIKE SHE website. http://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mike-she. Viewed August 2015.
53.	   Neitsch, S.L., J.G. Arnold, J.R. Kiniry, and J.R. Williams. 2011. Soil and Water Assessment Tool Theoretical
       Documentation Version 2009. Texas Water Resources Institute Technical Report TR-406, 647 pages.
54.	   Arnold, J.G., J.R. Kiniry, R. Srinivasan, J.R. Williams, E.B. Haney, and S.L. Neitsch. 2012. SWAT 2012 Input/
       Output Documentation. Texas Water Resources Institute Technical Report TR-439, 650 pages.
55.	   SWAT Website. http://swat.tamu.edu/. Viewed September 2015.
56.	   Gassman P.W., M.R. Reyes, C.H. Green, and J.G. Arnold. 2007. The Soil and Water Assessment Tool: historical
       development, applications and future research directions. Trans. ASABE, Vol. 50, No. 4, 2007, pp. 1211-1250.
57.	   Kaur, R., R. Srinivasan, K. Mishra, D. Dutta, D. Prasad, and G. Bansal. 2003. Assessment of a SWAT model for



                                                                                                                       63
      Water Resource Software




            soil and water management in India. Land Use and Water Resources Research, Vol. 3, 2003,pp.1-7.
     58.	   Garg, K.K., L. Bharati, A. Gaur, B. George, S. Acharya, K. Jella, and B. Narasimhan. 2012. Spatial Mapping
            of Agricultural Water Productivity using the SWAT model in Upper Bhima Catchment. India Irrigation and
            Drainage, Vol. 61, pp. 60-79.
     59.	   de Condappa, Devaraj, J. Barron, S.K. Tomer, and S. Muddu. 2012. Application of SWAT and a groundwater
            model for impact assessment of agricultural water management interventions in Jaldhaka Watershed: Data and
            Set Up of Model. SEI Report, Stockholm, Sweden. http://awm-solutions.iwmi.org/Data/Sites/3/Documents/PDF/
            publication-outputs/learning-and-discussion-briefs/application-of-swat.pdf
     60.	   Allander, K.K., R.N. Niswonger, and A.E. Jeton. 2014. Simulation of the Lower Walker River Basin hydrologic
            system, west-central Nevada, Using PRMS and MODFLOW model. U.S. Geological Survey Scientific
            Investigations Report 2014-5190, 93 pages.
     61.	   Essaid, H.I. and B.R. Hill. 2014. Watershed-scale modeling of streamflow change in incised montane meadows.
            Water Resources Research, Vol. 50, pp. 2657-2678.
     62.	   Mejia, J.F., J. Huntington, B. Hatchett, D. Koracin, and R.G. Niswonger. 2012. Linking global climate model to
            an integrated WRM model: Using an individual station downscaling approach. Journal of Contemporary Water
            Research and Education, issue 147, pp. 17-27.
     63.	   Ely, D.M. and S.C. Kahle. 2012. Simulation of groundwater and surface-water resources and evaluation of
            water-management alternatives for the Chamokane Creek basin, Stevens County, Washington. U.S. Geological
            Survey Scientific Investigations Report 2012-5224, 74 pages.
     64.	   Fulton, J.W., D.W. Risser, R.S. Regan, J.F. Walker, R.J. Hunt, R.G. Niswonger, S.A. Hoffman, and S.L. Markstrom.
            2015. Water-budgets and recharge-area simulations for the Spring Creek and Nittany Creek Basins and
            parts of the Spruce Creek Basin, Centre and Huntingdon Counties, Pennsylvania, Water Years 2000-06. U.S.
            Geological Survey Scientific Investigations Report 2015-5073, 86 pages.
     65.	   Hassan Tanvir, S.M., M.W. Lubczynski, R.G. Niswonger, and Z. Su. 2014. Surface-groundwater interactions
            in hard rocks in Sardon Catchment of Western Spain: an integrated modeling approach.Journal of Hydrology,
            doi: 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.05.026.http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022169414003904
     66.	   Hunt, R.J., J.F. Walker, W.R. Selbig, S.M. Westenbroek, and R.S. Regan. 2013. Simulation of climate-change
            effects on streamflow, lake water budgets, and stream temperature using GSFLOW and SNTEMP       , Trout Lake
            Watershed, Wisconsin. U.S. Geological Survey Scientific Investigations Report 2013-5159, 118 pages.
     67.	   Deltares. 2014. Delft3D-FLOW User Manual. Deltares Publication, May 2014, 710 pages.
     68.	   Deltares. 2014. D-Water Quality Water Quality and Aquatic Ecology User Manual. Deltares Publication, May
            2014, 414 pages.
     69.	   Deltares. 2014. D-Water Quality Sediment Water Interaction User Manual. Deltares Publication, May 2014, 24
            pages.
     70.	   Deltares. Delft3D Suite website. https://www.deltares.nl/en/software-solutions/. Viewed September 2015.
     71.	   USACE. 2010. HEC-RAS, River Analysis System, HEC-RAS, Users Manual Version 4.1. Computer Program
            Documentation CPD-68, USACE Hydrological Engineering Center, Davis, CA, 790 pages.
     72.	   USACE. 2008. HEC-WAT Watershed Analysis Tool User’s Manual. USACE Computer Program Documentation
            CPD-88, March 2008, 404 pages.
     73.	   USACE. 2015. HEC-RTS/CWMS User's Manual Version 3.0 - Draft. USACE Hydrological Engineering Center,
            Davis, CA, November 2015, 509 pages.
     74.	   USACE. HEC-RAS website. http://www.hec.usace.army.mil/software/hec-ras/. Viewed September 2015.
     75.	   DHI. 2015. MIKE HYDRO River User Guide. DHI Water and Environment Publication, 386 pages.
     76.	   DHI. MIKE HYDRO River website. http://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mike11. Viewed September
            2015.
     77.	   DHI. 2012. MIKE FLOOD User Guide. DHI Water and Environment Publication, 386 pages.
     78.	   DHI. 2015. MIKE 21C ST User Manual. DHI Water and Environment Publication, 206 pages.
     79.	   DHI. MIKE FLOOD website. http://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mike-flood. Viewed September
            2015.
     80.	   Deltares. 2015. SOBEK Hydrodynamics, Rainfall Runoff and Real Time Control User Manual. Deltares
            Publication, 876 pages.
     81.	   Deltares. SOBEK website. https://download.deltares.nl/en/download/sobek/.Viewed September 2015.
     82.	   Tonina, D. and K. Jorde. 2013. “Chapter 3. Hydraulic Modelling Approaches for Ecohydraulic Studies: 3D,
            2D, 1D, and Non-Numerical Models” in Ecohydraulics, An Integrated Approach. Editors Maddock, I., A. Harby,
            P. Kemp, and P. Wood, Wiley Blackwell, pp. 31-74.



64
                                                                                   APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




83.	   WFLOW v.2015.02. Master Documentation: http://wflow.readthedocs.org/. Access to Open Source Code:
       https://github.com/openstreams/wflow.
84.	   Deering. M. 2011. Flood Risk And Asset Management with HEC-WAT with FRA Compute Option. Presentation,
       International Workshop to Discuss the Science of Assessment, December 9, 2011.
85.	   Dunn, C.N., P.R. Baker, and M. Flemming. 2014. Flood Risk Management with HEC-WAT and the FRA
       Compute Option. Proceedings, 6th International Conference on Flood Management, San Paulo Brazil,
       September 2014, 9 pages.
86.	   Timbadiya, P  ., P. Patel, and P. Porey. 2011. Calibration of HEC-RAS Model on Prediction of Flood for Lower Tapi
       River, India Journal of Water Resource and Protection, Vol. 3 No. 11, 2011, pp. 805-811.
87.	   Parhi, P.K. 2013. HEC-RAS Model for Mannnig’s Roughness: A Case Study. Open Journal of Modern
       Hydrology, 2013, Vol. 3, No. 97, pp. 97-101.
88.	   Amrutkar, R. P . 2013. Flood Modeling by HECRAS andHEC-GeoRAS Hydrological tools: Case Study of Somb
       River, India. LAP Lambert Academic Publishing, 92 pages.
89.	   Flood Modeling of the River Godavari Using HEC-RAS. International Journal of Research in Engineering and
       Technology, Vol. 03, Special Issue 09, June 2014, pp. 81-87.
90.	   Deltares, RMSI, and JPS. 2015. Operational Research to Support Mainstreaming of Integrated Flood
       Management under Climate Change, Interim Report version 3. Deltares Report. 153p. http://www.wrmin.nic.
       in/writereaddata/NWM_Interim_Report_V3.pdf
91.	   WMO. 2011. Manual on Flood Forecasting and Warning. WMO-No 1072, 142 pages.
92.	   Deltares. Delft FEWS website. https://www.deltares.nl/en/software/flood-forecasting-system-Delft FEWS-2/.
       Viewed September 2015.
93.	   USACE. HEC-RTS website: http://www.hec.usace.army.mil/software/. Viewed September 2015.
94.	   DHI. MIKE11 RT website: http://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mike11. Viewed September 2015.
95.	   Apruban Mukherjee. Personal communication, February 2016.
96.	   Anil Vyas. 2016. Water Management of BBMB System presentation. Personal communication, February 2016.
97.	   Hicks, M., J. Walsh, J. Bind, J. Hoyle, R. Measures. 2013. Modelling channel dynamics in braided rivers.
       NIWA webposting. http://www.niwa.co.nz/freshwater-and-estuaries/research-projects/modelling-channel-
       dynamics-in-braided-rivers. Viewed February 2016.
98.	   DHI. MIKE 21C River Morphology: A Short Description. DHI Water Environment Health publication, 22 pages.
99.	   Kumar, C.P . 2013. Numerical modelling of ground water flow using MODFLOW. Indian Journal of Science,
       Vol. 2, No. 4, February 2014, pp. 86-92.
100.	 Aquaveo. GMS website: http://www.aquaveo.com/software/gms-groundwater-modeling-system-introduction.
      Viewed September 2015.
101.	 Rockware. Groundwater Vistas websitehttps://www.rockware.com/product/overview.php?id=147. Viewed
      September 2015.
102.	 Deltares. iModwebsite: https://www.deltares.nl/en/software/imod/. Viewed September 2015.
103.	 USGS. MODFLOW website: http://water.usgs.gov/ogw/modflow/. Viewed September 2015.
104.	 Waterloo Hydrogeologic Software. Visual MODFLOW website: http://www.novametrixgm.com/groundwater-
      modeling-software/visual-modflow-flex. Viewed September 2015.
105.	 Hanson, R.T., S.E. Boyce, W. Schmid, J.D. Hughes, S.W. Mehl, S.A. Leake, T. Maddock III, and R.G. Niswonger.
      2014. One-Water Hydrologic Flow Model (MODFLOW-OWHM). Chapter 51 of Section A: Groundwater in
      Book 6 Modeling Techniques. U.S. Geological Survey,134 pages.
106.	 Elewa, H., E.M. Ranadan, and A.M. Nosair. 2014. Water/Land Use Planning of Wadi El-Arish Watershed,
      Central Sinai, Egypt Using RS, GIS and WMS Techniques. International Journal of Scientific & Engineering
      Research, Vol. 5, Issue 9, September 2014, pp. 341-349.
107.	 IDWR. ESPA MODFLOW model website: https://www.idwr.idaho.gov/WaterInformation/Projects/espam/.
      Viewed September 2015.
108.	 Czarnecki, J.B., B.R. Clark, and G.P . Stanton. 2003. Conjunctive-Use Optimization Model of the Mississippi
      River Valley Alluvial Aquifer of Southeastern Arkansas. U.S. Geological Survey, Water-Resources Investigations
      Report 03-42, 32 pages.




                                                                                                                           65
     Water Resource Software




     Annex

     WRS Review Criteria
     Table A1. Metrics for the RBMs in Water Allocation and Planning in Table 5

     Metrics           Poor            Fair            Good                Best            Notes
     Software GUI (General)
     Operating         One platform,   Linux, Unix     Windows           Windows + 1       Options: Windows, OSX,
     Systems           not Windows     Only                              option            Linux, Unix
     Workflow          None                            Data input check Scenario
     Guidance                                                            manager
     Pre-Processing    None            TS formatter    TS formatter, Map Demand           Time series (TS) format,
     Tools                                             tool                               map tool
     Post-Processing   None            TS Viewer       TS Viewer, TS     Customizable     Time series (TS) viewer,
     Tools                                             Stats, Mapping    DSS Interface    mapping, TS statistics
                                                                                          (stats). Custom interface
                                                                                          a DSS for creating output
                                                                                          template
     GIS Interface     None            Background      Digitize network  Integration of   Full includes input and
                                       maps            on map and DEM full GIS            simulation dialogue
                                                       tools                              describing the item and
                                                                                          error
     Player Version    None            Predefined      Free, choose from Free, interface Versions for distribution
                                       scenario        several scenarios with input       to the public with limited
                                       viewing         to run model      controls,        functionality; preset
                                                                         customizable     scenarios; buttons, dials,
                                                                         output interface sliders bars to guide
                                                                                          input; and customized
                                                                                          output interface.
     Animations        None                            Map               Map and Fly By
                                                                                            
     Licensing/Support 
     Cost Software   >1 Lakh/seat      <=1 Lakh/       Free Agency,        Free, Public    Open Source not
                                       seat            Private Parties Fee Domain          considered a factor as
                                                                                           public domain is the main
     Service           None            Consultancy     >1 Lakh/seat        <=1 Lakh/seat
     Maintenance                       only (project
     Agreement                         based)
     Support           None            1 Option        2-3 Option          4 Options       Options: Online help,
                                                                                           training courses, tutorials,
                                                                                           user groups
     Indian Licenses   <25             25-50           50-250              >250            License (assumes seats),
                                                                                           network licenses counts as
                                                                                           5 seats
     Worldwide         <100            100-500         500-1000            >1000
     License
                                                                            




66
                                                                 APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Table A1 continued

 Metrics             Poor   Fair          Good               Best               Notes
 WA&P (RBM)                                                                      
 Simulation &                             Simulation or      Simulation &
 Optimization                             Optimization       Optimization

 Time Step           None   Monthly only Daily Only          User Defined
 Demand              None                 Precalculated      Dynamically
 Calculator                               within tool        linked,
                                                             influences
                                                             water allocation
 Irrigation          None   Demand        Preset Types +     Dynamically
 Calculator                 Only          User Defined       linked,
                                                             influences
                                                             water allocation

 Groundwater         None   Simple        Connect to         1D Simulation
 Simulation                 Reservoir     MODFLOW            near River,
                                                             connect to
                                                             MODFLOW
 Reservoir           None                 Direct Import      Dynamic Link
 Simulation
 Water Quality       None   Limited Suite Standard Suite     Extended Suite     Suite = temperature,
                                                                                nitrogen; phosphorus;
                                                                                algae; dissolved oxygen;
                                                                                pH, and BOD
 HD -WQ Linkage      None   External      Internal Module    Built-in
                            Program,      dynamically
                            Post-         linked
                            processed
 Economics           None   External      Internal Module,   Hydro-
                            Program,      Post-processed     econoomic
                            Post-                            link, influences
                            processed                        water allocation
 Ecological          None   External      Internal Module,   Hydro-
                            Program,      Post-processed     ecological
                            Post-                            link, influences
                            processed                        water allocation




                                                                                                           67
     Water Resource Software




     Table A2. Metrics for the DHMs in Water Allocation and Planning in Table 7

     Metrics          Poor           Fair            Good                Best              Notes
     Software GUI (General) 
     Operating        One platform, Linux, Unix      Windows             Windows + 1       Options: Windows, OSX,
     Systems          not Windows   Only                                 option            Linux, Unix

     Workflow         None                           Data input check    Scenario
     Guidance                                                            manager
     Pre-Processing   None           TS formatter    TS formatter,       Demand            Time series (TS) format, map
     Tools                                           Map tool                              tool
     Post-Processing None            TS Viewer       TS Viewer, TS       Customizable      Time series (TS) viewer,
     Tools                                           Stats, Mapping      DSS Interface     mapping, TS statistics (stats).
                                                                                           Custom interface a DSS for
                                                                                           creating output template
     GIS Interface    None           Background      Digitize network Integration of       Full includes input and
                                     maps            on map and DEM full GIS               simulation dialogue describing
                                                     tools                                 the item and error
     Player Version   None           Predefined      Free, choose from Free, interface     Versions for distribution to the
                                     scenario        several scenarios with input          public with limited functionality;
                                     viewing         to run model      controls,           preset scenarios; buttons, dials,
                                                                       customizable        sliders bars to guide input; and
                                                                       output interface    customizd output interface.
     Animations       None                           Map                 Map and Fly By
     Licensing/Support 
     Cost Software    >1 Lakh/seat   <=1 Lakh/       Free Agency,        Free, Public      Open Source not considered a
                                     seat            Private Parties Fee Domain            factor as public domain is the
                                                                                           main
     Service          None           Consultancy     >1 Lakh/seat        <=1 Lakh/seat
     Maintenance                     only (project
     Agreement                       based)
     Support          None           1 Option        2-3 Option          4 Options         Options: Online help, training
                                                                                           courses, tutorials, user groups
     Indian Licenses <25             25-50           50-250              >250              License (assumes seats),
                                                                                           network licenses counts as 5
                                                                                           seats
     Worldwide        <100           100-500         500-1000            >1000
     License
     WA&P (DHM) 
     Surface Water    None           Kinematic       Steady State        Hydrodynamic
                                     only            Energy, Kinematic   1D

     Overland Flow    None                           Linear Reservoir    2D Grid Based
                                                     HRU
     Unsatruated      None           2 Layer         2 Layer Water       2D Grid Gravity
     Zone                            Water           Balance Grid        or Richard's
                                     Balance                             equation
                                     HRU
     Groundwater      None           Linear          Linear Reservoir,   3D Grid Based
                                     Reservoir       HRU
                                     watershed


68
                                                                       APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Table A2 continued

 Metrics           Poor        Fair           Good                Best                  Notes
 Rainfall-Runoff   None                       Preprocessed in        Dynamic Link
 Link                                         Module
 Reservoir         None        Simple Mass    Mass Balance           Mass Balance
 Simulation                    Balance        with Reservoir         with Reservoir
                                              Geometry               Geometry&
                                                                     Operations

 Irrigation        None        Option 1       Options 1 and 2        Options 1-3        Options 1) Fixed irrigation
 Module                        or 2                                                     demand, 2) variable irrigation
                                                                                        demand 3) dynamically
                                                                                        calculated irrigation demand
 Water Quality     None        Loading        Loading or             Dynamic link
                               and routing    routing external,      for both loading
                               external       other process          and routing
                                              dynamic link
 Sediment          None        Loading        Loading or             Dynamic link
 Transport                     and routing    routing external,      for both loading
                               external       other process          and routing
                                              dynamic link




Table A3. Metrics for the Flood Planning in Table 9 and Water Quality and
Sediment Transport in Table 10

 Metrics             Poor      Fair           Good                        Best              Notes
 Software GUI (General)
 Operating Systems One         Linux, Unix    Windows                     Windows + 1       Options: Windows, OSX,
                   platform,   Only                                       option            Linux, Unix
                   not
                   Windows
 GUI Interface     Command     Simple         Simple dialogue             Professionally
                   Line        dialogue box   support all processes       developed
                               for specific
                               tasks
 Workflow            None                     Data input check             
 Guidance
 Pre-Processing      None      TS formatter   TS formatter, Map tool                        Time series (TS) format,
 Tools                                                                                      map tool
 Post-Processing     None      TS Viewer      TS Viewer, TS Stats,        Customizable      Time series (TS) viewer,
 Tools                                        Mapping                     Interface         mapping, TS statistics
                                                                                            (stats), custom interface

 Error Checking      None      Input or       Full Check on select        Full Check, all   Full includes input and
                               simulation     modules                     packages and      simulation dialogue
                               only                                       modules           describing the item and
                                                                                            error




                                                                                                                         69
      Water Resource Software




     Table A3 continued

     Metrics              Poor    Fair            Good                   Best                 Notes
     Animations           None                    Map                    Map and              Map is a static view, fly
                                                                         Fly By               by allows the video to "fly
                                                                                              along" a path similar to
                                                                                              being in a plane
     Licensing/Support 
     Cost Software   >1 Lakh/     <=1 Lakh/       Free Agency, Private   Free, Public         Open Source not
                     seat         seat            Parties Fee            Domain               considered a factor as
                                                                                              public domain is the main
     Service              None    Consultancy     >1 Lakh/seat           <=1 Lakh/seat
     Maintenance                  only (project
     Agreement                    based)
     Support              None    1 Option        2-3 Option             4 Options            Options: Online help,
                                                                                              training courses, tutorials,
                                                                                              user groups
     India Application    1       1-4             5-10                   >10                  License (assumes seats),
                                                                                              network licenses counts as
                                                                                              5 seats
     Worldwide License <25        25-50           50-250                 >250

     Flood Planning  
     1D Computation   Kinematic   Steady State    Hydrodynamic 1D        High Diffuse
                      only        Energy,                                Hydrodynamic
                                  Kinematic                              1D

     1D Model Builder     None                    GIS External Import    GIS Internal
                                                  Geometry               Module


     2D Computations      None                    Hydrodynamic 2D        Couple with 1D


     2D Mesh              None    Fixed Grid      Variable rectilinear   rectilinear cells,
                                                                         curvilinear
                                                                         meshes,
                                                                         triangles,
                                                                         pentagons


     Structures           None    Preset Types    Preset Types + User    Types, User          Types: Bridges, culverts,
                                                  Defined                Defined,             weirs. Control structures
                                                                         Control              allows for additional logic
                                                                         structures           to be introduced on the
                                                                                              operation of the structure
                                                                                              (e.g., gate logic)
     Multicore            None                                           Yes
     Processing
     Cloud Processing     None                    Upon Request           User Defined
     RR Linkage           None                    Direct Import          Dynamic Link
     Ensemble             None                    Batch                  Integrated
     Forecast,
     Uncertainty
     Calculations




70
                                                                    APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




Table A3 continued

Metrics              Poor   Fair            Good                       Best           Notes
Modular              None   Limited Suite   Full*                                     * Full denotes all the
Expansion                                                                             modules desired to support
                                                                                      modeling effort. Will
                                                                                      vary depending on water
                                                                                      resource issue
Flood Mapping        None   Map View*       GIS External Export        GIS Internal
                                            Results                    Module

Flood Impact         None   Map View*       GIS External Calculate GIS Internal
Calculator                                                          Module
Water Quality                                                                          
Processes            None   Advection or                       Advection and
                            Dispersion                         Dispersion
Water Quality        None   Limited Suite   Standard Suite     Extended Suite         Suite = temperature,
Constituents                                                                          nitrogen; phosphorus;
                                                                                      algae; dissolved oxygen;
                                                                                      pH, and BOD
HD -WQ Linkage       None   External    Internal Module, Dynamic Link
                            Program,    Post-processed
                            Post-
                            processed
Customizable         None   Choose CoCs Change equation Customize                     CoCs = constituents of
                                        parameters       Equations                    concern

Sediment Transport                                                                     
HD -ST Linkage  None        External        Internal Fixed        Dynamic Boundary
                            Program,        Boundary
                            Post-
                            processed
Transport Types      None   One type        Two types             All types           Types: Suspended,
                                                                                      bedload, and total load
                                                                                      equations (eqn.)
Available ST         1      2               5                     5+
Equations
Size Fractions       None   Only sand       Sand + Gravel         Multiple size
                                                                  fractions

Cohesive,            None   Only cohesive Only non-               Cohesive, non-      Cohesive and non-cohesive
Non-Cohesive                              cohesive                cohesive            sediment




                                                                                                                   71
     Water Resource Software




     Table A4. Metrics for the Groundwater in Table 11

     Metrics                 Poor       Fair               Good                 Best                   Note
     Software GUI (General)   
     Operating Systems    One platform, Linux, Unix Only   Windows              Windows + 1            Options: Windows, OSX,
                          not Windows                                           option                 Linux, Unix
     GUI Interface        Command       Simple dialogue    Simple dialogue      Professionally
                          Line          box for specific   support all          developed
                                        tasks              processes
     Pre-Processing Tools None          TS formatter       TS formatter, Map                           Time series (TS) format,
                                                           tool                                        map tool
     Post-Processing Tools   None       TS Viewer          TS Viewer, TS     Customizable              Time series (TS) viewer,
                                                           Stats, Mapping    Interface                 mapping, TS statistics (stats),
                                                                                                       custom interface
     GIS Interface           None       Background maps Import/export GIS       Integration of
                                                        coverages               full GIS
     Error Checking          None       Input or        Full Check on           Full Check, all        Full includes input and
                                        simulation only select modules          packages and           simulation dialogue describing
                                                                                modules                the item and error
     Animations              None                          Map                  Map and Fly By         Map is a static view, fly by allows
                                                                                                       the video to "fly along" a path
                                                                                                       similar to being in a plane
     Licensing/Support  
     Cost Software       >1 Lakh/seat <=1 Lakh/seat        Free Agency,        Free, Public            Open Source not considered a
                                                           Private Parties Fee Domain                  factor as public domain is the
                                                                                                       main
     Service Maintenance     None       Consultancy only >1 Lakh/seat           <=1 Lakh/seat
     Agreement                          (project based)
     Support                 None       1 Option         2-3 Option             4 Options              Options: Online help, training
                                                                                                       courses, tutorials, user groups
     India Application       1          1-4                5-10                 >10                    License (assumes seats), network
                                                                                                       licenses counts as 5 seats

     Worldwide License       <25        25-50              50-250               >250
     Groundwater 
     3D Mesh                 None       Fixed Grid         Variable rectilinear Variable rectilinear
                                                                                cells, triangles,
                                                                                pentagons
     Ground Water            None       User defined       Irrigation demand User Defined and
     Pumping                                                                    Irrigation demand
     Surface Water           None       Boundary           Linked but           Hydrodynamic-ally
     Connection                         Condition          different programs linked

     Overland Flow           None       Boundary           Linked but           Hydrodynamic-ally
                                        Condition          different programs   linked
     Unsaturated Zone        None       2 Layer Water      2 Layer Water        2D Grid Gravity or
                                        Balance HRU        Balance Grid         Richard's equation
     Water Quality 
     Water Quality           None       Limited Suite      Standard Suite       Extended Suite         Suite = temperature, nitrogen;
     Constituents                                                                                      phosphorus; algae; dissolved
                                                                                                       oxygen; pH, and BOD
     GW -WQ Linkage          None       External Program, Internal Module, Dynamic Link
                                        Post-processed    Post-processed
     Customizable WQ         None       Choose CoCs       Change equation Customize                    CoCs = constituents of concern
     Analysis                                             parameters       Equations

72
APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




                                  73
     Water Resource Software




74
APPLICATION OVERVIEW AND REVIEW




                                  75
     Water Resource Software




76
