                                                    106395




A practical guide for stakeholder analysis in PPD using
the Net-Map method
©2016 The World Bank Group
1818 H Street N.W., Washington D.C., 20433

All rights reserved.
May 2016
Available online at www.wbginvestmentclimate.org

This work is a product of the staff of the World Bank Group with external contributions.
The information included in this work, while based on sources that the World Bank Group
considers to be reliable, is not guaranteed as to accuracy and does not purport to be
complete. The World Bank Group accepts no responsibility for any consequences of the use
of such data. The information in this work is not intended to serve as legal advice.
The findings and views published are those of the authors and should not be attributed
to IFC, the World Bank, the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), or any other
affiliated organizations. Nor do any of the conclusions represent official policy of the World
Bank or of its Executive Directors or the countries they represent.
The denominations and geographic names in this publication are used solely for the
convenience of the reader and do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on
the part of IFC, the World Bank, MIGA, or other affiliates concerning the legal status of any
country, territory, city, area, or its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its boundaries
or national affiliation.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because the World Bank Group encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution of this work is given. Any queries on
rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the
Publisher, the World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; telephone: 202-
522-2422; email: pubrights@worldbank.org.
About the World Bank Group
The World Bank Group is one of the world’s largest sources of funding and knowledge for
developing countries. It comprises five closely associated institutions: the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the International Development Association
(IDA), which together form the World Bank; the International Finance Corporation (IFC);
the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA); and the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID). Each institution plays a distinct role in the mission
to fight poverty and improve living standards for people in the developing world. For more
information, please visit www.worldbank.org, www.miga.org, and www.ifc.org.
Table of Contents

Acknowledgements                                        1

The toolkit                                             2

Introduction                                            4

What is a PPD?                                          5

Three steps in stakeholder mapping                      8

 1. Identifying the purpose of stakeholder mapping      9

 2. Stakeholder mapping using the Net-Map method        13
    Step 1. Frame the right question                    18
    Step 2. Identify the actors involved                19
    Step 3. Work through the links                      20
    Step 4. Determine motivations                       23
    Step 5. Discuss levels of influence                 24
    Step 6. Harvest observations and possible actions   26

 3. Stakeholder analysis                                27

Learning from examples
 Example 1: Togo                                        11
 Example 2: Ghana                                       21
 Example 3: Ghana                                       25

Annexes
 Annex I: Checklist template for planning to use the    33
 toolkit
 Annex II: Terms of References                          34
 Annex III: Instructions to access the stakeholder      37
 analysis application for Net-Map data
 Annex IV: List of Net-Map Facilitators                 38
    Acknowledgements

    Creation of the main body of this document was managed by Sumit Manchanda and Anja
    Robakowski-Van Stralen of Trade & Competitiveness Global Practice in collaboration with
    International Finance Corporation (IFC) as well as Collaborative Leadership for Development
    (CL4D) team housed in Leadership, Learning, and Innovation (LLI). Special thanks go
    to Amitaksha Nag for shepherding this document through its various stages, and for
    contributions to its early drafts.
    Many thanks and acknowledgment go to Eva Schiffer, creator of the Net-Map method, which
    served as a basis for this toolkit 1 and is extensively used by LLI as part of the 100-day reform
    intervention.
    Valuable support was provided by Eunice Kim in the editing, design, and branding of the
    guide.




    1
        See www.netmap.wordpress.com for details.




1
The toolkit

This toolkit was prepared for World Bank Group teams and PPD practitioners to provide them
an option for stakeholder mapping by adapting the Net-Map method and allow them to:
  •	 design dialogue platforms and determine participants at concept stage
  •	 insert a dialogue element into an ongoing project to address specific implementation
     issues or midway lags
  •	 ensure that the right participants are invited given a country’s unique context
  •	 facilitate those parts of a dialogue which are concerned with deepening the
     understanding of political economy obstacles to reform processes
  •	 help bridge the divide between different partners of the dialogue
  •	 design a strategic reform communications plan
  •	 catalyze reforms by building knowledge and capacity of the right people.




                                                                                             2
        Who are the actors?
        •	 Relevant actors in a PPD
        •	 Role of each actor

        How are they connected to each other?
        •	 Strength of relationships
        •	 Central actors
        •	 Formal and informal



    Stakeholder mapping is at the
       center of PPD initiatives
        Who are the most influential actors?
        •	 What makes them influential?
        •	 How do they influence change?

        Why are some actors against your goal?
        •	 Why are some actors against your goal?
        •	 Willing participants
        •	 Indifferent, or hostile participants




3
Introduction




Stakeholder challenges in public-private dialogue (PPD) may manifest in unanticipated ways
at any point, despite detailed planning and technically sound processes. Decisions may stall
because the country reform team may realize halfway through a dialogue that an important
group or a stakeholder is not included. Those who were not invited to participate are
disappointed and may block the process. Some dialogues may be started against a backdrop
of long-standing underlying conflicts of which participants were not aware. Once the
discussion starts, signs of hostility emerge and participants do not know why. It is sometimes
difficult for PPD teams to identify underlying reasons for suboptimal results — no actions
taken, wrong people being invited, or unexpected conflicts.
  •	 Stakeholder mapping helps to proactively anticipate stakeholder challenges and plan
     mitigation strategies. It is a way to map complex stakeholder dynamics to understand
     how they individually and collectively determine the success or failure of projects.
     Mapping identifies the following:
  •	 Whom to involve at different stages of the project as not all actors require the same
     level or timing of engagement in PPD interventions.
  •	 Conflicts, collusions, and other informal relationships among stakeholders that
     influence the outcome.
  •	 Influential actors who may support or derail the reform.




                                                                                                 4
    What is a PPD?

    PPD is a structured engagement among an inclusive group of relevant and local stakeholders
    that seeks to identify, prioritize, and recommend consensus as well as fact-based based
    solutions to a specific need, challenge, or problem. PPDs go well beyond standard
    stakeholder consultation or simple exchange of opinion, as they:
      •	 are established as an ongoing, sustained engagement through the project lifecycle
         rather than a one-time conversation
      •	 are designed to be as inclusive as possible
      •	 go beyond information gathering to agree on a set of challenges and consider
         solutions to those challenges that are based on data and research
      •	 leverage a strong stakeholder communication strategy to sensitize stakeholders and
         beneficiaries, share knowledge and facts, advocate for change, increase ownership of
         agenda by local stakeholders, and improve transparency in decision making
      •	 are very adaptable and versatile as they can be implemented at various levels —
         sectoral, thematic, national, subnational, city-level, and so on.


    Determining linkages, levels of influence, and goals of actors in a given environment allows
    reform teams to become more strategic about managing stakeholders in complex situations.
    It helps them answer questions such as:
      •	 Do we need to strengthen the links to an influential potential supporter?
      •	 Do we have to be aware of an influential actor who does not share our goals?
      •	 Can we create a space for powerful and less powerful stakeholders to say what they
         think and make a difference?




5
PPD involves working with diverse
stakeholders from the government,
private sector, civil society, donors,
and others for developing a shared
understanding of goals and their role in
the project. Getting your head around
all the different dynamics that influence
decisions is overwhelming at times.
Stakeholder mapping enables diverse
teams to have an in-depth conversation
about the stakeholder politics that will
influence their ability to plan together on
how to navigate complex relationships.




                                              6
Three Steps in Stakeholder Mapping:

1. Identifying the purpose of stakeholder mapping
  Identify the issue or process to which stakeholder mapping will contribute in
  your project such as understanding the general stakeholder landscape, starting a
  conversation among stakeholders about a difficult issue, collecting data for a research
  paper on stakeholder politics, and so on.



2. Stakeholder mapping using the Net-Map
   method
  Facilitate stakeholder mapping with individuals or groups using the Net-Map method.
  During Net-Mapping, stakeholder maps are drawn on a large sheet of paper while
  participants discuss the reform question at hand. A facilitator conducts this group
  process and interviews by following a step-by-step process. Mapping also serves to
  engage stakeholders around the issues identified.



3. Stakeholder analysis
  Derive insights and action metrics from the information collected from the Net-Map
  exercise to leverage social network structures, actor positions, and influence to drive
  desired change in the program.




                                                                                            8
    1. Identifying the purpose of stakeholder mapping



    Stakeholders and political economy may change through the project lifecycle. Reform teams need to
    continuously assess the changing landscape to keep the project design and dialogue representative and
    relevant. Stakeholder mapping can be designed for different reasons and achieve different goals in a project.
    It may be required at different stages as described in Table 1:
     1.	 TTLs are scoping and designing a project or PPD. At this point, the project objective is broad and little
         is known about the stakeholders. This exercise can help in gaining specific insights on stakeholders
         and guiding project or PPD decisions.
     2.	 Implementation of reforms is being blocked and there is a need to understand the underlying cause.
         In such cases, the context and stakeholders are defined, and the purpose of stakeholder mapping is to
         figure out the underlying dynamics causing the problem.
     3.	 Reform communications. TTLs are looking to design an effective communications strategy around the
         reform agenda to create general awareness as well as support and advocacy for reform.




    Table 1. Uses of stakeholder mapping at different phases of the PPD life cycle

                            PPD Phases                                      Objective of stakeholder mapping

       1.	 Exploration and commitment                             Identifying gaps and entry points into a project, where
                                                                  PPD can add value to the reform process. For example,
          This phase concludes with a decision on whether or
                                                                  setting up a coordination mechanism between a key
          not to put in place a PPD process or mechanism.
                                                                  ministry and influential private sector actors maybe key to
                                                                  success of the program.


       2.	 Setting up and formalizing the PPD                     Identifying relevant stakeholders and their roles in the
                                                                  dialogue process that all parties agree to.
          This is the phase following an agreement to establish
          a PPD, and it includes defining the PPD scope,
          mandate, and its different participating parties.


       3.	 Implementation and management of the PPD               Driving consensus among diverse participants with
           process                                                different interests in reforms.

          This is when the work plan is drafted. This phase
          informs about how issues to be discussed are
          selected, and the process to deal with them.


       4.	 Development and sustainability of the PPD              Participatory learning of what is working and what is not.
          This step is about continuous learning and improving
          the process and relevance of PPD based on lessons
          learned; and about how to ensure its continued
          existence.



9
Mapping can be used for systematic transformation across the board — in cases where multiple agencies
are involved, such as government departments, private sector, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and
so on — or very localized, small community-level change. It can also be used as an instrument to promote a
culture of dialogue as a neutral medium in the PPD consultation processes to allow for different viewpoints
in design and engagement. In the context of the overarching objects above, Table 2 illustrates specific
elements for stakeholder mapping.

Table 2. Different elements for stakeholder mapping

     Context                       Results                                                 Notes


                                                          ÌÌ What informal connections and collusions drive policy decisions
                                                             and implementation?
                                                          ÌÌ What are the different incentives for action?
                     Understand political
                                                          ÌÌ Who are the influential actors who may not share the reform goals?
 Political economy   patronage, collusions,
     of change       political risks, and institutional   ÌÌ Who are the people with strong connections to influential actors in
                     alignment to reforms.                   the network?
                                                          ÌÌ How can reform teams benefit from formal and informal links
                                                             between politicians, private sector, and civil society members to
                                                             drive engagement?



                                                          ÌÌ Is the consultation process over-representing or under-
                                                             representing certain categories of actors?
                                                          ÌÌ How are we mainstreaming stakeholders in the periphery, such as
                     Provide inputs into identifying         the informal sector, women, new entrants, and consumers? How
    Identifying
                     the right people to engage              do we widen the support for reforms?
      relevant
                     at different stages of the PPD
   stakeholders                                           ÌÌ Is there adequate participation from secondary stakeholders such
                     consultation process.
                                                             as international organizations, NGOs, or media? They are influential
                                                             enablers of change through funding and building public support.
                                                          ÌÌ Are we alienating important actors or groups?



                                                          ÌÌ Make implicit knowledge explicit by making it visible.

                     Clarify stakeholders’ own            ÌÌ Build up mutual appreciation is particularly helpful in the initial
                     perceptions of a situation,             scoping stage of PPD to engage stakeholders in preparation for
   Stakeholder                                               collective action.
                     foster discussions by a larger
   participant
                     constituency in support for          ÌÌ Reveal attitudes towards each other, willingness to engage, and
                     change.                                 build trust.
                                                          ÌÌ Promote greater ownership.



                     Identify change agents who           ÌÌ Opinion leaders are often best suited to be champions within their
                     can champion the cause.                 groups and connections.
   Empowering        A common intervention in             ÌÌ Some may be well connected to the public or private sector alone,
  opinion leaders    networks is to empower                  while some may be connected with diverse stakeholders and
                     opinion leaders measured by             media. Thus, engaging opinion leaders helps draw in the widest
                     the centrality of actors.               range of dialogue participants.




                                                                                                                                    10
     Learning from examples
     Example 1

     A reform team of the World Bank Group’s Trade & Competitiveness
     (T&C) Global Practice (GP) in Togo is using Net-Map for stakeholder
     risk mitigation in a trade logistics program.
     T&C GP is implementing a trade logistics reforms program in Togo
     to establish Lomé as the transportation hub for West Africa. The area
     of trade facilitation, logistics, and transport involving the Lomé port
     is very sensitive as it involves diverse stakeholders from the political
     establishment, unions, customs, freight forwarders, truck owners, truck
     drivers, processing agencies, enforcement agencies, and international
     donors, among others. Moreover, there are mixed signals from
     leadership and stakeholders, as the reform will touch on multiple
     vested interests. The relationship between public and private sector is
     complicated, characterized by a mix of distrust and collusion.
     The project is at inception stage, and themes as well as an intervention
     framework for the program have been identified. However, the reform
     team realized that their plan could potentially run into problems
     if critical stakeholder issues are not identified and incorporated in
     the program design early on. Some symptoms of stakeholder risks
     manifested in the form of blockages, strikes, long clearance time,
     corruption, and other occasional political problems. Though the team
     was broadly aware of the issues and actors involved, they wanted to
     know more about the dynamics that led to the symptoms and thus be
     able to design targeted stakeholder interventions.
     The team mapped stakeholder dynamics by inviting public and private
     sector actors during participatory group interviews using the Net-Map
     method. It helped identify formal and informal relationships between
     the actors involved, potential conflict situations, political patronage,
     collusions, brokers, and intermediaries that might help or derail
     intended logistics reforms in Togo. The exercise provided inputs for a
     stakeholder risk mitigation strategy that will include:
       •	   engaging the right stakeholders
       •	   avoiding political and sociocultural minefields
       •	   understanding factors and motivations that determine actions
       •	   identifying or guiding the design of a PPD
       •	   developing targeted messages and a communication strategy.




11
12
     2. Stakeholder mapping using the Net-Map method

     Net-Map is a participatory tool for stakeholder mapping to render social network graphs and at the same
     time foster discussions among participants about their situation. Figure 1 below is a visual rendering of a
     Net-Mapping exercise. The visual helps understand the complex nature of relationships between actors,
     their interests, and influences of diverse stakeholders, as described in Table 3, that determine outcome.

     Figure 1. Visual rendering example of Net-Map data




     Table 3. Elements in visual rendering

                 Actors                            Links                          Influence                        Interests

      Any individual, group,            Connection between                How strongly does each          What are the positions of
      organization, or unit that acts   two actors. Actors can be         stakeholder influence project   actors regarding the issue?
      in a way that is relevant for     connected by many different       outcomes? The bigger            Who is for or against the
      the reform process. Actors        kinds of links such as            the circles, the higher the     reform process?
      can be those who try to make      friendship, formal hierarchy,     influence of actors.
      the reform happen, who try        money flow, or conflict.
      to impede it, and who are
      on the receiving end of the       •	 Formal link: a connection
      change (beneficiaries).              that has an official
                                           character, such as
                                           organizational hierarchy
                                           or money flow

                                        •	 Informal link: a
                                           connection that is not
                                           formalized or official, such
                                           as friendship, conflict,
                                           exerting political pressure,
                                           or flow of bribes



13
     Understanding different roles in stakeholder mapping
     (See detailed terms of reference in Annex III)




     Stakeholder mapping exercises may require single or multiple rounds of Net-Map sessions
     with homogeneous stakeholder groups or combined stakeholder groups as necessary. The key
     people involved are TTLs, stakeholder group members, and other staff, advisors, or consultants
     who know the country and project context well.

     Role: stakeholder analyst
     The role of a stakeholder analyst is to design the stakeholder mapping exercise, oversee Net-
     Map interviews, and derive stakeholder insights for the program with the data collected.
     Stakeholder mapping can be designed in different ways depending on complexity and
     scope of the program. It can be a one-off exercise or scaled across multiple components. A
     stakeholder analyst will be able to define the need for stakeholder mapping in the program,
     as well as facilitate understanding of implications of stakeholder dynamics for the reform
     team. The analyst may combine stakeholder mapping data with other relevant information for
     analysis. As a rule, this role can be fulfilled by the TTL.

     Role: Net-Map facilitator
     Net-Map interviews are facilitated sessions to stimulate discussions among participants.
     It is recommended to use the services of a trained internal or external facilitator who has
     experience in conducting Net-Map interviews.
     The tasks of a Net-Map facilitator are:
       •	   understanding the context of the project and Net-Mapping exercise
       •	   arranging and managing logistics of the Net-Map session
       •	   explaining the mapping process to participants
       •	   discussing, clarifying, and refining the question or issue at hand with participants (ideally
            with the help of a technical expert)
       •	   guiding the group through the process and clarifying any doubts
       •	   managing time
       •	   taking care of data entry and digitization
       •	   facilitating discussions
       •	   active listening and articulation.




15
Role: interview note taker
The role of a note taker is to take notes of the discussions during a mapping session. The note
taker is ideally someone familiar with the subject but no other specific skills are required.
The facilitator should give the note taker a brief training in stakeholder mapping, showing
them what to expect, and what the different steps are. The notes should be as close to the
discussion as possible, and not only reflect results but give insights into discussion, arguments,
disagreements, and so on.




                Take notes of
                  •	 Everything said about actors. They would not just note
                     the names but also anecdotes, what they like, what
                     their problem is, how they relate to the question, and
                     so on.
                  •	 Everything said about links. They do not need to write
                     down each link as it shows on the map, but reasons for
                     existence of the link.
                  •	 Everything said about goals, not simply who is plus and
                     minus but detailed information.
                  •	 Everything said about influence, not just the numbers
                     but where it comes from, how it is used, whether the
                     group disagreed about the ratings of specific actors,
                     and what the arguments in the disagreement were.
                  •	 The main lessons and insights the group talked about.
                  •	 The main action steps they decided, if any.
                  •	 What was the hottest issue they discussed and where
                     did emotions flare up?




                                                                                                     16
     A Net-Mapping session starts with defining and refining a specific problem followed by a step-
     by-step process (see Figure 2) that helps navigate the course from identifying a question to
     finding possible action points. The participants discuss their perspectives of the network while
     drawing the map. It is a process of exploration and co-creation, converging to solutions.


     Figure 2. Six steps of Net-Mapping


        1
            Frame the right question.



                      Identify the actors involved.
                  2




                                Work through the links.
                            3




                                     4
                                          Determine motivations.



                                                   Discuss levels of influence.
                                               5




                                                         6
                                                             Harvest observations and
                                                             possible actions.


17
                          Step 1. Frame the right question


TIME                      Framing the right question is crucial for getting specific answers from Net-Map
20 - 30 minutes           stakeholder interviews. During the stakeholder interviews, it is important that
                          the question is discussed so that everyone understands it well and refines it,
                          if necessary. Often, this is also an opportunity to add clarity or sharpen the
                          question. The participants may help in this process.
ACTIVITY
                          The overarching PPD reform agenda may be broad and—where feasible—
Identify and define the   need to be broken into multiple focused problem statements. In the
problem                   logistics reform project example of Togo (Example 1), the broad agenda of
                          improving the logistics sector was broken into multiple specific reform goals
                          — improvement in customs and border clearance, training of truck drivers,
                          implementing a trade portal, and so on. Separate Net-Map sessions provided
WHO                       insights into stakeholder dynamics related to the specific reform goals.
•	 Owner of the
                          What constitutes a great question (as illustrated in Figure 3)?
   problem
•	 Stakeholder              •	 It is specific. “Who influences the specific policy change we are aiming
   mapping                     for?” instead of “who influences policy making in general?” It is important
   participants to             that participants have the same understanding of what change looks
   refine the problem          like. By spelling it out, they challenge their assumption and arrive at an
                               explicit agreement.
                            •	 It is relevant. It should be at the center of the challenge the team is
                               facing.
                            •	 It is about change. Groups think about concrete change they want to
                               implement and draw a question that focuses on “who influences our
                               successful move from the current (bad) state to the future state we wish
                               for?” and “who influences the success of our reform?”
                            •	 It is a pressing issue that requires immediate attention


                          Figure 3. What makes a great question?


                                       Specific                                    Relevant
                                                            A great
                                                           Net-Map
                                                           question
                            About change                                           Pressing
                           Step 2. Identify the actors involved


     TIME                  The groups categorize actors/key stakeholders and pick different colors of
     15 minutes            Post-it® notes for each category. A category can be the government, private
                           sector, NGOs, international donors, small-scale industry, Chamber of Commerce,
                           regulatory authorities, labor unions, and so on.
                             •	 Identify actor categories and indicate them in the legend section in a
     ACTIVITY
                                corner of the map.
     Name categories and     •	 Name specific actors in each category. Actors can be individuals, groups,
     actors                     organizations, or divisions; any unit that acts can be an actor. Actors are
                                those that are related to the question, in positive or negative ways, with
                                high or low influence on the outcome.
                             •	 Write names on color-coded actor Post-its® and arrange them on a blank
     WHO                        mapping sheet.
     •	 All participants




19
                        Step 3. Work through the links


TIME                    Participants start by thinking about how the actors are linked to each other and
20 - 30 minutes         to define and map 3 to 4 types of links between them. Links can be ‘friendship’,
                        ‘reporting’ relationships, funding, conflict, bribes, putting political pressure on
                        someone, and so on.
                          •	 Draw the links as arrows. Some will go in one direction (such as a
ACTIVITY
                             hierarchical relationship), others will go in both directions (such as
Define type of links,        friendship)
and link the actors       •	 Participants assign different colors to each type of link (such as green =
                             flow of funding, blue = trust).
WHO                       •	 Draw arrows into the legend on the map. It is easier to start with formal
                             links and positive links. Leave the informal and/or negative links for last. If
•	 One participant
                             actors are linked by more than one connection (such as being friends and
   draws the links
                             having a conflict), the group can draw two arrows of different color next to
•	 Everyone
                             each other.
   contributes
     Example 2

     A stakeholder mapping (Net-Map) exercise helped ensure a fair representation of
     stakeholders in multi-stakeholder governance of district oversight committees for the
     African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) in Ghana.
     APRM is a mutually agreed instrument voluntarily acceded to by the member states of
     the African Union as a self-monitoring mechanism. The mandate of APRM is to encourage
     conformity with regards to political, economic, corporate governance values, and codes and
     standards among African countries, as well as the objectives of socio-economic development
     within the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD). Ghana is one of the early
     adopters of APRM and has chosen a decentralized approach to its implementation.
     Initiating the process of selecting people to serve as watchdogs for the APRM implementation
     in a multi-stakeholder system with different governance fields and objectives was difficult
     because of the variety of organizations from which they had to be drawn. One way forward
     was to devise a method that explained complex multiple stakeholder governance, how
     different actors were linked, the various power relations involved, possible conflict of interest
     and obstacles that might work against the goals of watch committees. Another important
     consideration was to be able to determine the source of information that the watch
     committees would need to carry out their work.
     The Net-Map method was used as a participatory way to engage diverse stakeholders to agree
     on the composition of committees to have fair representation of nine districts in Ghana’s upper
     East and Northern region. The stakeholder mapping exercise helped them to agree on some
     important issues such as:
       •	 All nine districts saw their various district assemblies as important partners in achieving
          the goals of APRM.
       •	 Even though some representations in the committee were not liked by everyone, it was
          agreed that they are inevitable at the district level.
       •	 Most groups agreed that having women groups, youth groups, and the commission on
          human rights and administrative justice in their committees would go a long way to
          achieving the goals of APRM.
       •	 Through Net-Map, most interview partners understood the need to involve actors who
          had long been marginalized .


              “The method is excellent. In using it, you are very fair,
              transparent on selection, it’s only when you have a picture
              like this that you can rate them, come to a consensus, then
              you realize that ‘a or b’ would be fit for a particular job.”
              - East Mamprusi NCCE District Director on the Net-Map method
                (Net-Map study by Waale Douglas Bakuro)




21
                      Step 4. Determine motivations


TIME                  For each actor, participants identify whether they are for or against the reform or
10 - 15 minutes       are neutral. This is not so much about the actors’ public statements but assessing
                      the impact of their action (or reluctance to act).
                        •	 Participants note (+), (+-), (-), next to each actor for positive, neutral, or
                           negative, and create legends. Strong supporters may get (++), and strong
ACTIVITY                   opponents may get (- -).
Actors who support,     •	 Sometimes participants may not be sure about a specific actor’s
oppose, or neutral         position. In this case, they can add a question mark. This step is often
                           straightforward as groups draw on the discussion they had beforehand, in
                           which they already talked about the position of actors.

WHO
•	 One participant
   marks the
   actors following
   discussions
                       Step 5. Discuss levels of influence


TIME                   In this step, the group discusses the influence of each actor on the issue (such as
30 - 40 minutes        the success of the reform) at hand. The definition of influence used is modeled
                       after Max Weber’s definition of power: “The ability of an actor to achieve their
                       goals in a social setting, despite resistance and irrespective of the means used.”
                       It is not “how influential are the actors in the world at large?” It is also not “how
ACTIVITY               strongly can actor A influence actor B?”
Influence towers for   The influence of each actor is represented by wooden blocks, called influence
each actor             towers as illustrated in the photos below, stacked one above the other next to
                       the actor cards.
                         •	 The group assigns influence towers to actor Post-Its®. The higher the
WHO                         influence on the issue at stake, the higher the tower. Towers of different
                            actors can be of the same height. Actors with no influence can remain at
•	 All participants
                            ground level.
                         •	 In case of disagreements, the group is encouraged to discuss and try to
                            reach an agreement after hearing everyone out. If they cannot come to an
                            agreement, they can put up two different influence towers for the actor.
                            However, this should be a rarely used exception.
                         •	 At the end, participants review all towers and note the height next to each
                            actor.
     Example 3

     Mapping for stakeholder engagement in the context of improved water governance of
     multi-stakeholder bodies in Ghana.
     A newly developed river basin board at the subnational level consisted of 17 institutional
     members representing district assemblies, regional level line ministries, traditional
     authorities, NGOs, and the research sector. The basin board had low formal decision-making
     and enforcement capacity and thus, needed to use its governance network strategically
     to achieve its developmental and environmental goals. The process included three
     interventions, spread over one year: individual Net-Map interviews with all 17 members,
     showing their specific perspectives: a session with the whole board in which they mapped
     out their network in small groups, helping them converge in their views and also understand
     their difference in perspective, and finally a large group session, to develop consensus on
     actors, networks, goals and influence and form the basis for strategic planning.
     In this process, the basin board members had a number of important insights. They
     understood that the stakeholder network can look very different from different positions of
     the network, and that understanding these differences can make them more effective. They
     realized that the actor with the highest formal position (hierarchical relation to most other
     actors) was one of the least influential actors when it came to achieving their goal because
     of lack of funding and technical involvement. So they developed strategies for using their
     informal network and influence of their parent-institutions to increase the influence of this
     multi-stakeholder organization.
     Stakeholder mapping helped them find a common ground emerging from multiple views of
     water governance in Ghana.




25
                        Step 6. Harvest observations and possible actions


TIME                    Once the group has completed stakeholder mapping, they can harvest
                        observations and think about possible actions (as listed in Figure 4).
30 - 40 minutes
                          •	 Participants discuss their main observations and list possible actions.
                          •	 Participants will come up with some actions they can take and have
                             control over. They may also find actions that actors out of their control
ACTIVITY                     need to take. In this case, it is not enough to state this fact (“the
Observations and             government and private sector should stop fighting and start being nice.”)
possible actions             but the teams have to explore how they can influence these actors to act
                             the way they should in the context of the reform.


WHO                     Figure 4. Observations and possible actions
•	 Everyone
   participates,
   facilitated by the
                                                                      Possible
   facilitator
                                Observations
                                                                      Actions

                                 What is the big                    What can we
                                 picture?                           do?

                                 What/who are                       Who else can
                                 the drivers?                       do what?

                                 What/who are                       Can we get
                                 the drivers?                       them to do it?
     3. Stakeholder analysis

     With information collected from Net-Map sessions about actor positions, network structure, interests,
     influence and narratives, the stakeholder analyst can develop metrics for stakeholder risk mitigation
     strategies, communication planning, and targeted stakeholder interventions for programs.
     The process of conducting Net-Map sessions generates two kinds of data:
       •	 Quantitative data of stakeholder connections, interests, and influence.
       •	 Qualitative data yielded by discussions during Net-Map interviews, explaining different stakeholder
          perspectives about the elements in the network.


     These two forms of data supplement each other. For example, the narratives may further explain the type
     of relationship two actors share in a network (“why did the conflict between the two actors start?”), or what
     makes an actor influential (“the actor heads an important committee”), or why an actor is against reforms.
     Net-Map data can be transformed into digital social network maps and other stakeholder analysis graphs as
     shown in Figure 5. (For technique to digitize Net-Map data and further stakeholder analysis please refer to
     Annex III).


     Figure 5. Digital stakeholder map from Net-Map data




27
Below are some ways to generate strategic insights from Net-Map data:

Stakeholder segmentation
The influence-interest matrix (see Figure 6 below) segments stakeholders by their level of influence and
support for reform. The influence and interest data points from Net-Maps are arranged into the matrix to
help prioritize efforts for stakeholder engagement. For example, a stakeholder with high influence but low
interest may have the ability to block reforms and therefore require special consideration at the beginning of
the program.


Figure 6. Influence-interest matrix


                         High influence,                                      High influence,


                                                           High influence
                         against reforms                                     supports reforms

                         Potentially derails the process                    Ideal state; empowered and
                         or influences others against                       proactive in their support for
                         reforms                                            reforms




                           Low interest                                                   High interest



                         Against reforms but does not                       Has high interest for reforms
                         have much influence                                but not empowered enough
                                                           Low influence




                         Low influence,                                        Low influence,
                         against reforms                                     supports reforms


The X axis shows the level of Interest and the Y axis displays Influence.
The matrix provides a perspective of the effort required to mobilize support for reforms
  •	 High influence, support reforms
     How can they be engaged for driving specific reform goals that they are able to drive?
  •	 High influence actors but against reforms
     What are their motivations? Are they sabotaging the process by colluding with others?
  •	 Low influence, support reforms
     How do we empower these stakeholders?
  •	 Low influence, against reforms
     Do they feel left out? How to mainstream them?

                                                                                                                 28
     Detect stakeholder risks
     Stakeholder maps help to detect stakeholder risks and thus help incorporate appropriate safeguards into
     program design early on. Some common stakeholder risks that reform teams may face include:
       •	 Conflict among stakeholders
          ÌÌ Identifying who is in conflict with whom, the nature and intensity of conflicts, and implication on
             specific program objectives.
          ÌÌ Are there actors in conflict who are crucial to connect for the success of the program?
          ÌÌ How does the conflict, directly or indirectly, affect the dialogue?
          ÌÌ To what extent can the conflict be mediated, and by whom?
       •	 Program design with unintended abetment of corruption or special interest collusions.
          ÌÌ Are we encouraging informal social or political influence that is holding back reforms?
       •	 Skewed incentives towards few influential actors or those who are impediments to the reform process.
          ÌÌ Are there few actors overburdened with responsibilities and demand from the network?
          ÌÌ If they leave, will they take away important knowledge and connection, and will the system
             collapse?
          ÌÌ How should we account for such system vulnerability?
       •	 Potential problems in institutional structure and capacity to adopt PPD initiatives.
       •	 Micro-level political economy risks, such as -
          ÌÌ Collusion between public and private actors that inhibit competition
          ÌÌ Special interest groups (actors maybe bound by contracts) whose economic interests are
             protected by the status quo, who may resist change
          ÌÌ Potential economic effects (for example, increase in fuel prices) on some stakeholder groups that
             may become major political issues
          ÌÌ Political patronage of public institutions or lobbying by private sector that provides competitive
             advantages to certain actors
          ÌÌ The participants (and the mix) for a PPD governance structure as well as working group
             composition




29
Identify opinion leaders in networks
Opinion leaders play important roles because of their positions in a network as intermediaries, brokers, or
gateways to important communities. They are central actors in a network who, by virtue of their position or
connections can influence others in the network to drive change. The highlighted actors in Figure 7 are in a
position to become opinion leaders and change agents in the network. They can help accelerate the pace of
reforms by motivating others in the network. The reform teams can use the social capital of opinion leaders
to widen support for reforms.


Figure 7. Opinion leaders in a network




                Most
              connected




                                                                           Intermediary




                                                                                                               30
     Inform design of help in strategic communications strategy
     Stakeholder mapping can help in communications planning and outreach to prioritize focus and resources
     on important stakeholders at different phases of the program. For example, it may be required to focus on
     a very influential actor who is against reforms right at the inception phase of the program, or else the actor
     may derail all reform efforts.
     Stakeholder maps also identify opinion leaders who can generate public support, instead of having to invest
     resources into large scale campaigns.
     Figure 8 below shows how the influence interest matrix may help in designing a communications strategy,
     keeping in mind questions such as:
       •	 Are there influential government actors who are neutral? Are influential private sector actors holding
          back reforms? Is this due to lack of information or awareness?
       •	 How can we organize public support to incentivize the government? Can the media help amplify
          supporting voices?
       •	 Should the reform team form coalitions with influential NGOs who support reforms?



     Figure 8. How stakeholder mapping can help in strategic communications
                                                             High influence




                         Company A
                                                                                               NGO X
                                    Cor
                                        ruptio
                                              n
                                                   Finance ministry
                                                                                                           coa
                                                                                                           For ion
                                                                                                               lit
                                                                                                               m
                                                                              pressure
                                                                              Create




                                                                                                     Reform
                                     Commerce
                                                                                             Or essu




                                                                               Media
                                                                                               ga
                                                                                               pr
                                                                                                  niz re
                                                                                                     ed
                                                                                  Aw
                                                                                    ar
                                                                                      en
                                                             Low influence




                                                                                        es
                                                                                         s




                                  NGO Y
                                                                                             Communities

                   Low interest                                                                        High interest




31
32
     ANNEXES
     Annexes
     Annex I: Checklist template for planning to use the toolkit
     Please answer the questions below to properly plan a stakeholder mapping intervention for your project.
     Filling in this template will help you clarify what you need to do to frame and implement an intervention.

     Framing
       •	 What is the bigger issue, project, or process the toolkit contributes to?
       •	 Goal of using the toolkit. For example, to start a conversation among stakeholders about a difficult
          issue, or to collect data for a research paper on stakeholder politics?
       •	 For which phase of the project cycle is the stakeholder analysis relevant?
       •	 What questions will this exercise address that you cannot answer now?
     Intervention design
       •	 Briefly describe the designed sequence of activities, stakeholder mapping, and others, which are
          planned — and how they will feed into or support one another in reaching the project’s goals.
       •	 Why is stakeholder mapping the right tool?
       •	 Who needs to participate?
       •	 What knowledge, experience, or skill-set do you need around the table (such as diversity of
          perspectives, specific technical knowledge, or political reasons for selection)?
       •	 Is a follow-up action expected? If yes, what type of action is needed? By whom?
     Team
       •	 Who is leading the initiative?
       •	 Who is responsible for planning, briefing, and organizing the team (TTL, manager, or others)?
       •	 Who are the external consultants in the team (stakeholder analyst, stakeholder mapping facilitators)?
     Content of specific Net-Map session
       •	   Mapping question(s) such as “who influences XYZ?”
       •	   Foreseen actor categories (such as government, NGOs, or private sector).
       •	   Foreseen links (such as flow of funds, formal hierarchy, conflict, or friendship).
       •	   Foreseen goals of actors (such as positive or negative).
     Logistics of the Net-Map session
       •	 Identify different parts of your session and roughly assign time slots.
       •	 Determine if you are planning individual or group maps.
           ÌÌ Number of maps
           ÌÌ Number of participants
           ÌÌ Number of facilitators (at what level of proficiency):
       •	 Allocate roles and responsibilities among the facilitators (if more than one is available).
       •	 Identify who will document maps and discussions, and how.
     Stakeholder Analysis
       •	 What is the depth of analysis required?
       •	 Will there be limitations about how much of the results you can share? Who decides about that? How
          will you manage confidential information?



33
Annex II: Terms of References

Stakeholder analyst
Note: TTL or someone intimately involved in the project should play this role
Deeper analysis for strategic inputs will require support from a stakeholder analyst as it requires an
understanding of social network analysis to identify structures and positions in networks as well as
exploratory data analysis skills. Some PPD domain knowledge and understanding of the context are
required.
The role of a stakeholder analyst is to lead the stakeholder mapping exercise by designing the study,
planning and executing the data collection process, providing stakeholder analysis, and producing reports.
Following are the program-specific tasks of a stakeholder analyst:

1) Contextualizing stakeholder mapping for the program:
  •	 Define the function of stakeholder mapping exercise for reform-specific goals
  •	 Facilitate reform teams to define the objective of the stakeholder mapping exercise


2) Designing the stakeholder mapping study:
  Information areas -
  •	 Identify areas of interest and parameters to measure stakeholder dynamics in a specific reform context
  •	 Determine stakeholder data requirements to inform strategy and identify sources of data

  Data collection -
  •	   Select appropriate data collection instruments (such as stakeholder mapping, surveys, or focus groups)
  •	   Put particular emphasis on stakeholder mapping toolbox for drawing stakeholder maps
  •	   Identify relevant stakeholders and groups for interviews
  •	   Synthesize data from different sources


3) Facilitating reform team in:
  •	   Screen, train, and onboard consultants for stakeholder interviews
  •	   Select stakeholders as appropriate for interviews
  •	   Brief facilitators on the data collection process
  •	   Conduct stakeholder interviews using the tool


4) Conduct stakeholder analysis and formulate recommendations:
  •	 Identify important stakeholders, influences, goals, and relationships that determine success of the
     program
  •	 Identify drivers and barriers in stakeholder networks which include:

                                                                                                                34
      ÌÌ stakeholders that are important connectors in the network
      ÌÌ influential stakeholders who are against reforms that can influence others in their direction
  •	 Account for stakeholder risks (such as potential conflicts between actors, collusions, overburdened, or
     isolated actors) early on in program design
  •	 Leverage stakeholder networks and specific opportunities as tactical intervention strategy
  •	 Understand the political economy of change; consider informal dynamics in the network, implications
     for change, and stakeholder perceptions that need to be addressed to avoid potential problems.


5) Maintaining confidentiality of sensitive data


Criteria for selection
  •	   Minimum qualification: Masters in social sciences or related disciplines
  •	   Understanding of methods of stakeholder analysis and program design
  •	   Experience in facilitating group interviews (using methods such as Net-Map)
  •	   Data analysis skills, advanced skills in social network analysis
  •	   Some PPD experience desired but not required
Net-Map facilitator
The role of a Net-Map facilitator is to guide and moderate group interview sessions to generate data and
insights from participants. Specific tasks include:

1) Preparing for group interviews
  •	 Understand the requirements and context of stakeholder mapping interviews from the stakeholder
     analyst
  •	 Pre-test (if required) and design the interviews according to the mapping process
  •	 Organize participants and preparing them for interviews
  •	 Brief the note taker (of qualitative data)


2) Facilitating group interviews
  •	 Be neutral and be able to facilitate in the local language
  •	 Introduce the method and keep an eye on the process
  •	 Facilitate flexibly, observe group processes, ensure everyone participates, intervene where necessary
     to keep the process on track, and stand back as much as possible to allow participants to drive their
     own process


3) Conducting data digitization
  •	 Enter quantitative data in pre-formatted datasheets
  •	 Organize qualitative data from the note taker


4) Debriefing the stakeholder analyst


Criteria for selection
  •	 Trained as a Net-Map facilitator
  •	 Experience in conducting stakeholder mapping interviews
  •	 Excellent facilitator of group processes — required traits are openness, respect, ability to focus on a
     problem, and adherence to process
  •	 Minimum qualification: Bachelor’s degree
  •	 Well-versed (spoken and written) in the local language
  •	 (In some cases where bi-lingual support is required) Ability to write and speak in English may be
     required




                                                                                                               36
     Annex III: Instructions to access the stakeholder analysis
     application for Net-Map data
     For stakeholder analysis and rendering of social network graphs of Net-Map data using the
     ‘Datamuse’ software -
      1.	 E-mail support@datamuse.io; identify yourself and secure a login id and password.
      2.	 A self-help tutorial is available as a step-by-step guide to generate digital maps and explore
          data for stakeholder analysis.




37
Annex IV: List of Net-Map facilitators
 •	   Kentice Tikolo (Kenya) - donaccesspato@gmail.com
 •	   Cla Marie (East Africa) - cladonna1@gmail.com
 •	   Paul Udoto (Kenya) - pauludoto@gmail.com
 •	   Aliou Diougue (French speaking West African facilitator) - maitrejuk@gmail.com
 •	   Pato Dondasse (French speaking West African facilitator) - donaccesspato@gmail.com




                                                                                           38
