       The Distributional Consequences of Group Procurement:
Evidence from a Randomized Trial of a Food Security Program in
                                            Rural India∗

                                           Paul Christian†



                                             July 1, 2015


                                                Abstract
           Public transfer programs that allow beneﬁciaries to choose the transferred good
       may be more eﬃcient, but the poorest beneﬁciaries may not participate if the good
       chosen is too costly. A model shows that program targeting and consumption impacts
       are tied to selected quality of the provided good. Evidence from a randomized trial
       in rural India in which groups of beneﬁciaries choose the variety of rice to be oﬀered
       as a subsidized loan conﬁrms that choosing lower cost goods self-targets the program
       towards the poorest beneﬁciaries. Consumption impacts are biggest for wealthiest
       households and may be negative for moderately poor households.

   ∗
      This paper is a product of the Social Observatory of the World Bank. Support and funding for data
collection from the South Asia Food and Nutrition Security Initiative (SAFANSI) and from the Population
Studies Training Center and Global Health Initiative at Brown University is gratefully acknowledged. I am
grateful to Andrew Foster, Vijayendra Rao, Sriniketh Nagavarapu, Upamanyu Datta, Nethra Palaniswami,
and Samrat Kumar Ghosh for their support and feedback. Valuable feedback was provided by Brian Knight,
Anja Sautmann, and seminar participants at Brown, Tufts, Cornell, Occidental, Mathematica Policy Re-
search, and NEUDC 2013 (Harvard). Special thanks are due to the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project for their
support, cooperation, and useful conversations, especially Ajit Ranjan, Archana Tiwari, and Nidhi Singh.
The ﬁndings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reﬂect the views of
The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The World Bank
does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The author accepts all responsibility for
errors.
    †
      Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University and Social Observatory, Cor-
respondence: 301H Warren Hall, Cornell University, Email: paul.christian@cornell.edu.
     When designing distributive social programs, policymakers often attempt to balance
two goals: 1. improving the welfare of people believed to have the highest return to the
program while 2. minimizing total cost. One way that policies have attempted to address
the ﬁrst goal is by oﬀering goods that only poor households want to consume, for example
low quality staple foods that only poor households buy. Making transfers in the form of
physical goods can lead to ineﬃciencies, however, because of corruption and wastage related
to transportation, storage, and distribution, and because program implementers do not know
the preferences of potential beneﬁciaries. To avoid these ineﬃciencies, programs may want
to have communities choose the good themselves and procure the chosen good locally. This
paper examines whether using public choice this way is consistent with self-targeting and
shows that two program features which arise as natural attempts to deal with targeting
problems (subsidizing staple grains and letting beneﬁciaries choose the grain to receive the
subsidy) leads to outcomes that policy makers likely do not prefer. Speciﬁcally, I study
two questions regarding a program that gives villages the choice of which variety of food
grain to transfer to beneﬁciaries. First, will take-up be concentrated among the poor if
villages jointly choose the good? Second, how does the quality of grain chosen determine
heterogeneity of measured impacts on quantity of grain consumed by intended beneﬁciaries
of varying wealth?
     In general, tension often arises between the goal of improving welfare for the poor at
the lowest cost, because while policymakers may deem poor households most in need of the
program, wealthy households also would like to participate, and participation by relatively
wealthy households increases the cost of the program. If program administrators can easily
observe poverty or a proxy for poverty, they can allow or disallow participation based on
that characteristic. But given the cost and uncertainty in measuring poverty, setting ﬁxed
eligibility rules often causes both exclusion errors (poor households are left out) and inclusion
errors (wealthy households participate). (Alatas et al., 2012)
     Given the challenge of determining exclusion directly on wealth, researchers and poli-
cymakers have attempted to design program features such that households with a particular
characteristic favored by policymakers reveal themselves through their choice to participate
or drop out. Inﬂuencing take up through program restrictions rather than explicit exclusion
criteria is called self-targeting. Many of the major strategies for devising self-targeted pro-
grams were classiﬁed by Nichols and Zeckhauser. (Nichols and Zeckhauser, 1982) One class
of mechanisms recently receiving attention are ordeal mechanisms, which hypothesize that
making people complete a costly task can lead to better targeting, because only those with


                                               1
the highest marginal return to participation will choose to pay the cost. (Alatas et al., 2012;
Dupas et al., 2013) Implementing ordeal mechanisms has proven to be complicated however,
because wealthy and poor members may have diﬀerential abilities to circumvent the ordeals,
and because non-linear utility functions mean that ﬁxed ordeals may impose bigger burdens
on the people who have the highest returns to the program, undermining the potential for
targeting. (Alatas et al., 2012)
     An alternative example of a self-targeting mechanism was described by (Besley and
Coate, 1991) and demonstrated empirically by (Jacoby, 1997). These models proposed that
programs could focus on providing certain goods that would be taken up only by low income
households. If policymakers subsidize only low-quality goods, poor beneﬁciaries for whom
the marginal utility of consumption is high will choose to participate, but relatively wealthy
households will willingly opt forgo the program in favor of consuming higher quality goods,
even though the subsidy eﬀectively raises the marginal cost of quality. Jacoby demonstrated
the concept using a subsidy of a low-cost, bland staple food in Jamaica, ﬁnding that take-up
of a school feeding program providing the bland food was higher among poorer households
and those with more eligible children than among comparatively wealthy households. (Ja-
coby, 1997)
     Directly observing poverty through expenditure surveys imposes a cost on programs
who must fund expenditure surveys or proxy means tests, and ordeal mechanisms impose
costs on beneﬁciaries that are by deﬁnition a burden to the potential beneﬁciaries. In con-
trast, in addition to the potential for self-targeting, in-kind transfers may have features that
make them more desirable to both households and policymakers than equivalently valued
cash transfers. First, in-kind transfers may be politically appealing if they are more easily
portrayed and understood as using public funds only to help disadvantaged households buy
the things they really need. (Barrett, 2002) Second, in-kind transfers can have diﬀerential
consumption impacts than equivalently sized transfers of cash in ways that are useful for
policy design. (Jacoby, 2002) demonstrates that in-kind transfers targeted to speciﬁc mem-
bers have ﬂy-paper eﬀects which inﬂuence the consumption of targeted members more than
the consumption of co-resident, but non-targeted members. Finally, policymakers might
have paternalistic preferences for increasing consumption of food in particular. Currie and
Gahvari’s review of the literature cites numerous studies claiming that various food transfers
or subsidies may increase food consumption more than equivalently valued cash transfers
would. (Currie and Gahvari, 2008)
     In-kind transfers can also have impacts which work against policy goals, and the ex-


                                               2
pected eﬀects on consumption of food subsidies can be theoretically ambiguous. Subsidy pro-
grams can even cause a reduction in estimated food consumption for certain sub-populations,
either because of general equilibrium eﬀects (Cunha, Giorgi and Jayachandran, 2011) or be-
cause of a Giﬀen eﬀect, wherein income eﬀects of subsidizing staple foods outweigh the
cross-price eﬀect of the subsidy, causing people to substitute to higher quality foods, which
could ultimately reduce caloric intake for some households. (Jensen and Miller, 2011)
      Unfortunately, implementing programs to directly transfer staple goods presents chal-
lenges for program design. Procurement and distribution of physical goods, especially food
goods, is logistically diﬃcult to implement by a centralized agency. Avoiding these logisti-
cal costs is especially important to policymakers in India, where the national governments
primary food subsidy program, the Public Distribution System (PDS) has been criticized
for leakage and corruption in the procurement and distribution process (Jha and Srinivasan,
2001). Local procurement obviates the need for these systems, since goods are purchased and
stored in close proximity to beneﬁciaries, eliminating the need for transportation and storage.
Comparisons of internationally transported food aid with locally or regionally sourced grains
have found that buying grain locally is generally cheaper because of savings on transporta-
tion and storage, (Lentz, Passarelli and Barrett, 2013) and more preferred by beneﬁciaries
because of diﬀerences in local varieties and cultivation methods. (Violette et al., 2013)
      If policymakers choose to employ local procurement when implementing an in-kind
transfer, additional challenges arise. First, in many contexts, even basic staple goods are
heterogeneous, and their price and quality can vary widely. If a centralized policy maker
chooses a good that is too costly, poor members may not be able to participate, but if the
policy maker chooses a good that is too inferior, even relatively poor members targeted by the
program may opt out. Evidence from migrants’ food consumption patterns in India conﬁrms
that households forfeit caloric intake in favor of consuming goods which most closely match
their preferences but may be more costly. (Atkin, 2013) Second, program implementers
may not have good information about sources of food and prices, causing the program
to overspend on grain. An attractive candidate to address both of these challenges is to
incorporate a public choice mechanism into the policy design. Public choice can potentially
incorporate information about the preferences of beneﬁciaries that is not easily available to
a central planner, increasing satisfaction and take-up. Both theory and experience suggest
that communities can leverage information to identify poor households and adapt programs
to their preferences, but that doing so makes the program susceptible to elite capture. For
a review, see Mansuri and Rao. (Mansuri and Rao, 2013) In addition, the exercise of public


                                              3
choice has been shown to independently increase program participation and satisfaction.
(Olken, 2010)
     This paper asks whether the strategy of local procurement and public choice is com-
patible with the goal of self-targeting through the provision of a good generally preferred by
the poorest members of the communities in a context where basic staple goods have some
heterogeneity. A simple model shows the mechanisms through which price and quality of
varieties of the staple good can generate separation of potential beneﬁciaries by wealth, and
predicts the relative likelihood of participating over the wealth/income distribution. In the
model, households have preferences for quality of the staple grains they consume, and quality
is a normal good, meaning that optimal quality is increasing in household wealth/income.
The model predicts that the surplus utility of participation in a program for a household
of a given level of wealth is maximized when the program subsidizes a particular quality of
food corresponding to household wealth, and that surplus utility is decreasing as quality is
increased or decreased from this point. The implication of this model is that households who
choose to participate in the program in a given village will come from particular sections
of the wealth distribution, i.e. when the village subsidizes high quality grain, only wealthy
people participate, and when the village subsidizes low quality grain, only poor people partic-
ipate. Whether the program is targeted toward the poor then becomes an empirical question
of what kind of grain the villages decide to provide. The model further shows that if some
villages choose relatively high quality grain, the program may actually lead to decreases in
the quantity of grain consumed relative to control villages, because some moderately poor
households may decide to use the program to upgrade the quality of the grain they buy, even
though the high quality rice from the program is still more expensive than the low quality
grain they would have purchased otherwise.
     The model used in this paper are applicable generally to public transfer programs where
beneﬁciaries have some say in the quality of a good to be provided where the program
only provides one or a limited, discrete set of options from a menu of choices where cost
and quality are associated and purchasing other, non-selected varieties of the transferred
good at market rates is an option. Other contexts where similar models have been applied
include supplementary nutrition programs in developing countries (Jacoby, 1997), public
school provision where private schools are an option (Besley and Coate, 1991).
     Using data from a randomized evaluation of a food security program that provides in-
kind subsidized loans, I show that communities participating in the program do not always
choose the cheapest available staple good. The data suggests that the particular represen-


                                              4
tative choice model for public choice employed by the program leads to village committees
being more slanted to choosing higher price/quality goods and to lower participation by less
wealthy members. Next, I show evidence that the variation in the price of the good chosen
by each participating village predicts whether wealthier or poorer potential beneﬁciaries are
more likely to participate. Finally, the paper turns to heterogeneous consumption impacts.
The model predicts that the eﬀects on quantity of rice consumed by the household are only
unambiguously positive for the wealthiest households, since the program for them is subsi-
dizing grain that is already at least as inexpensive as they would have purchased from the
market. Moderately poor households who choose to purchase grain which is more expensive
than what they would have chosen to buy from the market may actually decrease their con-
sumption. The balance of treatment eﬀects over the distribution of wealth in this particular
case leads the program to show no impact on consumption across the distribution of wealth,
even though the program: 1. Is at least weakly welfare improving for all households and 2.
Does result in consumption increases for some groups, even if not the ones that the program
designers might wish to target for consumption increases.
     The next section describes the program and the particular context for the model. Sec-
tion 3 provides data on the characteristics of rice in Bihar to set up the intuition of the
model. Section 4 presents the model and demonstrates the results related to targeting. The
implications of the model for choice of rice and targeting are taken to the data in Section
5 and Section 6 respectively. Section 7 demonstrates the application of the model for the
analysis of consumption eﬀects from the program. The consumption predictions are tested in
Section 8 using the cluster randomization of the program. Section 9 summarizes the results,
draws conclusions, and raises further questions and extensions.


1    The Program and Data
     The data used was collected as part of an evaluation of a program operated by the
Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project (BRLP), a joint project of the World Bank and the state
government of Bihar in India. The BRLP’s primary role is to organize groups of women
called Self-Help Groups (SHGs). SHGs conduct microﬁnance activities and participate in
the BRLP’s programs aimed at increasing the earning potential of the women and their
families. The SHGs are further grouped together into Village Organizations (VOs) which
participate in programs designed to involve multiple SHGs. Each VO consists of 100-150
women, all of whom live within the same village.


                                             5
      The program is a food security intervention called the Food Security Fund (FSF). The
FSF is designed to help credit-constrained VO members access large quantities of rice in
a single purchase without exposing them to high interest rates. The BRLP grants 100,000
rupees (about $2,000) to the VO, and assigns a staﬀ member to use the funds to organize
an in-kind lending program. First, members of the VO are interviewed about their food
practices, and encouraged to think about how much food they may need to purchase or
borrow over the following three months, based on the amount of rice they expect their family
to produce and consume over that period. If members expect to purchase or borrow rice,
they are asked if they would like to take a loan from the FSF fund. Once all members have
expressed a desired amount to borrow, the BRLP staﬀ adds up the aggregate loan demand.
Members of the VO leadership take this amount to nearby grain vendors and solicit bids
from each vendor. Samples of vendors’ varieties of rice are taken, along with prices, and the
VO leadership agrees on which type of grain to purchase. Once the rice is purchased, it is
distributed to members, who are given three months to repay their loan with no interest rate
charged.
      Although this program does not directly subsidize the price of the rice, the project
believes that it beneﬁts participants in three ways: 1. Many members rely on loans to
purchase food in absence of the program, meaning that the program is a direct subsidy
on interest costs for these members; 2. Encouraging members to purchase three months’
worth of food at one time, rather than smaller quantities at small intervals, allows individual
members to leverage potential bulk discounts; and 3. Pooling the demands of the whole
VO together when bargaining with shop keepers and wholesalers to solicit competitive bids
could help them leverage further bulk purchasing discounts. Due to diﬃculties in comparing
quality, the exact size of the bulk discount is not measured in this paper. However, program
participation is voluntary, and high participation rates suggest that there is some beneﬁt to
the program relative to purchasing independently from the market. For the remainder of the
paper, this beneﬁt will be thought of as a small discount to the per-unit purchasing cost of
rice.
      The data was collected as part of a cluster-randomized control trial. Six blocks1 were
selected for the study, chosen because these locations had formed a suﬃcient number of VOs
to be included in the study, but had not yet started the FSF program. The project divides
each block into three units called clusters. Random assignment either to receive the FSF
program (treatment) or not (control) was done at the cluster level, so that within a block,
  1
      A block is an Indian administrative unit similar to a county.



                                                       6
all of the VOs within one or two clusters were assigned to start the program, while the
remaining cluster or clusters were assigned to wait until completion of the study.
     After randomization, baseline data was collected from ﬁve VOs in each of the eighteen
evaluation clusters (90 VOs: 45 treatment, 45 control) in July 2012 prior to initiation of
the lending program in any VOs. A VO is comprised of ten to ﬁfteen smaller units called
Self Help Groups (SHGs), which each have ten to ﬁfteen members, including three leaders
(designated as President, Secretary, or Treasurer). To generate the sample of households,
three SHGs were randomly chosen in each VO and seventeen members were selected from
each of these SHGs. In each of the selected SHGs, two out of three leaders were selected,
as well as either three or four non-leaders. If a respondent could not be located, a sub-
stitute was randomly selected from among the remaining members. Upon completion of
the baseline, the lending program began in September 2012. A post-intervention survey
was collected in February-March, 2013. The surveys covered detailed monthly food expen-
diture and weekly consumption, coarse categories of non-food expenditure, experiences of
food insecurity, agricultural production, income, and child health measures. Data was col-
lected from a total of 1,529 SHG members about their households in the baseline. In the
post-intervention survey, the same members were resurveyed with 1,449 being relocated and
agreeing to participate again. Attrition was evenly balanced across treatment and control
(p=.25). A second post-intervention survey was conducted in September to October 2013,
with 1,472 again successfully surveyed and attrition balanced by treatment status (p=.68).
Out of the original 1,529 at baseline, 1518 households were re-surveyed in at least one one
of the two follow-up rounds with balanced attrition (p=.76).


2    Rice as a Staple Good in Bihar
     The literature on using in-kind provision of services as a second-best method of targeting
(Nichols and Zeckhauser, 1982; Besley and Coate, 1991; Jacoby, 1997) suggests that choosing
an inferior staple good can ensure that program participation is concentrated among disad-
vantaged members. This line of reasoning has encouraged programs to focus on providing
staple grains, but neglects potential heterogeneity of quality even among staple goods.
     Table 1 shows some summary statistics for the households of the members surveyed. The
general pattern is one of disadvantage, with the average household earning little more than
1000 rupees per month per capita (about $20) in the month before the baseline. Moreover,
the average z-score for length-for-age and weight-for-age is near or below the WHO’s cutoﬀs


                                              7
for stunting and underweight. The incidence of poverty and related health indicators reﬂect
both the circumstances of rural Bihar, as well as the project’s intentional focus on recruiting
disadvantaged households as beneﬁciaries. Since following results comparing consumption
impacts rely on comparing treatment and control villages, the means are reported separately
for these two groups, with a t-statistic for the signiﬁcance of the diﬀerence. The t-statistics
are calculated from a regression of each variable on a treatment dummy, clustering at the
unit of randomization, and including block ﬁxed eﬀects to account for the stratiﬁcation
procedure used during randomization. The last column shows p-values calculated using
Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller’s wild cluster bootstrap procedure to account for the fact
that only eighteen clusters were subject to randomization (Cameron, Gelbach and Miller,
2008). Given the small number of clusters, randomization did not quite acheive balance on all
baseline characteristics, with six out of twenty variables not balanced across treatment and
control. However, the primary outcome variable of interest relying on the randomization,
consumption of rice, is well balanced. To be careful, the regressions identiﬁed through
the randomization will use changes in consumption from the baseline, diﬀerencing out any
discrepancy in levels between treatment and control following Jensen and Miller (2011).

                                           (T able1)

     In Bihar, the staple foods are mostly rice, wheat, or maize. These three grains account
for 33% of food expenditures in the households surveyed, and 30% of these households
cultivate at least one of these grains. Among the three available staple grains, rice accounts
for the largest share of expenditure and consumption. Including home-produced goods valued
at the median market rate in the village, rice alone accounts for 25% of expenditures on
food. In addition to its importance in the diet of rural Bihar’s population, rice is an inferior
good. Table 2 shows the relationship between the share of food expenditure, including
consumption from home production, and the log of monthly household expenditure. The
correlation is negative, indicating that wealthier households spend a lower percentage of their
total expenditure speciﬁcally on rice.

                                           (T able2)

     Given its importance in meeting the food needs of households and its relative importance
for poor households in particular, rice appears to be the kind of candidate that policymakers
would have in mind when trying to choose a food to subsidize that will be most valued by


                                               8
the poor.
     Other characteristics of rice, however, make it a less ideal candidate for a program
seeking to raise the consumption of staple foods by the poor. The main issue is that rice is
not a homogenous good. Even within a single market or shop, a diversity of varieties and
qualities of rice are often available. Rice varies according to color, taste, texture, presence
of impurities, whether grains are broken or whole, and other dimensions. 2 It is reasonable
to expect that some of this variation in quality and variety is associated with prices paid
for rice. Figure 1 shows the distribution of prices paid by households at the baseline for 1
kilogram of rice at the market prior to the baseline survey. The prices range from around 10
rupees per kilogram to over 20 rupees, suggesting that some members pay nearly twice as
much for rice as others. Some of this variation is undoubtedly explained by geography, bulk
discounting, and negotiating ability, but some is also likely explained by demand for quality.

                                                   (F igure1)

      If there is a quality component underlying the price variation of market purchases and
quality is positively associated with price, we would expect that wealth will be positively
associated with quality choice and consequently with the price paid. Table 3 shows the linear
relationship between the unit price paid at the market for rice (in the month prior to the
baseline survey) with wealth measured in various ways. All four measures of wealth show a
positive relationship between the price paid at the market and wealth. The two which are
likely to be measured with the least error, household expenditures and expenditure on food
(excluding rice and wheat), show the most signiﬁcant relationship.

                                                    (T able3)

     Another way to view the relationship between the price of rice and wealth is shown in
Figure 2. The ﬁgure shows the kernel density plots of prices paid for rice (in the month prior
to the baseline survey) for the lowest quartile of wealth and the highest quartile. The plots
reveal that the sorting based on wealth is not perfect; nevertheless, those paying lower prices
seem to be more likely to be from the poorest quartile, and those paying higher prices seem
   2
    Variation in nutritional content is much more limited, however. Of the seven categories for rice listed
in the publication Nutritive Value of Indian Foods, the diﬀerence in calories between the most and least
calorically dense was less than 20% (?). Varieties fortiﬁed with micronutrients may be an exception, but
interviews with households and shopkeepers suggested that people were not aware of these varieties. This
suggests that either fortiﬁed varieities are not generally available or that their nutrient content is not a salient
property aﬀecting consumer choices.


                                                         9
more likely to be from the highest quartile.

                                          (F igure2)


3    A Simple Model of Take-up Under Heterogeneity of
     the Staple Good
     The descriptive evidence in the previous section suggests that rice is an important staple
good in Bihar, and is particularly important as a component of the consumption basket for
the poorest households. These characteristics suggest that, in this context, a program which
attempts to target participation and beneﬁts toward the poorest members should consider
subsidizing rice. However, the evidence also suggests that rice is not a homogeneous good.
When broadly deﬁned, rice seems to be an inferior good, meaning that the relative share
of rice consumed out of the total consumption basket is decreasing. However, the quality
component of rice is likely a normal good, meaning that household demand for quality is
increasing in household wealth. To explain why heterogeneity of the staple good may be
problematic for targeting, the model below extends a model of take-up similar to those
of Jacoby (1997) and Besley and Coate (1991). The model demonstrates that wealthier
households’ preference for higher quality foods causes programs that provide lower quality,
less costly food items to attract beneﬁciaries who are relatively poor. Programs that oﬀer
higher quality goods attract wealthier participants. To determine which types of participants
will choose to participate, I compare the utility that a household of a certain income would
receive from participating in the program with the utility they would receive from choosing
to forgo the program and purchase their food from the market.
     The household consumes two goods, a staple food good c and a composite good n. The
staple food has a quality component q . Both goods and the quality component can be chosen
continuously, but q is bounded above and below, so that there is a minimum quality available




                                               10
and a maximum.3 The utility function is:

                                 U = α ln (c − a) + β ln (q ) + δ ln (n)

where α, β , and δ are all in the range (0,1). This utility function captures a few key intuitions
about the choice of consumption and quality. First, the MRS between quality and the non-
staple consumption good n does not depend on the amount of staple good consumed c (weak
separability). In other words, the appeal of taste, appearance, ease of cooking, etc. for the
diﬀerent varieties of the staple good relative to consuming more non-staple goods does not
depend on the amount of staple good consumed. Second, food consumption is subject to a
subsistence constraint, which captures the intuition that as food consumption falls to levels
needed for survival, the marginal utility of consuming food becomes very high.4
     The budget constraint is simply:

                                               y = pqc + nz

     where y is income (or wealth in this single period model) and z is the unit price of n.
The key feature of this model is that the price of c is assumed to increasing in q , and q
is endogenously chosen within the model along with c and n, with the choice of q directly
determining the price paid. To keep the model simple, I assume that the unit price of c is a
simple linear function of q:
                                        price = pq

This function captures the idea that higher quality goods cost more per unit to buy. q is
restricted to be in the range qmin ≤ q ≤ qmax .
     Ruling out the case where every consumer chooses the corner solution q = qmin requires
one restriction on parameters, namely that β>α, which I will assume for the remainder of
the paper. In this simple setup, n and q are both increasing in y , but c is a constant in
   3
     This assumption does not drive the results that follow, and only highlights the cases where all members
with wealth above or below a certain cutoﬀ are included or excluded. This restriction could be replaced
by one in which wealth is bounded above and below so that the only minimum and maximum varieties
available in a village are those preferred by the wealthiest and poorest members. Alternatively, quality could
be unbounded, in which case any quality choice would create a threshold above and below which no one
would participate. If quality is unbounded below, the restriction on parameters I will make to prevent all
households from choosing the minimum quality instead ensures that the optimal choice of c and q at market
rates is positive.
   4
     This assumption does not drive targeting results, but allows for the possibility that the poor place
the highest value on program participation when the program subsidizes their most preferred good. This
intuition is part of the reason policymakers might view such a program as pro-poor.


                                                     11
preferences.5 Households consume a ﬁxed quantity of the staple good but as their wealth
increases, they both upgrade the quality of the staple good and consume more of the other
good, which may include other non-staple foods.
      Introducing a subsidy or transfer into the above model reveals the mechanism through
which targeting can result from the choice of good to be subsidized. If the program oﬀers
a cash grant, the program would simply expand y in the budget constraint. Households
would respond by increasing both q and n, and would consequently experience an increase in
utility. A program that oﬀers a voucher not restricted to one particular type of food could be
modeled as a decrease in p, for at least up to a maximum quantity for all possible qualities.
In the voucher case in this simple model, households will increase q , the quality of rice they
desire.6 Again, the vouchers would be a welfare improvement for households of all wealth
levels. Equivalently valued vouchers will create a higher welfare surplus to poor households
who have a higher marginal utility of quality and quantity, but this alone would not lead to
diﬀerential participation on the wealth dimension.7 In either the cash or voucher case, all
households would be willing to take up the program, so if the policy maker wants to target
the program to lower income households, exogenous rules would have to be put in place to
restrict higher income households from participating or to encourage take up among poor
households.
      In contrast to ﬂexible voucher or subsidy programs, a program that subsidizes the cost
of one particular variety of food will have diﬀerent welfare implications for diﬀerent types of
households. If the program only subsidizes one good, then for participants in the program,
q is exogenously chosen and ﬁxed at the level q = qp .8 Households receive a discount for
this variety, so that the price of a unit of c for the quality qp is φpqp, where φ < 1 and the
diﬀerence between φ and 1 represents the per unit value of the subsidy. Other than this
   5
      Details of the optimal choices are in Appendix 1. Assuming that prices could be a more ﬂexible function
of quality could generate a solution where the optimal c is also increasing in wealth. This is not necessary
for the intuition of the results, but would admit the possibility of the Giﬀen eﬀects previously described by
Jensen and Miller (2011)
    6
      In a more sophisticated model where the price is a more general function of quality, households could
also choose to change their consumption of c or n in response to a voucher program.
    7
      It is possible that vouchers could lead to separation in take-up between rich and poor if vouchers are
tied to speciﬁc shops that are more diﬃcult to access than the ones households otherwise normally use. This
variety of ordeal mechanism is explored by Dupas, Hoﬀman, Kremer, and Zwane (2013). But if vouchers are
ﬂexible enough to be used in the same places where households generally buy grain, they should be appealing
to rich and poor alike.
    8
      q may be endogenously chosen at the village level in that the village choice is a function of the wealth
of the residents of that village. For now, we assume that individual households cannot inﬂuence the village
choice, so that from the perspective of a single household, the quality choice is exogenous.



                                                     12
price discount for the exogenously chosen q , the budget constraint and utility function for a
program participant is the same as before, and households optimally choose n and c.9
      To ensure that the optimal choices are non-negative, I assume throughout that y>aφpqmax
for all households, which means that every household is able to aﬀord a quantity of the sta-
ple good at least as high as the subsistence constraint a at the prices the program would
oﬀer for the highest quality grain qmax . In contrast to the market case, where c was chosen
endogenously, if a household participates in the program, optimal levels of both c and n
will be increasing in income, y . To determine whether a given household would choose to
participate or not, I deﬁne two indirect utilities. Deﬁne u(c∗        ∗
                                                                 p , np , qp ) as the indirect utility a
household receives from taking the quality of their staple food as exogenously given by the
program. u(c∗      ∗    ∗
              m , nm , qm ) is the indirect utility the household would receive from purchasing
all their goods from the market without the subsidy and endogenously choosing q . Assuming
that the optimal q is in the range (qmin , qmax )10 , the surplus utility from participating in the
program, relative to not participating, can then be given by the following quantity:

                                                   y − aφqp        qp        y − aφqp
  W = u(c∗    ∗             ∗    ∗    ∗
         p , np , qp ) − u(cm , nm , qm ) = α ln            + β ln    + δ ln          +K
                                                      φqp          y            y

where K is a function of preference parameters and is constant in qp and y .
      Having deﬁned the surplus utility from participating in the program, we can use this
quantity to show that wealthier households will opt to participate when the program chooses
a higher quality grain to provide. The relationship between household wealth and surplus
utility from program participation can be stated in the following proposition:
Proposition 1: For a ﬁxed quality chosen by the program qp , there exist yL (qp)
and yH (qp) with yL (qp)<yH (qp), such that W (qp , y )>0 for all y in (yL , yH ), and W <0
for all other y .

                                              (F igure3)

     Proposition 1 holds for general parameters of the model as shown in Appendix 2, but
Figure 3 provides a more intuitive depiction of the proposition by plotting W (qp , y ) over y ,
choosing representative values for the preference and price parameters while keeping qp ﬁxed
at various levels. The solid line shows the surplus utility from participating in the program
  9
    The exact expressions for c and n are shown in Appendix 1.
  10
    The optimal q may be a corner solution as shown in Appendix 1. The speciﬁc cases where corner
solutions for quality apply are handled separately in the proofs.



                                                   13
relative to the market, W (qp , y ), assuming that the program chooses the minimum available
quality. For such a program, W (qmin , y ), the surplus value of participating in the program
rather than the market, is highest for lowest income households. Intuitively, this is because
poor households have the highest marginal utility of consumption (c), and they already
optimally choose to purchase the lowest quality good available in the market without the
subsidy. When the program is introduced, they opt into the program and beneﬁt from moving
away from the subsistence constraint. As consumers move up the income distribution, a gap
                      ∗
opens up between qm     , the quality households would choose to purchase from the market,
and qmin , the quality they would have to purchase through the program. For moderately low
income households, the gain in utility from the extra consumption they can purchase at the
lower prices makes it worthwhile for them to participate, and they are willing to switch from
slightly above-minimum quality food to minimum quality food in order to participate. But as
income increases, the marginal utility of consumption falls, while diﬀerence between quality
they would choose at the market and the quality chosen by the program widens. For higher
income households, the extra consumption they get by switching to qmin and participating in
the program does not compensate them for having to consume a substantially lower quality
good. When the program oﬀers the minimum quality good, households with income in
the range [0, B ] shown in the graph are willing to participate, and households with income
greater than B opt out.
      Comparing households with wealth lower than B in the graph with households with
wealth above B demonstrates the result described by Jacoby (1997). By choosing the lowest
quality good, low income households self-select into the program, and high income households
self-select out without the policymaker otherwise needing to ﬁx rules for who is allowed to
participate.
      The above shows how focusing a program on inferior goods can self-target the program
toward relatively poor households. But given the heterogeneity in cost and quality of rice,
a program which allows choice over the good is not guaranteed to produce this result. The
dashed line in Figure 3 again shows W (qp , y ), the surplus utility from participating in the
program and buying the rice supplied by the program rather than their optimally chosen
variety of market priced rice, over the income axis. This time W is shown assuming that
the program supplies the highest quality rice available in the market, ie W (qmax , y ). For the
ﬁgure, I assume that the subsidy is not so large as to make the highest quality rice under
the program prices cheaper than the lowest quality rice. Choosing the highest quality rice
available reverses the targeting result shown above. Now, households with wealth below the


                                              14
point marked C in the graph would choose not to participate, since the utility they would
get from consuming lower quality rice at a lower price would be more than the utility they
would get from upgrading to the program’s higher quality rice. For wealth levels above C ,
households experience a utility premium from buying the discounted program rice, rather
than their optimal basket at market prices, and choose to participate.
      Comparing the solid line and the dashed line demonstrates that, in the simpliﬁed case
where the program can only buy either the highest or the lowest quality/price rice available,
the choice of rice totally determines whether the program is targeted toward the poor or
captured by relatively wealthy households. Since there is no reason to assume that markets
will only make two kinds of rice available, the model assumes that grain varieties and prices
available from the market are on a continuum between the highest and lowest available
quality of rice. It is possible that the program could choose one of these intermediate
varieties.
      The dotted line in Figure 3 shows the surplus utility of program participation for the
choice of an intermediate good. Not surprisingly, the take-up implications of this choice are
halfway between what we see from the choice of the lowest or highest quality good. For
values of wealth below the point A, households choose not to participate. Above the level of
wealth D, wealthy households also self-select out. This curve demonstrates that there may
be excluded populations at both the upper and lower ends of the income distribution, but
such regions need not exist. If the income distribution in a village is bounded within the
range [A − D], the middle quality of grain shown by the dotted line would appeal to both
low and high income types.
      Proposition 1 says that when q is ﬁxed at some qp , the function W (qp , y ) deﬁnes a
range of y = (yL , yH ) such that W (qp , y )>0 for all qp in this range where yL , yH are func-
tions of qp . In Figure 3, (yL (qmin ), yH (qmin )) = (0, B ), (yL (qmax ), yH (qmax )) = (C, ∞) , and
(yL (qp ), yH (qp)) = (A, D) for another qp for which qmin <qp <qmax .
      Figure 3 plots W (qp , y ) for representative values of the preference parameters and prices,
but Proposition 1 is true for general values of these parameters, which I prove in Appendix
2.
      Having demonstrated that ﬁxing the program quality qp deﬁnes a range of income such
that people within the range are willing to participate, I now to turn to the relationship
between this income region and the quality of the good provided. In Figure 3, I showed
the surplus utility of program participation plotted for three diﬀerent qualities selected by
the program: qmin , qmax , and a quality qp such that qmin <qp <qmax . The range of income


                                                 15
such that people would be willing to participate in a program that oﬀers grain of quality
qp is [0, B ]. When the program oﬀers a higher quality of grain qp , the lower bound of the
income range of participants goes up to A and the upper bound goes up to D, suggesting
that the range participants’ income is shifted to the right. As the program further increases
the quality oﬀered to qmax , the lower bound of participants income shifts up to C , and the
upper bound extends to ∞. The plot suggests that the as the quality of grain oﬀered by
the program increases, the range of participants’ income will shift to the right. This feature
is generally true for the assumed parameters of the utility function and can be stated more
formally in the proposition below:
                    ∂ (yL )         ∂ (yH )
Proposition 2 :              >0 and          >0
                    ∂ ( qp )        ∂ ( qp )
     Propositions 1 and 2 allow me to make predictions about the choice of qp and the tar-
geting implications for the program.11 Typically, improving targeting refers to one or both of
two goals: 1. Increasing the proportion of people below some cutoﬀ who participate (desired
inclusion) and 2. Decreasing the proportion of people above that cutoﬀ who participate
(desired exclusion). Focusing on this deﬁnition of targeting can obscure the relationship be-
tween quality choice and takeup, however; for a particular choice of program quality qp , the
income distribution between yL (qp ) and yH (qp ) determines the percentage of people above
and below any particular cutoﬀ who participate.
     To see the relationship between qp and the traditional measures of targeting, suppose
that the program sets an income cutoﬀ to assess targeting at the point marked C in Figure
3, so that the program intends to include households with income below C and exclude
households with income above C . Then either a program that provides the lowest quality
grain or one that oﬀers the intermediate quality shown on the graph would be strictly better
targeted than a program that provides the highest quality grain. Only the highest quality
program out of the three would attract participants with income above C , and only the two
lower quality programs attract any participants with income below C . But the comparison
between the low and intermediate quality is ambiguous, because only the low quality program
would attract those with income below A, while only the intermediate quality program would
attract those with income between B and C . Which of the two programs attracts a higher
percentage of those below the cutoﬀ C will depend entirely on the number of households
with income below A relative to the number of households whose income is between B and
C.
     More formally, the percentage of households below an income cutoﬀ y ∗ can be written
 11
      The proof for Proposition 2 proceeds exactly as in the proof of Lemma 3 in Appendix 2.


                                                    16
as:
                                                      y∗
                                           I=              π (y )f (y )dy
                                                  0

     where π (y ) is the probability that a household with wealth y will choose to participate
in the program.12 The distribution of income f (y ) is a feature of the data sampled or the
population of interest, and y ∗ can be chosen either by the policy-maker or the econometrician.
                                           ∂I
Assessing the simple comparative static        depends on the shape of f (y ), the y ∗ chosen, and
                                          ∂qp
the function π (y ). Assessing targeting potential empirically by the proportion of members
below an arbritrary cutoﬀ who participate based on quality choice is problematic because
such a measure would be very sensitive to both the speciﬁc income distribution and the
cutoﬀ chosen. Such a measure then is limited in external validity–because other contexts
will have other income distributions–and prone to data mining–because the econometrician
can cherry pick the cutoﬀ that generates a desired result. To avoid confusion about whether
results on targeting are driven by f (y ) or y ∗ , the remainder of the paper will focus on the
quantity π (y ). This quantity can be thought of as expressing the proportion of people with
income y who participate.


4        VO Choice of Quality as a Function of VO Charac-
         teristics
     In the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project, village organizations have a hierarchical struc-
ture. Each VO is composed of members of 10-15 Self Help Groups (SHGs), who participate
together in VO-level programs like the food security loan. To choose the quality and price of
grains provided through the program, members of the VO leadership collect bids from local
merchants to supply the estimated amount of grain needed. At a meeting of VO leadership,
samples of rice that represent each of the bids are assessed for quality and appearance. In
some cases, the rice samples are cooked to allow members to taste the food before choosing a
bid to accept. Although any member of an SHG is technically allowed to participate, the VO
committees are comprised of leaders appointed by each SHG to represent them in VO-level
decisions. Thus it is likely that these members have more inﬂuence on program outcomes,
both through their attendance in the VO committee meetings, and through their inﬂuence
as leaders. Such a representative model is a common approach for programs in developing
  12
       Or the share of households with income y who participate.



                                                           17
countries to aggregate preferences and use local information in deciding policies and program
allocations (Olken, 2010).
     In this type of representative choice allocation, the preferences of the chosen VO com-
mittee members are more likely to be represented in the choice of goods, including the choice
over the quality of grain selected. In the model, wealth is correlated with the price paid for
rice is through the channel of preferences for quality, and empirical results in Section 2
showed a relationship between household expenditure and the price paid for rice at market
rates prior to the baseline survey. Together, these results suggest that VO representation
may underlie part of the choice of quality and explain some of the variation in the prices
oﬀered by the program.

                                                (T able4)

     Table 4 shows the relationship between VO committee status and household expenditure
at baseline. An extra log point of household expenditure is associated with a 6 percentage
point increase in the likelihood of being a VO committee member; this suggests that wealthier
members are disproportionately represented on the VO committees that choose the quality
of rice to provide through the program. Column 2 shows that VO committee members
are also more likely to participate in the program than non-committee members. If VO
committees are often made up of relatively wealthy members of the SHGs, we might expect
these members’ preferences to inﬂuence the program prices. Table 5 shows the relationship
between the median price of rice paid by the VO committee members at the baseline of the
survey, as well as the prices of the variety of rice ultimately chosen in the second column.
The median market price paid at baseline is signiﬁcantly correlated with the price the VO
ultimately chooses, consistent with the idea that the median committee member is pivotal
in choosing a variety of rice. The more this member values a higher quality variety of rice,
the more likely it is that the committee will choose a higher cost variety. 13

                                                (T able5)
  13
    Committee membership and prices oﬀered at baseline are not randomly assigned. Any correlation
between baseline prices and prices of available varieties when the committee makes this choice could explain
the relationship.




                                                    18
5     Empirical Results on Targeting and Take-up
     The model above outlines the mechanism through which quality and price of the pro-
vided good interact with wealth to determine which segments of the income distribution
choose to participate. When communities choose their own grains, it is not clear which type
of grain will be chosen, and which types of members will choose to participate as a result. Fig-
ure 4 shows the distribution of prices paid for grain by VO members purchasing through the
community lending program against the distribution of prices paid by households purchasing
from the market in the control villages during the midline survey. Comparing the prices paid
by the VOs with prices paid by the households confounds the price diﬀerentials from two
sources: those associated with quality diﬀerences and any discounts members receive by buy-
ing through the food security program rather than the market. This confounding means that
the apparent leftward shift of the VO distribution relative to the household/market distribu-
tion cannot be necessarily attributed only either to a bulk discount or to VOs systematically
choosing lower qualities.14 The main feature of the comparison is that there is signiﬁcant
variation in the prices that VOs pay. The VOs oﬀering the most expensive grains oﬀer the
rice at a price about 50% higher than the VOs oﬀering the grains at the lowest price. There
seem to be VOs who oﬀer grain at prices equivalent to those experienced by members pur-
chasing the most expensive grains and other VOs oﬀering rice at prices equal to the cheapest
prices available in the market. Some of the variation may be spatial or temporal, so that all
the VOs are in fact buying the same rice, which happens to be available at diﬀerent prices in
diﬀerent times and places. However, given the correlation between wealth and market price
seen earlier and the correspondence between market and VO prices, it seems reasonable to
speculate that some of the diﬀerence in VO prices relates to the quality of grain chosen. It
therefore seems unlikely that public choice of the staple good in this context will have led
either to systematic targeting of the poor or elite capture by the wealthy, but that diﬀerent
VOs will have diﬀerent participant proﬁles based on the price/quality choice made by that
VO.

                                                (F igure4)

    To assess whether variation in take-up is correlated with the variation in prices of
the grains oﬀered by the VOs as predicted by the model, I estimate the quantity π (y ).
  14
     There is also the issue of heaping at 20 rupees per kg in the market prices. It is not clear whether this
heaping comes from stickiness of prices around a round number, measurement error, or both.



                                                     19
Starting from the simplest case, under the assumption that there are only two quality/price
combinations of rice available in a particular village, the model predicts that take-up should
vary based on whether the high or low quality rice is chosen. The model predicts that the
surplus utility from participation should be positive for low levels of wealth and negative
for high levels of wealth when the low quality of rice is chosen, and the opposite when the
high quality rice is chosen. If the probability of participation is an increasing function of the
surplus utility from participating in the program, relative to buying only from the market,
the quantity π (y ) can be estimated by the following simple binary dependent variable model:

       Y = f (α + β1 ∗ ln expenditure + β2 ∗ vo price + β3 ∗ ln expenditure ∗ vo price) +

where the choice of the function f depends on the selection of an LPM, logit, or probit
model. The model predicts that β1 <0, β2 <0, β3 >0, capturing the idea that when the VO
chooses the low price good, wealth would be negatively correlated with the probability of
participation.
     In the above regressions, the price chosen and oﬀered by the VO is not randomly as-
signed, and may be correlated with characteristics of the VO that are related to both wealth
as measured by expenditure and take-up. To avoid this source of bias, I will instead im-
plement a village ﬁxed eﬀects version of the above estimation equation. Since the program
price only varies at the village level, we cannot separately identify β2 , the eﬀect of raising
the VO price for the low-wealth households.

                                                (T able6)

     Table 6 shows the results of the above speciﬁcation, using both a logit and LPM spec-
iﬁcation and including a village ﬁxed eﬀect. The ﬁrst three columns show an LPM imple-
mentation of the model, while the following three columns show a conditional logit model.
Including a village ﬁxed eﬀect means that the model can either separately identify within
village variation in prices 15 over rounds or identify an eﬀect of the round on participation,
but can not separately identify both. For each model, the results are shown including: 1.No
ﬁxed eﬀects for the round or village price, 2. Round dummies, and 3. Including the village
price as a regressor. As predicted by the model, the coeﬃcient on ln expenditure is nega-
tive, suggesting that when the price of the grain chosen by the VO is low, the probability
  15
    All prices are de-trended from a linear trend in prices where price is a linear function of the month in
which the grain is purchased.



                                                    20
of take-up is highest for the lowest income members. This is a conﬁrmation of the results
predicted by Besley and Coate (1991) and demonstrated elsewhere by Jacoby (1997). But
also consistent with the model allowing for the choice of a higher quality is the fact that the
coeﬃcient on vo price ∗ ln expenditure is negative. Solving the following equation for VO
prices allows me to estimate the price at which household expenditure switches from being
negatively correlated with take-up to being positively correlated:

                  β1 ∗ ln expenditure + β3 ∗ ln expenditure ∗ vo price = 0

The inﬂection points range from around the 65th percentile of the price distribution to the
98th percentile depending on the model choice. The interpretation of this fact is that for
most of the range of the observed price distribution, participation is relatively associated
with lower levels of wealth and expenditure. But when a price around the 90th percentile is
chosen, wealth becomes positively correlated with participation. In the higher cost VOs, even
when the program provides rice, a staple food which is an especially important component of
food expenditure for the poorest members, wealthier members are more likely to participate.
This reﬂects that the wealthier members perceive an additional beneﬁt from participating
in the program that the poorer members do not experience.
      The above results restricted the probability of participation to be monotonically in-
creasing or decreasing in wealth. In a version of the model where there are only two varieties
of rice available in the local market, this restriction is consistent with the model. But when
the model allows for a bounded continuum of quality choices, the model predicts that for a
particular quality choice between the minimum and the maximum available quality, there
can be regions at both the bottom and the top of the income distribution where members
choose not to participate. If probability of participation is increasing in the surplus utility
from participation, a more realistic representation would be to allow the probability of par-
ticipation as a function of income to have both increasing and decreasing regions. To allow
this loosening of restrictions, Figure 5 shows local polynomial plots of participation over the
log expenditure distribution. The dependent axis is a dummy for participation removing
VO and round ﬁxed eﬀects. Log expenditure is trimmed at the top and bottom 5 percent
of expenditure to exclude outliers where the data is thin.

                                          (F igure5)

    The ﬁgure shows the relationship between wealth and participation for three diﬀerent


                                              21
wealth categories of prices of grains chosen by the VO, corresponding to terciles of the
distribution of VO prices. The plots conﬁrm the main features of the model and the logit
results. Comparing the relationship for the quarter of VOs with the lowest cost grains (the
light colored solid line) with the line for the third of VOs with the highest cost grains (dark
solid line), the data show how the model connects to the relationship between participation
and prices of rice chosen by VOs in the project. Choosing the least expensive grains is an
eﬀective way to self-target the program, because participation is highest among the poor,
and the wealthy select out. When relatively expensive grains are chosen, however, the both
wealthy and poor participate, suggesting that villages who choose these grains are spending
more per kg than would be necessary to induce the poor to participate and encouraging
relatively wealthy households to take advantage of beneﬁts. Given that the subsidy on grain
is small in this case, the fact that the poor do not select out when their village chooses
expensive rice has important consumption implications, described in the following section.


6    Implications of the Model for Average Treatment
     Eﬀects on Consumption of the Staple Good
     To this point, the targeting of the program has been assessed by referring in the model
to the wealth range of households who would choose to participate, and empirically referring
to the probability of a household of a given wealth in taking up the program. But another
way to view whether a program is well targeted is to assess the regions of the income dis-
tribution where the program changes the consumption patterns of households. A goal of
policymakers might be not only that the program should have higher take-up among rela-
tively poor households, but that the program should increase the consumption of relatively
poor households. Additionally, the increase among poor households should be more than
the increase among wealthy households.
     Under heterogeneity of the good that can be selected for provision through the program,
whether consumption is increased by the program and whether these increases are concen-
trated among the poor will depend on the quality of the good. Returning to the model, the
optimal choice of consumption in the simple model when buying the staple good only from
the market is:
                                                βα
                                         c∗
                                          m =
                                               β−α



                                              22
If they participate in the program, households optimally choose to consume:

                                                    αδpφqp + αy
                                             c∗
                                              p =
                                                    (α + δ )pφqp

The role of income in determining optimal consumption is diﬀerent depending on whether
the household participates in the program or purchases their staple food from the market.
This suggests that the diﬀerence between optimal consumption when purchasing from the
market and consumption when purchasing from the program will be a function of income.
     For an individual, the progras eﬀect on consumption is 0 if the household chooses not
to participate in the program and c∗     ∗
                                    p − cm if the household does choose to participate.
Proposition 3: For a ﬁxed choice of program quality qp among households who
choose to participate, the size of the program eﬀect on an individual household’s
consumption of rice is increasing in wealth.
     Assuming that a household is willing to participate, the program eﬀect is:

                                                 aδpφqp + αy     βa
                                    c∗    ∗
                                     p − cm =                 −
                                                 (α + δ )pφqp   β−α

       The derivative of this quantity with respect to income is:

                                                    α
                                                            >0
                                               (α + δ )pφqp

     which implies that if everyone were required to participate in the program, for a ﬁxed
program quality qp , the size of the program eﬀect on consumption is increasing in wealth.16
     Proposition 3 says that the program eﬀect in terms of increased consumption will be
bigger for wealthier households than for poorer ones, which likely runs counter to the goals
of policymakers interested in targeting programs to the poor. But even the policy goal of
increasing consumption may not hold under the heterogeneity of the program good explored
here. Others, in particular Jensen and Miller, have already demonstrated that consumption
eﬀects of a subsidy on inferior goods need not be positive over the income distribution, and
can even be negative because of a Giﬀen eﬀect (Jensen and Miller, 2011). However, the model
  16
    It may appear that this result is only a product of the fact that at market rates consumption of the staple
good is not a function of income, while in program participating households, income does inﬂuence optimal
consumption. The fact that consumption at market rates results from the assumption that the price of the
staple good is simply the quality times a constant (Price = pq ). If the price is a slightly more complicated
function of the quality (for example, Price = P0 + P1 q ), then c∗m is an increasing function of y . Using these
functional forms precludes closed form solutions, but numerical solutions suggest that the results are robust
to such an extension.


                                                      23
of heterogeneity in staple goods presented above also introduces the possibility of negative
consumption impacts because of a cross price eﬀect within the choice of available goods.
When the program aﬀects the price of only one variety out of a continuum of varieties of
rice available, some members may choose to upgrade to a higher quality rice (if the program
oﬀers a higher quality than they choose to consume at market rates) or to lower the quality
of their grain in order to take advantage of the program discount and purchase more grain.
This eﬀect is stated in the proposition below:
Proposition 4: Suppose the program subsidizes a ﬁxed quality qp , where φpqp >pqmin .
For households whose income falls within the range of those willing to partici-
pate, there is a level of income such that all households with income below this
level have lower consumption when participating in the program then they would
if purchasing at market rates. All households with income above the range will
consume more of the staple good when participating in the program than from
market rates. 17
     Proposition 4 states that for any choice of qp such that the program price is higher
than market price of the lowest available quality of grain,18 the lowest income households
who choose to participate will respond to the program by lowering their consumption of the
staple good, and only the highest income participants will show an increase in consumption.
     The average treatment eﬀect on consumption is the average of the individual program
eﬀects on consumption over the entire range of income. Proposition 4 then yields an inter-
esting result with regard to consumption: the average treatment eﬀects from a program that
subsidizes only one quality of rice need not be positive. If the program does not subsidize the
grain below the market price of the minimum available quality of rice, some households will
respond by using the program to upgrade the quality of their consumption while actually
reducing their consumption. Whether the average treatment eﬀect is positive or negative
for a given qp will depend on the distribution of income in the village and the size of the
treatment eﬀects at each income level, since the average treatment eﬀect for a ﬁxed qp can
  17
    A proof of Proposition 4 is shown in Appendix 5.
  18
    If the program oﬀers grain of a quality higher than the minimum available at the market, but at a
price lower than the market price available of the lowest quality grain, even the poorest households would
respond by (weakly) increasing their consumption of the staple food. The reduction in consumption when
participating in the program comes from households who respond to the program by choosing to upgrade the
quality of the grain they buy, even though the program grain is more expensive than the market grain they
would have bought (though not as much more expensive as it would have been without the program). If the
program rice is cheaper than any market rice, no one faces higher prices by participating in the program.




                                                   24
be deﬁned as:                             ∞
                                          (cp (y ) − cm (y ))dy
                                      0

where cp (y ) = c∗                                                       ∗
                 m if a household chooses not to participate, cp (y ) = cp if the household does
participate, and cm (y ) = c∗m . This proposition does not imply that consumption impacts
across villages making choices of diﬀerent varieties of rice will be negative for the poorest, as
some villages may select low cost varieties for which the only participation we observe comes
from households who respond to the program by increasing their consumption.
      These propositions demonstrate several important implications of the model: 1. Con-
sumption impacts are heterogeneous on the income distribution, 2. The average treatment
eﬀect is only unambiguously positive in the case where the VO chooses to provide the lowest
quality of rice available in the local market, 3. If a quality of rice higher than the lowest
possible quality is chosen, treatment eﬀects are only unambiguously positive for the wealth-
iest households, but may be only weakly positive for these households, 4. If higher than the
minimum quality of rice is chosen, negative treatment eﬀects are possible and are mostly
likely to be observed for households who are not the wealthiest in the village, but only weakly
negative for the very poorest.


7     Empirical Results on Consumption Impacts
     Table 7 shows the average treatment eﬀects (ATE) on consumption, estimated sep-
arately by quintiles of the expenditure distribution for changes from the consumption of
rice at baseline to midline or endline. Following Jensen and Miller (2011), I compute the
treatment eﬀects as changes in weekly rice consumption in kg from the quantity at baseline
in order to help account for any potential imbalences in baseline consumption levels. In
particular I estimate the treatment eﬀects as:

                       ∆RiceConsumedijt = α + β ∗ T reatmentjt +

     The goal of policymakers is to increase the quantity of staple foods that housholds
(especially the poor) are able to consume. The ﬁrst column of Table 7 shows the treatment
eﬀects for the whole sample, which are positive, but small and not statistically signiﬁcant.
The model oﬀers an explanation for how a subsidy on rice could fail to increase consumption
of rice through the prediction that the only region of the wealth distribution for which
the consumption impacts should unambiguously be positive is the right tail, while a region


                                                25
of moderately poor households may reduce consumption. The far right column of Table
7 reveals that as predicted, the largest increases in consumption of rice occur among the
wealthiest households, and for this group, the increase is statistically signiﬁcant. The other
prediction of the model is borne out by the third column, which reveals that for the second
quintile of households, the consumption impact is negative. This is the surprising result of
the model, that a subsidy on consumer staples reduces consumption of these goods for some
members. This could result from Giﬀen behavior, but as shown in the model, can also arise
from cross-price substitution between diﬀerent varieties of rice.

                                           (T able7)

     The lowest quintile of households also shows a signiﬁcant increase in consumption.
However, this ﬁnding is not inconsistent with the model because we could expect to see
increases in consumption among the poor if enough villages choose to provide low cost
grains. As shown in Figure 5, the poorest households participate both when expensive
and low cost rice is chosen. Whether the coeﬃcient is positive or negative for this group
depends on whether the increase in rice consumption when the village chooses low cost rice
is greater than the potential decrease in villages that choose high cost rice. These results
demonstrate the only predictions that can be made ex ante : consumption of rice will at least
weakly increase for the wealthiest households, and consumption could increase or decrease
for anyone else. Together these results demonstrate a surprising fact that a program designed
to increase the consumption of staple foods by subsidizing rice may not achieve its goal.


8    Conclusion
     Although rice seems to be a staple food and an inferior good, the fact that the program
under study focused on providing rice did not seem to guarantee relatively high take-up by the
poorest eligible beneﬁciaries. This paper suggests one reason that take-up is not uniformly
concentrated among the poor could be that rice is actually a heterogeneous good, and some
villages seem to have opted to buy high quality rice. Empirical results from the program
evaluation show that the choice of rice seems to predict participation of relatively poor or
wealthy households, consistent with the model. These results suggest that if programs want
to self-target by oﬀering inferior goods, and also allow for public choice, they need to have an
additional mechanism to ensure that the preferences of the poorest members are given more
weight than occurs in a representative candidate model like the one employed by the program

                                              26
under study. Understanding the processes by which some VOs seem to successfully select
goods that are preferred by the poorest members and designing mechanisms to encourage
this choice could reveal mechanisms that make targeting and public choice more compatible.
      There is an intuitive appeal in tying a subsidy to goods preferred by the poor in order to
self-target the subsidy and maximize its impact in terms of increased consumption of staple
foods by the poor. However, this paper shows how diﬃcult it is to implement such a program
when limited information about markets and preferences is available. Without a clear choice
of a good to subsidize, decentralizing the choice to potential beneﬁciaries may seem like
a way to incorporate local preferences. Unfortunately, allowing this choice unravels three
goals of the program: 1. Wealthy households often participate because their village selects
high quality rice that they prefer, 2. The program is able to purchase a smaller quantity of
rice for a given subsidy grant than if all villages selected the lowest cost rice, and 3. The
program does not increase the consumption of staples on average because many households
end up purchasing higher cost, high quality rice. As in other investigations of self-targeting
mechanisms, achieving self-targeting proves to be diﬃcult.


References
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Bannerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, Ririn Purna-
 masari, and Matthew Wai-Po. 2012. “Ordeal Mechanisms in Targeting: Theory and
 Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.” CID Working Paper, , (254): 175–191.

Atkin, David. 2013. “The Caloric Costs of Culture: Evidence Indian Migrants.” NBER
 Working Paper, , (19196).

Barrett, Christopher B. 2002. “Food Security and Food Assistance Programs.” In Hand-
 book of Agricultural Economics, Vol. II. , ed. Bruce B. Gardner and Gordon C. Rausser,
 2103–2190. Elsevier Science B.V.

Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate. 1991. “Public Provision of Private Goods and
 the Redistribution of Income.” The American Economic Review, 81(4): 979–984.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller. 2008. “Bootstrap-Based
 Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
 90(4): 414–427.



                                              27
Cunha, Jesse M., Giacomo De Giorgi, and Seema Jayachandran. 2011. “The Price
 Eﬀects of Cash Versus In-Kind Transfers.” NBER Working Paper, , (17456).

Currie, Janet, and Firouz Gahvari. 2008. “Transfers in Cash and In-Kind: Theory
 Meets the Data.” Journal of Economic Literature, 46(2): 333–383.

Dupas, Pascaline, Vivian Hoﬀman, Michael Kremer, and Alix Zwane. 2013.
 “Micro-Ordeals, Targeting and Habit Formation.” Unpublished Manuscript.

Jacoby, Hanan G. 1997. “Self-Selection and the Redistributive Impact of In-Kind Trans-
  fers: An Econometric Analysis.” The Journal of Human Resources, 32(2): 233–249.

Jacoby, Hanan G. 2002. “Is there an Intrahousehold Flypaper Eﬀect? Evidence from a
  School Feeding Programme.” Economic Journal, 112(476): 196–221.

Jensen, Robert, and Nolan Miller. 2011. “Do Consumer Price Subsidies Really Improve
  Nutrition?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(4): 1205–1223.

Jha, Shikha, and P.V. Srinivasan. 2001. “Taking the PDS to the Poor: Directions for
  Further Reform.” Economic and Political Weekly, 36(39): 3779–3786.

Lentz, Erin C., Simone Passarelli, and Christopher B. Barrett. 2013. “The Time-
  liness and Cost-Eﬀectiveness of Local and Regional Procurement of Food Aid.” World
  Development, 49: 9–18.

Mansuri, Ghazala, and Vijayendra Rao. 2013. “Localizing Development: Does Partic-
 ipation Work?” World Bank Policy Research Reports.

Nichols, Albert L., and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 1982. “Targeting Transfers through
 Restrictions on Recipients.” The American Economic Review, 72(2): 372–377.

Olken, Benjamin A. 2010. “Direct Democracy and Local Public Goods: Evidence from a
 Field Experiment in Indonesia.” American Political Science Review, 104(2): 243–267.

Violette, William J., Aur Elie P. Harou, Joanna B. Upton, Samuel D. Bell,
 Christopher B. Barrett, Miguel I. Gomez, and Erin C. Lentz. 2013. “Recipients’
 Satisfaction with Locally Procured Food Aid Rations: Comparative Evidence from a Three
 Country Matched Survey.” World Development, 49: 30–43.




                                          28
                                  TABLE 1: CHARACTERISTICS OF SAMPLE POPULATION AND BALANCE CHECK

                                                                (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)             (5)
                                                                                                                            CGM Wild
                                                           Mean in        Mean in        Difference        t-value for      Cluster BS
Variable                                                   Treatment      Control        T-C               Difference          p-value
Number of HH members                                             5.68           5.69            -0.01             -0.22           0.74
Dummy for Household is a General Cast Hindu                       0.06           0.07           -0.01            -0.46            0.43
Dummy for Head Literate                                           0.32           0.38           -0.05            -0.79            0.18
Per Cap. Monthly Income                                         1258.7        1281.3            -22.6            -0.77            0.21
Monthly HH Expenditure on Non-Food Items                        4965.1        4790.1           175.0                 1.62         0.03
Monthly HH Expenditure on Food                                  3492.3        3385.4           106.9                 0.03         1.00
Total Monthly HH Expenditure                                    8457.4        8175.5           281.9                 1.56         0.05
Number of Assets Owned                                            6.42           6.70           -0.28            -2.60            0.01
Total Household Debt                                            13733          28175          -14441             -1.00            0.12
Acres of Land Cultivated in Past 1 Year                           1.47           1.94           -0.47            -2.29            0.01
Dummy for Household Cultivates Grains                             0.25           0.36           -0.11            -4.08            0.00
Kg. of Rice Purchased in Last 1 Month                            54.22          51.88               2.34             0.82         0.27
Kg. of Rice Consumed in Last 1 Week                              10.15           9.99               0.15             0.75         0.30
Price per Kg. of Rice purchased from Market                      17.45          17.66           -0.21            -0.31            0.78
Kg. of Wheat Purchased in Last 1 Month                           58.14          61.14           -3.00            -0.59            0.23
Kg. of Wheat Consumed in Last 1 Week                              9.86          10.07           -0.22                0.52         0.40
Price per Kg. of Wheat purchased from Market                     13.76         16.81          -3.05          -0.04            0.98
Z-score Length for Age for children < 5 years old                 -3.27        -3.32           0.05          -0.88            0.25
Z-score Weight for Age for children < 5 years old                 -1.96        -2.19           0.23           0.52            0.41
Z-score Weight for Length for children < 5 years old              -0.50        -0.96           0.46           2.86            0.00
        Notes: Columns 1-3 are unadjusted means in the treatment and control groups. T-statistic (Col. 4) is computed
        clustering at the cluster level where clusters are groups of 5 VOs in a regression that includes block fixed effects to
        account for the fact that randomization was done by stratification at the block level. Col. 5 reports Cameron,
        Gelbach, and Miller’s wild cluster bootstrap correction for the standard errors with 999 replications and the same
        regression as Col. 4.
TABLE 2: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WEALTH AND SHARE OF EXPENDITURE ON RICE

                                   (1)                   (2)
VARIABLES                     Percent of HH         Percent of HH
                                  Food                  Food
                              Expenditure on        Expenditure on
                                  Rice                  Rice

Log of Total HH                 -0.0474***            -0.0474***
Expenditure                      (0.00339)             (0.00321)

Block FE                            NO                    YES

Constant                         0.417***              0.403***
                                 (0.0590)              (0.0497)

Observations                    1528                  1528
R-squared                       0.005                0.019
 Note: Robust standard errors are clustered at the cluster level,
             where clusters are groups of 5 VOs.
               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                     TABLE 3: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN UNIT COST OF RICE AND MEASURES OF HOUSEHOLD WEALTH

                                                      (1)                (2)                 (3)            (4)
VARIABLES                                         Log Price of       Log Price of        Log Price of   Log Price of
                                                     Rice               Rice                Rice           Rice
                                                    Rs/Kg              Rs/Kg               Rs/Kg          Rs/Kg

Log HH Expenditure                                 0.0228***
                                                   (0.00711)
Log Food Exp                                                          0.0256**
(Excluding Wheat and Rice)                                            (0.0101)

Asset Index                                                                                0.00738
                                                                                          (0.00821)
Log of HH Income                                                                                          0.00514
                                                                                                         (0.00632)

Village FE                                            YES                YES                 YES           YES

Constant                                           2.657***           2.662***             2.859***      2.815***
                                                   (0.0627)           (0.0768)            (0.000858)     (0.0534)

Observations                                       1,089              1,089             1,089              1,077
R-squared                                          0.006              0.006             0.001              0.001
Number of VOs                                        90                 90               90                  90
                             Note: Robust standard errors are clustered at the VO Level.
                                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
    TABLE 4: VO COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP, WEALTH, AND PARTICIPATION

                                  (1)                      (2)
VARIABLES                  =1 if Member of           =1 if Member
                           VO Committee              Purchased in a
                                                     Given Round

Log Total HH Exp.              0.0602***
                                (0.0144)

=1 if Member of VO                                      0.0368*
Committee                                               (0.0202)

Constant                          -0.184               0.428***
                                 (0.129)               (0.0276)

Observations                   1,528                 2,946
R-squared                      0.009                 0.001
       Note: Standard errors are clustered at the VO level
                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




           TABLE 5: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PRICES PREFERRED BY
            COMMITTEE MEMBERS AND PRICE OF VARIETY CHOSEN

                                              (1)
        VARIABLES                           VO Price

        Median Price per KG of               0.267*
        Rice Among VO                        (0.121)
        Committee Members at
        Baseline


        Round FE                               YES
        Block FE                               YES

        Constant                            15.72***
                                             (2.069)

       Observations                          142
       R-squared                           0.203
     Note: Standard errors are clustered at the cluster level,
              where clusters are groups of 5 VOs.
                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                           TABLE 6: MEMBERS’ PARTICIPATION BY WEALTH AND PRICE OF VARIETY CHOSEN

                                       LPM Model                                          Conditional Logit
                            (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)
VARIABLES                 =1 if           =1 if             =1 if             =1 if             =1 if          =1 if
                       Participated    Participated      Participated      Participated     Participated    Participated

   Tot. HH. Exp.       -0.0580***        -0.0448**         -0.0645         -0.281***          -0.220**          -0.285
                         (0.0207)         (0.0201)         (0.103)          (0.0968)           (0.0926)        (0.481)
 Tot. HH. Exp. X       0.00241***       0.00176**          0.00273         0.0118***         0.00874***        0.0120
    VO Price           (0.000717)       (0.000701)        (0.00526)        (0.00322)          (0.00309)       (0.0246)

      Round 2                           -0.149***                                            -0.716***
                                         (0.0394)                                              (0.191)
      Round 3                           -0.178***                                            -0.823***
                                         (0.0410)                                              (0.200)
      Round 4                           -0.154***                                            -0.728***
                                         (0.0560)                                              (0.253)
     VO Price                                            -0.00285                                        -0.00169
                                                         (0.0438)                                         (0.208)
Observations                2,241          2,241           2,241          2,241           2,241            2,241
R-squared                   0.009          0.033           0.009
Number of VOs                 45             45             45             45               45               45
Note: LPM Models include VO level fixed effects. Conditional logit models include VO as the group variable. All
regressions are clustered at the VO level. Total Household Expenditure includes food and non-food expenditure
estimated in the baseline survey. VO Price is the VO level median of the households’ reporte d price offered by the
VO for each round. Prices are de-trended from a linear time trend in months to account for inflation across rounds
and across months within rounds.
                                           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                       TABLE 7: CHANGE IN CONSUMPTION OF RICE BY WEALTH QUINTILE

                        (1)               (2)                  (3)                  (4)                 (5)            (6)
VARIABLES             Δ Rice         Δ Rice Cons.         Δ Rice Cons.         Δ Rice Cons.        Δ Rice Cons.   Δ Rice Cons.
                     Cons. (kg)          (kg)                 (kg)                 (kg)                (kg)           (kg)

                     ALL HHs          1st Quintile         2nd Quintile         3rd Quintile       4th Quintile    5th Quintile

Treatment               0.131            0.946               -1.390*               0.255             -0.00762         1.170*
                       (0.305)          (0.667)              (0.724)              (0.879)             (0.467)         (0.615)
                       [0.536]          [0.086]              [0.024]              [0.696]             [0.844]         [0.082]
Constant             -1.819***          -1.628*               0.538               -2.130*           -1.594***       -4.459***
                       (0.335)          (0.822)              (1.500)              (1.196)             (0.529)         (0.705)

Block FE                YES              YES                   YES                  YES               YES             YES
Round FE                YES              YES                   YES                  YES               YES             YES

Observations           2,818             559                 569                  562                 561               567
R-squared              0.009            0.025               0.022                0.010               0.027             0.059
       Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the cluster level, where clusters are groups of 5 VOs. P-
       values from Cameron, Gelbach, Miller’s (2008) wild cluster bootstrap in brackets. The dependent variable is the
     change in kg of rice consumed in the previous week from the week prior to baseline data collection to the week prior
                                             to midline or endline data collection.
                                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
40
30
20
10
 0




     10          15                           20               25
          Price Paid for 1 Kg. of rice at Market


            FIGURE 1: DENSITY OF UNIT COSTS FOR 1 KG OF RICE
.15
  .1
.05
      0




          0                  10                         20                         30
                             Unit Cost for Kg of Rice in Rs

                   Lowest Exp. Quartile                      Highest Exp. Quartile



              FIGURE 2: DENSITY OF MARKET UNIT COSTS FOR 1 KG OF RICE BY HH EXPENDITURE
FIGURE 3: SURPLUS UTILITY FROM PROGRAM PARTICIPATION
  .6
  .4
  .2
    0




        10                   15                   20                    25                   30
                                          Price (Rs per KG)

                     Prices in FSF                 Prices paid by HH's in control villages



FIGURE 4: DENSITY OF PRICES FROM FSF PROGRAM (TREATMENT VILLAGES) AND MARKET (CONTROL VILLAGES)
                             .55
                               .5
Participation




                             .45
                               .4




                                      7.5                   8                 8.5             9                         9.5                  10
                                                                            Log(total expenditure)

                                                                          1st Tercile                      2nd Tercile
                                                                          3rd Tercile



                                                   FIGURE 5: NON-LINEAR PARTICIPATION RATES BY LOG HH EXPENDITURE
                Notes: Participation in the graph is demeaned at the village level and round level to control for village and round level factors that might be
                related to participation and wealth of village members. The overall mean is added back in to make the quartiles comparable. Log expenditure is
                trimmed at the top and bottom 5 percent of expenditure to exclude outliers where the data is thin.
Mathematical Appendices-For online publication only

Appendix 1: Optimal Choices of q , c, n in the Market and the
Program

     In the market, where q is optimally chosen by the household and the price of a unit of
the staple good is pq , the optimal choices of q , c, and n are:

                        ∗     y (β − α)                 βa                      yδ
                       qm =              ,     c∗
                                                m =        ,         n∗
                                                                      m =
                              ap(β + δ )               β−α                  z (β + δ )

        ∗           ∗             ∗
unless qm <qmin or qm >qmax . If qm <qmin , the optimal choices of q , c, and n are:

                   ∗                       aδpqmin + αy                   δ (y − apqmin )
                  qm = qmin ,      c∗
                                    m =                   ,        n∗
                                                                    m =
                                           pqmin (α + δ )                    z (α + δ )

             ∗
Finally, if qm >qmax , the optimal choices of q , c, and n are:

                   ∗                       aδpqmax + αy                   δ (y − apqmax )
                  qm = qmax ,     c∗
                                   m =                    ,        n∗
                                                                    m =
                                           pqmax (α + δ )                     z (α + δ )

If the household chooses to buy from the program, they take q as exogenously given as qp .
They get a discount on each unit of c purchased, so that the price of a unit of c through
the program is φpqp where φ<1. For households who purchase through the program, the
optimal c and n are:

                                       aδqθ + αy                  δ (y − aqθ)
                                c∗
                                 p =               ,       n∗
                                                            p =
                                       θq (α + δ )                 z (α + δ )




                                                       1
Appendix 2: Proof of Proposition 1

        If W (qp , y ) were a concave function with respect to y for ﬁxed qp , demonstrating Propo-
sition 1 for the general case would only require that W (qp , y )>0 for some y and Proposition
1 would follow directly, but W (qp , y ) is not concave over the entire range of y . So proving
                                                                                  ¯, there
Proposition 1 proceeds in four steps. First, we show that for any ﬁxed income y = y
                                                  ¯)>0. Second, we show that for a ﬁxed value
exists at least one value of qp such that W (qp , y
              ¯ , there exist qL (¯
of income y = y                               y ) with qL (¯
                                  y ) and qH (¯                    y ) such that W (qp , y
                                                           y )<qH (¯                     ¯)>0 for all
                              ¯)<0 for all other qp by showing that W (qp , y
qp in (qL , qH ), and W (qp , y                                             ¯) is a concave function
                                        y ), qH (¯
with respect to qp . Third, we show qL (¯        y ) are increasing functions of y . Finally, we use
the second and third step to show the existence of the yL , yH described in Proposition 1.
        The ﬁrst step in proving Proposition 1 is to show the following Lemma:
                        ¯, W (qp , y
Lemma 1: For a ﬁxed y = y          ¯) is positive for at least one value of qp .
        Lemma 1 states that no matter which income is chosen, there is at least one quality of
grain that the program could choose to oﬀer and the household would be willing to participate
in the program. To prove Lemma 1, imagine that the program chooses to subsidize the same
quality of grain that the household would have chosen to consume at the market, so that
the household consumes the same quality grain, but gets it a cheaper price if the grain is
purchased from the program. In this case:

                           ∗                      φα + β (1 − φ) + δ       1
                       W (qm  ¯) = (α + δ )ln
                             ,y                                      + αln   >0
                                                        α+δ                φ

since φ<1 and we have assumed that β>α, which proves the lemma.
        The next step in proving Proposition 1 is to demonstrate the following:
Lemma 2: For a ﬁxed value of income y , there exist qL (y ) and qH (y ) with qL (y )<qH (y ) such
that W (qp , y )>0 for all qp in (qL (y ), qH (y )), and W (qp , y )<0 for all other qp .
                                                      ¯) is concave. Concavity of W (qp , y
        Lemma 2 can be proven by showing that W (qp , y                                   ¯),
along with the existence of a global maximum with respect to qp and Lemma 1, implies that
for any choice of y there exist q1 (y ), q2 (y ) such that W (q1 , y ) = W (q2 , y ) = 0.1 Deﬁne qH =
   1
       A detailed proof of this statement is in Appendix 3.


                                                       2
                                                                   ¯) implies that W (qp , y
max(q1 , qmin ) and qL = max(q2 , qmax ). The concavity of W (qp , y                       ¯)>0
for all qp in (qL , qH ) and W (qp ) ≤ 0 for all qp not in (qL , qH ), which proves Lemma 2.
     Next, we show that qL (y ), qH (y ) are increasing functions of y , by demonstrating the
following:
Lemma 3:
Deﬁne yH , yL such that yH >yL .
3.a. The lowest quality oﬀered by the program for which a household of income yL is willing
to participate is weakly lower than the lowest quality that would induce a household of income
yH to participate. The inequality is strict if the lowest quality for which is a household of
income yH would be willing to participate is greater than qmin .
3.b. Similarly, the highest quality oﬀered by the program for which a household of income yL
would be willing to participate is weakly lower than the highest quality which would induce
a household of income yH to participate, with strict inequality when the highest quality for
which a household of income yL would be willing to participate is less than qmax .2
     Lemma 3 can be proven by focusing on three points on the range qp : q1 (y ), q2 (y ) and a
       ∗
point qp − just to the left of the qp where W (qp , y ) attains its maximum and where W (qp −
 , y )>0. Deﬁne yL , yH with yL <yH and suppose that q1 (yL )>q1 (yH ). Then it would have to
                 ∂W (qp , yH )   ∂W (qp , yL )                                   ∂W (qp , y )
be the case that               <               , which contradicts the fact that              >0 .
                       ∂qp          ∂qp                                           ∂qp ∂y
A more detailed proof is in Appendix 4.
     With Lemmas 1-3, we are ready to prove Proposition 1. Suppose qp = qmin . By Lemma
2, W (qmin , y ) ≥ 0 for any y such that q1 (y ) ≤ qmin . By Lemma 3 and the continuity of
W (qp , y ) w.r.t. y , there exists y such that W (qmin , y ) = 0. Deﬁne this y as yH (qmin ). For all
y<yH (qmin ), W (qmin , y )>0, and for all y ≥ yH (qmin ), W ≤ 0.
     Suppose qp = qmax . By Lemma 2, W (qmax , y ) ≥ 0 for any y where q2 (y ) ≥ qmax . By
Lemma 3 and the continuity of W (qp , y ) w.r.t. y , there exists y such that W (qmax , y ) = 0.
Deﬁne this y as yL (qmax ). For all y>yL (qmax ), W (qmax , y )>0, and for all y ≤ yL (qmax ),
   2
     Lemma 3 can also be expressed in terms of the notation already introduced. For any yH , yL such that
yH >yL :
  3.a. qL (yL ) ≤ qL (yH ) and qL (yL ) = qL (yH ) iﬀ qL (yL ) = qL (yH ) = qmin
  3.b. qH (yL ) ≤ qH (yH ) and qH (yL ) = qH (yH ) iﬀ qH (yL ) = qH (yH ) = qmax .


                                                   3
W ≤ 0.
                                       ¯. Following from the proof of Lemma 2, we can deﬁne
     For qp in (qmin , qmax ), ﬁx qp = q
functions q1 (y ) and q2 (y ) for which we must have W (q1 (y ), y ) = W (q2 (y ), y ) = 0. By Lemma
3, both functions q1 (y ) and q2 (y ) are continuous and monotonically increasing in y , which
implies that the inverse of each function exists. Deﬁne yH (qp ) as the inverse of q1 (y ) and
                                                                          q ), q
yL (qp ) as the inverse of q2 (y ). By Lemma 3, yL (q ) < yH (q ). W (yL (¯                q ), q
                                                                               ¯) = W (yH (¯    ¯) = 0,
                                                                                                 ¯).
which proves that if qp is in (qmin , qmax ), there are at least two roots to the function W (y, q
                                                                q , y1 ) = W (¯
     Now suppose there are three points y1 <y2 <y3 such that W (¯                           q , y3 ) =
                                                                              q , y2 ) = W (¯
0.   By Lemma 2, we have that for ﬁxed y , we can deﬁne qL (y ) and qH (y ) such that
W (qL (y ), y ) = W (qH (y ), y ) = 0, and by Lemma 3, it must the case that qL (y1 )<qL (y2 )<qL (y3 )
                                             ¯ = qH (y1 ). Then qH (y2 )>q
and qH (y1 )<qH (y2 )<qH (y3 ). Suppose that q                                          ¯. Ad-
                                                                         ¯ and qH (y3 )>q
                         ¯ = qL (y2 ). Then qL (y3 )>q
ditionally, suppose that q                           ¯. But by Lemma 2, qL (y3 ) and qH (y3 )
                                                                                q , y3 ) = 0.
are the only values of qp for which W (qp , y3 ) = 0, which contradicts that W (¯
                                                                  q , y ) = 0.
Therefore, there cannot be more than two points in y such that W (¯
                                                                  q , y )>0. The above argument
     All that remains to be shown is that for y in (yL , yH ), W (¯
                                                                  q , y ), which implies that
shows that there cannot be more than two roots of the function W (¯
          q , y )<0 or W (¯
either W (¯               q , y )>0 in the region (yL , yH ). Therefore, if we can ﬁnd one point
                         q , y )>0, the function must be positive over the entire region. In
y in the region where W (¯
order to have two roots, the function must have a stationary point between the two roots.
        ∂W (qp , y )
Solving              for 0 gives:
            ∂y
                                          aφqp (β + δ )
                                     y∗ =
                                            β−α
Since there is only one point where the derivative of the function is 0, this must be the
stationary point, and therefore y ∗ must be in the region bounded by the two roots (yL , yH ).
Substituting y ∗ into W (qp , y ) gives:

                                                        1
                                           W = β ln
                                                        φ

Which is >0 since φ<1.


                                                  4
                                            ¯ there exist yL (¯
     We have shown: 1. That for a ﬁxed qp = q                          q ) with yL (¯
                                                              q ), yH (¯                    q)
                                                                                    q )<yH (¯
such that W (¯       q )) ≥ 0 and W (¯
             q , yL (¯                       q )) ≥ 0 and 2. For all y in (yL , yH ), W (¯
                                     q , yH (¯                                           q , y )>0,
which proves the Proposition.




                                                5
Appendix 3: Proof that a continuous, concave function y = f (x)
with y>0 at the function’s global maximum has exactly two roots
over the range x = (−∞, ∞).

     By the fact that f (x) is a concave function, we have that:


                                    f (z ) ≤ f (x) + f (x)(z − x)


     Deﬁne x∗ as the value of x such that f (x) takes a global maximum. By assumption,
f (x∗ )>0. Then there exists >0 such that f (x∗ + )>0 and f (x∗ − )>0.
                                        f (x1 )x1 − f (x1 )
     Deﬁne x1 = x∗ − and z1 =                               .
                                              f (x1 )
                                        f (x1 )x1 − f (x1 )
     Then f (z1 ) ≤ f (x1 ) + f (x1 )
                                            f (x1 )x1
     The concavity of f (x) implies that f (x1 )<0, since f (x∗ ) = 0 and x1 <x∗ . Using this
fact, we can simplify the above to:
                                                 f (z1 ) ≤ 0

Using again the fact that f (x1 )<0, we have that z1 <x1 <x∗ , which proves that there is a
point z1 <x∗ , such that f (z1 ) ≤ 0. If f (z1 ) = 0, z1 is a root. If f (z1 )<0, then the fact
that f (x) is continuous and f (x∗ )>0 implies that there must exist a point xlbar in the range
(z1 , x∗ ) such that f (x) = 0, which proves the existence of one root where xlbar <x∗ .
     To prove that there is a second root xhbar >x∗ , deﬁne x2 = x ∗ + and the proof proceeds
exactly as above.
     Therefore there are at least 2 roots, xlbar and xhbar . To prove that these are the only
roots, suppose that q1 , q2 , q3 are all roots of W , so that W (q1 ) = W (q2 ) = W (q3 ) = 0, and
q1 < q2 < q3 . By concavity of W , W (z )>W (q1 ) and W (z )>W (q3 ) for all z in (q1 , q3 ), which
contradicts that W (q2 ) = 0. Therefore, q2 cannot be a root of W , and there are at most 2
roots.
     To apply this proof to Lemma 2, we have only to show that W (qp , y )>0 at the global


                                                      6
maximum. Setting the derivative of W (qp , y ) w.r.t. qp equal to 0 and solving for qp gives q ∗ ,
the maximand of W (qp , y ). Substituting q ∗ into W (qp , y ) gives:

                                                           1
                                     W (q ∗ , y ) = β ln     >0
                                                           φ

where the last inequality is true since φ<1.




                                                  7
Appendix 4: Detailed Proof of Lemma 3

     We will do the proof only for 3.a. concerning qL (y ). The proof for 3.b. concerning qH (y )
is similar.The proof follows two cases: 1. q1 (yL ) ≤ qmin and 2. q1 (yL )>qmin .

Case 1: q1 (yL )>qmin

The proof of Lemma 3 uses relies on characterizing four points on the qp axis:
            ∗
        1. qp : The qp which maximizes W (qp , yL ) for some ﬁxed y = yL
            ∗                                  ∗
        2. qp − : A point just to the left of qp
        3. q1 (yL ) :The point where W (qp , yL ) = 0
        4. q1 (yH ): The point where W (qp , yH ) = 0 with yH >yL
To clarify the interpretation of each point described in the proof, W (qp , y ) is graphed below
for two values of y . In the graph, the blue line is W plotted over qp for y = yL , and the red
line is W plotted over qp for y = yH .
To avoid clutter on the graph, the 4 key points are labled as:
      ∗
     qp ∗ = qpstar
      ∗
     qp ∗− = C
     q1 (yL ) = A
     q1 (yH ) = B




                                                8
Figure 1:




The proof follows three basic steps:

                                ∗
Step 1: Characterize the point qp − which will be used in the proof.          is chosen so that:
                  ∗     ∗
     1. q1 (yL )<qp − <qp
     2. W (yL , qp− )>0
                                ∗              ∗
     Step 1 then shows that W (qp − , yL )>W (qp − , yH ).

Step 2: Assume that q1 (yL )>q1 (yH ). This assumption implies that W (qp , yH , ) and W (qp , yL )
                                                                ∗
must cross at some qp between the point ql (yL ) and the point qp − . We will use this crossing
point in Step 3 to prove a contradiction that negates the assumption.
                                                                                     ∂W (qp , yH ) ∂W (qp , yL )
Step 3: At the crossing point described in step 2, it would have to be the case that              <              .
                                                                                          ∂qp         ∂qp
Show that this result contradicts the fact that the following cross partial derivative is positive:

                                                 9
∂W (qp , y )
 ∂qp ∂y

Detailed Steps of the proof:
                                ∗
Step 1: Characterize the point qp − that we will use in the proof of Lemma 3.

                                                                                     ∗
For ﬁxed y , there exists at least one point z1 >q1 (y ) such that 0<W (z1 , y )<W (qp (y ), y ) and
∂W (z1 , y )
             <0.
    ∂y

     Proof: We have shown in the proof of Lemma 2 that there exists q1 (y ) such that
                                 ∗                   1               ∗
W (q1 (y ), y ) = 0 and that W (qp (y ), y ) = βln   φ
                                                          >0. Since qp is the only stationary point of
                                                                ∗                               ∗
the function W (qp , y ) and q1 (y )<q2 (y ), the fact that W (qp (y ), y )>0 implies that q1 <qp . By
                                                                                      ∗
the fact that W (qp , y ) is continuous in qp , there must exist >0 such that qp        − is in the
             ∗           ∗                       δW  (q p , y )                    ∗
range (q1 , qp ) and W (qp − )>0. Evaluating                    at the point qp = qp − gives:
                                                     δy

                                         aφ (β 2 + 2βδ + δ 2 )
                                  −                             <0
                                      (aβ φ + aδ φ + αy + δy )y
                                                                ∗              ∗
     The negative sign on the above derivative implies that W (qp − , yL )>W (qp − , yH ) at
           ∗
the point qp − .
     The graph below demonstrates the proof. qpstar in the graph is the point where
                                                 ∗                                 ∗
W (qp , yL ) attains its maximum of F . At qp = qp − (labeled C in the graph), W (qp − , yL ) =
E , where 0<E<F . The fact that E<F follows from the fact that W (qp , y ) is a local maxi-
mum. The negative sign on the partial derivative at the end of the proof above implies that
     ∗              ∗
W ( qp − , yH )<W (qp − , yL ) as shown by the fact that D<E in the graph.




                                                     10
Figure 2:




Step 2: Assume that q1 (yL )>q1 (yH ). This assumption implies that W (yH , qp ) and W (yL , qp )
                                                                ∗
must cross at some qp between the point ql (yL ) and the point qp − .
     To obtain the contradiction that proves Lemma 3, suppose in the graph that A = q1 (yH )
and B = q1 (yL ) so that q1 (yH )<q1 (yL ). Step 1 demonstrated that W (C, yL )>W (C, yH ). Un-
der the assumption, W (qp , yH ) must intersect both (A, 0) and (C, D) and W (yL , qp ) must
intersect (B, 0) and (C, E ). Now imagine two lines that meet both conditions, there must be a
point where both lines cross. This crossing must happen for any two continuous functions be-
tween these points, including the particular convex function W (qp , y ). Therefore, the assump-
tion that q1 (yL )>q1 (yH ) implies that there must be a point where W (qp , yH ) = W (qp , yL ) in
the range of qp in (B, C ).

Step 3: Show that the result from step 2 contradicts the fact that the cross partial derivative
of W (y, qp ) w.r.t. y , qp is positive.



                                                11
Focus on the point where W (qp , yH ) = W (qp , yL ) in the range of qp in (B, C ). Since
W (yH , qp )>W (yL , qp ) for any point to the left of this crossing point and W (qp , yH )<W (qp , yL )
to any point to the right, it must be the case that:

                                    ∂W (qp , yH )   ∂W (qp , yL )
                                                  <
                                       ∂qp             ∂qp

at the crossing point.
All that is left is to argue why the above implies a contradiction. This can be shown directly
through taking the derivative of W (qp , y ):

                                   ∂W (qp , y )   αφ(α + delta)
                                                =               >0
                                    ∂qp ∂y         (αφqp − y )2
                                                                           ∂W (qp , yL )   ∂W (qp , yH )
The fact that the above derivative is positive implies that for all qp ,                 <
                                                                              ∂qp             ∂qp
for all yH >yL , which contradicts

                                    ∂W (qp , yH )   ∂W (qp , yL )
                                                  <
                                       ∂qp             ∂qp

.
     The assumption that q1 (yH )<q1 (yL ) leads to a contradiction of a known feature of W ,
namely that the cross partial derivative of W w.r.t. y , qp is positive, so we must reject the
assumption. It therefore follows that q1 (yH )>q1 (yL ), which proves Lemma 3.

Case 2: q1 (yL ) ≤ qmin

By Lemma 2, if q1 (yL ) ≤ qmin then qL (yL ) = qmin .
Suppose that q1 (yH ) ≤ qmin , then again from Lemma 2, qL (yH ) = qmin , and we have that
qL (yH ) = qL (yL ).
Now suppose that q1 (yH )>qmin . Then by Lemma 2, qL (yH ) = q1 (yH )>qmin ≥ qL (yL ) which
implies that qL (yH )>qL (yL ) .
Since these are the only two possible cases for q1 (yH ), we have shown that qL (yL ) = qL (yH )


                                                  12
iﬀ qL (yL ) = qL (yH ) = qmin .




                                  13
Appendix 5: Proof of Proposition 4

    To show Proposition 4, ﬁrst assume that all households are willing to participate. Solv-
ing c∗    ∗
     p − cm = 0 for y gives:
                                           a(β + δ )pφqp
                                    y0 =
                                              β−α
    Given that the ﬁrst derivative of the program eﬀect with respect to income is positive
(Proposition 3), for any income less than y0 , the program eﬀect on consumption would be
negative and for any y>y0 , the program eﬀect would be positive.
    To prove the proposition, we have only to show that W (y0 , qp )>0, so that there are
participants with income just above and just below y0 . Substituting y0 into W gives:

                                                    1
                                      W = β ∗ ln
                                                    φ

which is >0 since φ<1. At the point where the program eﬀect is 0, households receive a level
of surplus utility from program participation which is strictly positive, implying that they
are willing to participate in the program. Since W is a continuous function, there exists >0
such that W (qp , y0 − )>0 and W (qp , y0 + )>0. By Proposition 3, at y = y0 − , c∗    ∗
                                                                                  p − cm <0

and at y0 + , c∗    ∗
               p − cm >0, which proves Proposition 4.




                                             14
