  STRATEGIC NOTE




 Cash Transfers
in Humanitarian
    Contexts
       Strategic Note

  Cash Transfers in
Humanitarian Contexts

    Final draft prepared for the Principals of the
         Inter-Agency Standing Committee

               The World Bank Group

                     June 2016
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank

1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed here do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of
the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in
this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because the World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowl-
edge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this
work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the
Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail:
pubrights@worldbank.org.

Photos: iStock.com/EdStock (cover); iStock.com/Guenter Guni (p. iv); iStock.com/Joel Carillet (p. viii)

Cover design/layout and editing: Nita Congress
                               Contents



          Acknowledgments  v
       Executive summary  vii
                   Abbreviations  xi
                  1. Background  1
     2.  Overarching issues  2
                         3. Context  3
4.  Areas for enhancement  6
                               Notes  21
                     Appendixes  23
                          A.  Evidence paper    25
                      B.  Terms of reference    57
  C.  Minutes of IASC–World Bank meeting        59
           D.  Staff and agencies consulted     61
     E.  Compilation of interview responses     62
                       F.  Workshop outputs     73
                   G.  Documents consulted      82



                                                     iii
                                       Acknowledgments




T
         his note was produced under the strategic leadership of Colin Bruce, Senior Adviser in the Office
         of the President, and spearheaded by Jehan Arulpragasam, Practice Manager, Social Protection
         and Labor Global Practice (GSPDR). The core team included Ugo Gentilini, Senior Social Protection
Specialist, GSPDR; Stephen Anderson, Independent Consultant, FEG; Matthew Hobson, Senior Social Pro-
tection Specialist, GSPDR; and Andrew James Roberts, Senior Operations Officer, Social, Urban, Rural and
Resilience Global Practice (GSURR).


The team wishes to express its gratitude to all Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) members of the
Cash Strategic Task Group as well as officials from country Cash Working Groups for their insightful, con-
structive, and supportive approach throughout the consultation and drafting process. Special thanks go to
members of the “Engine Room”—staff appointed by each of the IASC principals to engage on technical
aspects in the production of the note, including phone interviews and a one-day workshop held March 21 in
Washington, D.C. Special thanks also to the IASC Secretariat and, in particular, Astrid Van Genderen Stort
for facilitating the early stages of the process.


Non-IASC experts also provided invaluable advice via phone interviews, including representatives from the
U.K. Department for International Development, the European Commission Humanitarian Aid Office, the
Overseas Development Institute, and the United States Agency for International Development. A full list of
people interviewed is provided in appendix D.


The drafting process was also informed by technical advice from an internal working group, including
Julie Dana (Lead Financial Officer, GFM3A), Caroline Bahnson (Senior Operations Officer, GCFDR), Sima
W. Kanaan (Lead Social Development Specialist, GSURR), Benedicte Leroy De La Briere (Lead Economist,
GCGDR), and Holger Kray (Lead Agriculture Economist, GFA13).


Finally, the Evidence Paper (appendix A) benefited enormously from discussions with Berk Ozler, David
McKenzie, David Evans, Emanuela Galasso, Ruslan Yemtsov, Omar Arias, John Hoddinott, Harold Alderman,
Leslie Elder, Aline Coudouel, and Jumana Qamruddin.




                                                                                                             v
                                      Executive summary




U
           pon request of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) Principals, the World Bank Group
           agreed to lead a process of reviewing key issues and options for significantly scaling up the use
           of cash transfers in the humanitarian space. The IASC agencies have introduced an impressive
number of innovations around this modality, but at present, they still account for no more than 6 percent of
humanitarian assistance. The IASC agencies should now chart the way forward to significantly scale up use
driven by the available evidence. They should also work toward filling evidence gaps on priority issues, such
as the potential of cash to stimulate job creation. Such a scale-up would be very timely as major trends in
policy, technology, concentration of people in urban settings, and market integration are creating a condu-
cive environment for the wider use of cash transfers to meet humanitarian needs.


More countries are also developing national social protection systems in which cash is a significant com-
ponent. The global spread of conditional cash transfers soared from 27 countries in 2008 to 64 in 2014.
Between 2010 and 2013, the number of African countries with unconditional cash transfers doubled to
40 nations. Cash can help facilitate linkages between humanitarian and development approaches. In-kind
assistance will continue to be a strategically important component of humanitarian assistance in the years
to come, though ongoing discussions on humanitarian reform are demanding robust evidence of its effec-
tiveness and efficiency in achieving agreed outcomes.


Cash sheds light on the strengths and challenges of the current humanitarian system and can be a com-
pelling entry point for systemic change. Multipurpose cash in particular can challenge traditional sectoral
responses. To capitalize on this, the composition of humanitarian assistance must be rebalanced to reflect
the rapidly evolving context with clear links to the Grand Bargain and the Secretary-General’s ongoing
structural reform agenda.


Three clusters of priority action areas have been identified to structure the IASC Principals’ engagement:
(1) foundational areas (i.e., clarifying core concepts and principles including how to consider cash), (2) opera-
tional issues (i.e., transfer selection, needs analysis, delivering with common approaches, and preparedness),
and (3) structural elements (i.e., pursuing a multistakeholder agenda with strong governance and responsive
coordination, and ensuring actors build upon and strengthen existing systems). These are detailed below.




                                                                                                                    vii
       Foundational issues
           ■■ Concepts and definitions. The IASC Principals should develop consensus on shared terminol-
              ogy and definitions building on work initiated by actors such as actors such as the World Food
              Programme, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the Cash Learning Partnership,
              the U.K. Department for International Development, and the European Commission Humanitarian
              Aid Office.


           ■■ Systematic equity in consideration. The IASC should agree to equally and consistently con-
              sider cash alongside other forms of humanitarian assistance.




       Operational issues
           ■■ Assessments. Needs assessment should be multisectoral, with clear links between needs
              assessments, response analysis, and the response plan. Assessments should also include the
              analysis of markets around a range of humanitarian objectives and across sectors. The IASC
              should ensure that assessment and monitoring data sets, analytical methods, and findings are
              readily available to the broader humanitarian and development communities through a common
              accessible repository. The IASC should test whether and under what circumstances a separation
              of responsibility for assessments and implementation could result in a more accountable division
              of responsibilities and activities.


           ■■ Drivers of transfer selection. Cash transfers hold the potential to provide beneficiaries with
              choice, strengthen local markets, engage the private sector (e.g., banking and financial services),
              and empower people and communities. The IASC should ensure that the most appropriate trans-
              fer modality, including combinations thereof, are context- and sector-specific and emerge from
              careful response analyses. Issues to consider include program objectives, the level of market
              functionality, predicted cost-effectiveness, implementation capacity and financial infrastructure,
              the ability to manage risks such as those around protection and gender, beneficiaries’ prefer-
              ences, and pragmatic considerations on resource availability.


           ■■ Common programming approaches. A priority reform area should be to reduce the current
              fragmentation in approaches throughout the programming cycle by moving to common systems
              that work for all parties. Where program design does not have the benefit of building on common
              approaches, IASC programs should help develop them and support linkages to government sys-
              tems when possible.


           ■■ Leveraging and improving existing national systems. There is extensive scope for build-
              ing upon and improving existing national systems as central to humanitarian action. In general,
              humanitarian actors should demonstrate the rationale for not using existing national systems to




viii   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
      provide assistance. To this end, the IASC should develop a checklist of issues to consider in decid-
      ing whether and to what extent government structures can be leveraged to attain humanitarian
      objectives. Where appropriate, and while ensuring adherence to humanitarian principles, the IASC
      should align with and complement efforts to build national systems, as well as promote much a
      stronger engagement and role for governments and national actors in humanitarian assistance.


  ■■ Preparedness. There is a strong need for increased preparedness investments by the IASC
     to use cash as a response, including anticipating the evolving conditions of markets, ensuring
     an up-to-date cash-related mapping of service providers, forging pre-agreements with delivery
     institutions, developing risk financing strategies in advance to ensure funds are available to rap-
     idly respond, and gaining an in-depth understanding of regulations and government capacities.




Structural issues
  ■■ Generation and use of evidence. The IASC should develop a global research strategy to fill
     evidence gaps on the relative performance of transfer modalities, particularly beyond food secu-
     rity objectives, as well as on the choice and trade-offs between unconditional and conditional
     interventions in humanitarian settings.


  ■■ Coordination. Strong leadership and guidance are required to clarify the rules of the game, the
     architecture, and the roles and responsibilities that will best facilitate the scaling up of cash by
     individual agencies as well as identifying entry points for common programming. The Cash Work-
     ing Groups that emerged spontaneously in over 20 countries should be formalized into Response
     Analysis Groups providing technical support to clusters on cash and in-kind transfers.


  ■■ Multi-actor agenda. Cash is a broad agenda that affects actors in both the humanitarian and
     development spheres. While cash alone will not lead to the transformation required in the overall
     system, it does provide a window for the IASC to lead a discussion on the roles and responsi-
     bilities of different stakeholders. Donors should commit to upstream coordination and enhanced
     donor policy, communication, and technical harmonization. The IASC should promote the contin-
     ued strong engagement of civil society and nongovernmental actors in the scaling up of cash. The
     IASC should increase its engagement with the private sector as a potential major partner in the
     scaling up of cash, while ensuring respect for humanitarian principles.




                                        Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts             ix
                                                              Abbreviations



CaLP	   Cash Learning Partnership


CWG	    Cash Working Group


DFID	   Department for International Development


ECHO	   European Commission Humanitarian Aid Office


FAC	    Food Aid Convention, now Food Assistance Convention


FAO	    Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations


IASC	   Inter-Agency Standing Committee


MPCT	   multipurpose cash transfer


NGO	    nongovernmental organization


RAG	    Response Analysis Group


UNHCR	 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees


WFP	    World Food Programme


WHS	    World Humanitarian Summit




                                                                         xi
                                               1. Background
                                           1. Background
1.  Upon request of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) Principals at their meeting on December
11, 2015, the World Bank agreed to coordinate a process of reviewing key issues and options for signifi-
cantly scaling up the use of multipurpose cash transfers (MPCTs; including digital cash and vouchers) in
the humanitarian space. This note lays out the main findings and options emerging from the process. The
main text is complemented by a set of seven appendixes, detailing the process and feedback received, as
well as presenting a thorough review of the evidence and evidence gaps in the comparative effectiveness of
cash and in-kind programs across humanitarian objectives. A review of the evidence of in-kind programs,
on their own, is beyond the scope of this note.


2.  Specific activities were defined in a subsequent meeting (see appendixes B and C), and include
the following: (1) review the evidence of existing cash programming in the field; and (2) develop strategic
recommendations on cash programming, including coordination based on analysis of commonalities and
specificities, cost-effectiveness, and direct applicability to people’s needs. This note centers on the latter,
while the former is included as appendix A, “Humanitarian Cash and In-Kind Transfers across Sectors:
Selection, Performance, and Research Priorities.”


3.  A core team from the World Bank, together with a senior independent consultant, completed
more than 25 meetings with dozens of agencies and country representatives (appendix D). Together
with the extensive literature reviewed, those consultations were instrumental in capturing good practice
and identifying strategic recommendations. The results of these interviews were documented in an anony-
mous format and can be found in appendix E.


4.  This note synthesizes main issues and findings from the process, including defining overarching
issues (next section), setting out the overall context in which a wider use of cash should be considered
(section 3), and identifying the specific areas to help unleash a wider use of cash transfers when and where
appropriate (section 4).



Figure: Select process milestones

                                                                                           World Humanitarian
      Note request                                                        Submission of    Summit, including      Submission of
        by IASC                   Consultations         Workshop            first draft      Grand Bargain          final draft




     December 2015                February 2016        March 2016           April 2016          May 2016            June 2016




                                                                                                                                1
     2. Overarcing
2.  Overarching    Issues
                issues
        ■■ Major trends in policy, technology, concentration of people in urban settings, and market
           integration are creating a more conducive environment for the wider use of cash transfers
           to meet humanitarian needs and objectives. To capitalize on this, the composition of humani-
           tarian assistance must be rebalanced to reflect the rapidly evolving context.


        ■■ Cash sheds light on the strengths and challenges of the current humanitarian system
           and can be a compelling entry point for systemic change. MPCTs in particular can challenge
           traditional sectoral responses.


        ■■ With humanitarian aid directed toward increasingly protracted crises,1 cash could serve
           as a mechanism for scaling up humanitarian and development funding and activities that,
           when appropriate, can help reduce costs and complexity. More host countries have also devel-
           oped or are developing social protection systems including cash and other flexible instruments. Part
           of such a “systems agenda” should include the strengthening of both the demand and supply sides
           of national services to maximize outcomes from cash programs (e.g., on health status).


        ■■ The use of cash demonstrates the need for strong leadership by the IASC or other coordi-
           nating mechanism to drive the greater use of common assessments and systems required
           for more effective programming, including cash. This builds on the emerging innovations
           in response to crises such as Ethiopia, Kenya, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, and the Philippines,
           among others. Having strong government ownership and leadership of these processes, whether
           at the national or subnational level, is feasible—especially if the international community honors
           its commitment to capacity building in these areas.


        ■■ A proactive change management strategy should outline the principles and structures to
           drive reforms and directly address the new attitudes and incentives required. This aligns
           with the broad consensus for much greater linkages between humanitarian and development
           approaches, including a wider engagement with national governments and the private sector.


        ■■ Part of the unfinished agenda around cash is further developing the evidence base. The
           note reviewed the evidence that is available for humanitarian settings. In areas where the evidence
           base does not exist (e.g., health, education, and shelter) or is limited (e.g., nutrition), lessons could
           be learned from the use of other innovations, such as results-based financing and vouchers, while
           evidence building in specific humanitarian contexts is accelerated. Evidence about the effective-
           ness of humanitarian support when provided only in kind was beyond the scope of this note.


        ■■ Cash is inherently a multi-actor and multisector agenda. Each actor—whether an IASC
           member, a national government, a donor, the private sector, or civil society—is critical in ensuring
           that potential systemic improvements are realized.




2   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
                                                                 3. Context
                                                             3. Context
5.  According to recent estimates, about 94 percent of total humanitarian assistance is provided
in kind. Even within the current cash portfolio, cash is predominantly used to pursue food security
and livelihoods objectives (see appendix A). This configuration is being increasingly challenged on
many fronts, and the humanitarian architecture is recognizing the inherent limitations stemming from an
unbalanced, low level of cash assistance. For example, the World Humanitarian Summit (WHS) Secretar-
iat’s final report on the WHS global consultations emphasized the need to “generate a new architecture
for supporting humanitarian cash transfers.” The recent report by the High-Level Panel on Humanitarian
Financing Report called for “the use of unconditional and predictable cash in humanitarian settings to be
rapidly scaled up,” while the report of the Secretary-General for the WHS further recommended the use of
“cash-based programming as the preferred and default method of support.”


6.  The fact that humanitarian assistance tends to gravitate around in-kind provisions has deep
historical roots. For instance, over the 1960s and 1970s, a number of high-income countries nurtured
generous systems of domestic agricultural subsidies. Such measures generated high surpluses of com-
modities, which, in turn, were provided as in-kind food aid to developing countries facing deficits in food
availability. In 1970, about 13.3 million tons of food aid were delivered globally, especially through trans-
oceanic shipments. Institutional mechanisms such as the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) Consultative Subcommittee on Surplus Disposal, and later the Food Aid Convention (FAC),
emerged and helped discipline the international use and commitments of in-kind assistance.


7.  Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, reforms in donor approaches—especially in Europe—
decoupled the provision of international in-kind assistance from domestic agricultural goals. This
reduced global in-kind food deliveries, but within such a shrinking pool of in-kind resources, an increasing
degree of flexibility was accorded to procure food in developing countries. As a result, the share of locally
procured in-kind commodities grew from 9 percent in 1990 to nearly 33 percent in 2005, including an
increasing attention to food quality and nutritional standards. Those procurement practices were the result
of greater flexibility in resources, but also of enhanced performance and larger transformations in agrifood
systems. Growing per capita incomes and consumption patterns provided an entry point for organized,
larger-scale retail outlets in urban markets, epitomized by the rapid rise of supermarkets across Africa and
Asia.


8.  Similar market conditions are likely to underpin humanitarian crises as they become more
spatially concentrated. Urban areas host most of the world’s population and are expected to assimilate,
by 2050, an additional 2.4 billion people, with 9 out of the 10 fastest urbanizing countries in Sub-Saharan
Africa. While urban areas are often the engine of economic opportunity, they will also be increasingly
exposed to disaster risks, which are projected to affect 870 million urban dwellers.




                                            Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts            3
    9.  The combination of functioning markets and flexible resources has led to an increase in the
    use of cash to respond to emergencies. For example, in 2005, cash was an important part of the
    response to the Indian Ocean tsunami, as well as being introduced in protracted crises (e.g., Ethiopia) and
    conflict settings (e.g., Somalia). By 2012, the FAC had gradually evolved into a broader platform, the Food
    Assistance Convention, which included cash transfers and vouchers as well as in-kind food (which by 2012
    had dropped by over 60 percent from the food aid 1970 level, accounting for 4.7 million tons).


    10.  This growing diversity and flexibility in interventions was also reflected in the emergence
    of national social protection systems. Between 2010 and 2013, the number of African countries with
    unconditional cash transfers doubled, with such programs currently present in 40 nations. Similarly, the
    global spread of conditional cash transfers soared from 27 countries in 2008 to 64 in 2014. Innovations in
    social protection are under way across low- and middle-income countries, including in terms of building
    systems that are both robust and flexible. Indeed, social protection systems have been increasingly lever-
    aged to help respond to humanitarian crises, including in contexts as diverse as Ethiopia, Lebanon, Niger,
    the West Bank and Gaza, and the Philippines.


    11.  The evolution of technology has also provided favorable conditions for the use of cash.
    Increasingly, governments and donors are looking to transition their social protection payments from cash
    to electronic. This momentum toward e-payments rests on the promise of improving transparency, reduc-
    ing leakage, and decreasing costs on the one hand; and facilitating value-added services for beneficiaries
    through financial access on the other. The rapid growth of mobile phones and point-of-sale devices has
    created an opportunity to reach more poor people than ever before. For instance, nearly 7 of 10 people
    in the bottom fifth of the population in developing countries own a mobile phone, improving their access
    to markets and services. In Kenya, for example, the cost of sending remittances dropped by as much as
    90 percent after the introduction of M-Pesa, a digital payment system.


    12.  Similarly, the price of biometric technology and smart cards has fallen to levels that make
    mass enrollment into electronic identification systems possible. Digital identity systems can provide
    better access to services for the 1.5 billion people who lack formal identification records, such as a birth
    certificate. This has been demonstrated recently in two of the world’s most populous countries, India
    and Indonesia. There, digital systems are being used to open bank accounts, monitor attendance of civil
    servants, and identify recipients of government programs. Importantly, many of these technological inno-
    vations—e.g., biometric verification of beneficiaries’ identity—are sparking more efficient administration
    of programs across transfer modalities, including being applicable to cash, vouchers, and in-kind transfers.


    13.  Despite the trends outlined above, in-kind assistance will continue to be a strategically
    important component of humanitarian assistance in the years to come, though ongoing discus-
    sions on humanitarian reform are demanding robust evidence of its effectiveness and efficiency
    in achieving agreed outcomes. Complex contextual situations during times of emergency will continue to
    call for some in-kind support in specific instances. The interconnection of markets might present structural
    risks, including spreading crises swiftly and fueling volatility in prices of basic commodities. Connectivity
    and the penetration of technology are highly uneven across and within countries, often leaving the poorest




4   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
and most vulnerable left behind. Both technological and social service delivery infrastructure and markets
are often severely disrupted as a result of emergencies, or are seldom functional at adequate scale in
complex crises and remote areas. And the critical nature of some objectives and activities pursued by the
humanitarian community may not be achievable through local market mechanisms alone—e.g., public
health interventions such as preventive mass vaccination; management of severe malnutrition; or water,
sanitation, and hygiene–related objectives. This is also an area where experimentation and evidence build-
ing should be prioritized.


14.  Taken together, the fundamental, long-term trends in concentration of people, economic
activity, and technology are creating a landscape that is increasingly conducive for cash as an
appropriate humanitarian response. The growing experiences with cash transfers over 2005–16 are
promising, yet these seem dwarfed by their full potential. Trends in development and technology are creat-
ing more favorable conditions for a significant increase in the share of cash within the humanitarian port-
folio beyond its current 6 percent level. This opportunity is reflected in the aspirations of the humanitarian
community, as noted above. Strategically aligning the composition of humanitarian assistance with evolving
21st century developments would allow for more systematic consideration of cash on par with in-kind
transfers. While progress has been made on this front, the next section discusses areas that would require
further attention for rebalancing modalities of humanitarian assistance and meeting stated aspirations of
significantly enhancing the use of cash when and where appropriate.




                                            Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts             5
     4. Areas
4.  Areas      for
          for enhancement
    15.  The IASC agencies have been leaders in promoting the use of cash in humanitarian contexts
    and should be commended for impressive levels of innovation, collaboration, and flexibility. Even in the
    most difficult of situations, there have been consistent and very positive signs of adaptation and a willingness
    to work differently. A compelling example is the organic establishment of over 20 country-level Cash Working
    Groups (CWGs) formed to respond to rapidly changing demands. It is this impressive level of effort that should
    now be solidified and taken to the next level through an ambitious, proactive, and forward-looking strategy.


    16.  In order to proactively lead on the cash agenda in humanitarian situations, 10 priority action
    areas have been identified to structure the IASC Principals’ engagement. These include


         ■■ Foundational areas (i.e., clarifying core concepts and principles including how to consider cash);


         ■■ Operational issues (i.e., transfer selection, needs analysis, delivering with common approaches,
            and preparedness); and


         ■■ Structural elements (i.e., pursuing a multistakeholder agenda with strong governance and respon-
            sive coordination, and ensuring actors build upon and strengthen existing systems).


    All of these themes must be grounded in a more robust evidence base to ensure that decisions are guided
    by an understanding of how to reach the best possible outcomes for beneficiaries.


    17.  The agenda for action should be seen within the wider changes to the humanitarian system.
    These changes are articulated by the U.N. Secretary-General in the report One Humanity, Shared Responsibility
    and in the report of the High-Level Panel on Humanitarian Financing, Too Important to Fail—Addressing the
    Humanitarian Financial Gap, including the negotiations held as part of the Grand Bargain process.2 Changes
    made within the cash agenda can only go so far in addressing some of the more systemic issues inherent in the
    humanitarian architecture. Where relevant, the links to the systemwide change agenda will be noted, with the
    reminder that changes in cash are necessary but not sufficient to realize the full potential of humanitarian action.




    4.1  Concepts and definitions
    18.  The IASC Principals should galvanize action in developing consensus on shared terminology
    and definitions, including building on work initiated by actors such as the World Food Programme
    (WFP), the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the Cash Learning Partner-
    ship (CaLP), the U.K. Department for International Development (DFID), and the European Commis-
    sion Humanitarian Aid Office (ECHO). Clear guiding principles are lacking at the strategic level to guide
    dialogue on choices related to cash programming. For example, there is diversity in views on issues such




6   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
as whether value and commodity-based vouchers are part of the cash or in-kind family; on the nature and
objectives of MPCTs; and on a host of terms including modalities, unconditional, conditional, and restricted
use, among others. It would be useful to ensure that all IASC agencies are aware of available definitions,
collegially review them, reach consensus, and, through their Principals, formally adopt them.




  I   n UNHCR’s 2015 “Operational Guidelines for Cash-
      Based Interventions in Displacement Settings,” the types
   of cash-based interventions for refugees are described
                                                                   regarding commodities, retailer, or location. Others
                                                                   suggest MPCTs should only be a cash transfer equivalent
                                                                   to the amount of several in-kind benefits designed to meet
   as including cash transfers and vouchers. DFID’s view,          basic needs; others suggest they should be small, regular
   however, is that cash-based interventions cannot include        transfers during emergencies. There is no agreement on
   vouchers, since these typically contain de facto restrictions   whether MPCTs should be conditional or unconditional.




4.2  Systematic equity in consideration
19.  The IASC should positively advocate for agencies to consider cash as a modality, but allow
room for in-kind support when conditions are not conducive. Cash is a modality and not a sector
or objective per se. However, at present, cash is not on an equal footing with other modalities and the
humanitarian system is largely skewed toward the use of in-kind transfers. As mentioned earlier, this has
historical roots that are no longer aligned with the current expectations and options of beneficiaries and
other stakeholders. Evidence suggests that, on average, they can be less efficient than cash, although
under certain conditions they can be efficient humanitarian interventions (see appendix A). Cash must be
equally and consistently considered for each objective alongside other forms of humanitarian assistance.




4.3 Assessments
20.  The needs assessment process is largely conducted with a sectoral lens, with analysis often
reflecting narrow agency mandates instead of a consistent and cohesive multisectoral view. Cash
transfers have highlighted the need to broaden the scope and uptake of such cross-sector approaches,
and point to the information and process gaps to be addressed to inform appropriate responses. The IASC
has recognized the challenge of sector-driven assessments and created the IASC Needs Assessment Task
Force, whose aim, among others, is to develop a set of tools and products harmonizing and promoting
cross-sector needs assessment initiatives. Specifically, the task force has developed two main tools:


      ■■ The Multi-Cluster/Sector Initial Rapid Assessment (MIRA) Manual to undertake a joint multisector
         assessment in the earliest days of a crisis or change, and guide subsequent in-depth sectoral
         assessments


      ■■ The Humanitarian Dashboard to consolidate needs assessment and response information, and
         present a shared analysis of a humanitarian situation3




                                            Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                      7
    21.  In principle, a systematic consideration of cash highlights the need for clear links between
    needs assessment and response analysis. The challenge is how to include cash-specific issues in these
    and other assessment tools without overburdening the process. Cash clearly highlights the importance
    of an integrated “all-actors” assessment of needs that leads to both a coherent and integrated response
    analysis and a sectorwide response plan, with clear people-oriented outcome objectives.


    22.  Need assessments, however, may not be a one-off process. Estimating beneficiary needs may
    involve multiple iterations over the course of the emergency to reflect changing circumstances and latest
    information. Currently, when the situation becomes relatively stable, detailed emergency assessments are
    commissioned, depending on the type and magnitude of the crisis.4 There are also numerous smaller sub-
    national emergency assessments that do not necessarily receive international attention but nevertheless
    are important to adequately address the targeted outcomes. In these cases, it is often difficult to get suf-
    ficient and timely traction for larger joint assessment and analysis due to relevance, funding, and technical
    resource constraints of partners. In this regard, the IASC could take steps to ensure that assessment and
    monitoring data sets,5 analytical methods, and findings are readily available to the broader humanitarian
    and development communities through a common accessible repository.


    23.  Assessments should include analysis of markets around a range of humanitarian objectives
    across sectors. Within these objectives, markets must be assessed, including food security as well as
    other complex markets such as shelter, health, and education. In addition, a closer examination of the
    capacity and quality of the supply side of services (e.g., health clinics) and demand-side aspects would
    help in identifying other possible barriers to accessing services. It is also important to assess financial
    infrastructure, together with understanding existing government structures and programs in advance.6 Bal-
    ancing depth with speed remains a major challenge and points to the need to invest in preparedness to
    address issues in advance of a crisis. Identifying policy and other actions for governments to take to develop
    or stimulate markets and create jobs would be desirable as well.


    24.  A wider use of cash falls within broader efforts to ensure checks and balances between
    diagnostics and programming. This finding was highlighted by several stakeholders as a systemwide
    issue that, however, might be important to acknowledge in the cash context: indeed, the results from
    assessments are key in articulating the objectives programs should pursue and the modalities for doing so.
    As such, there are differing views around the linkages between assessments and implementation. Some
    donors and agencies press for a separation of functions, while others suggest that implementers are best
    placed to understand needs and are more accountable to beneficiaries.


    25.  The issue of separating responsibilities for assessments and implementation has been raised
    previously in a number of contexts. Among these are the U.N. Secretary-General report, One Humanity,
    Shared Responsibility ; the report of the High-Level Panel on Humanitarian Financing, Too Important to Fail—
    Addressing the Humanitarian Financial Gap; and commitments under the Grand Bargain (see box following). It
    was raised again by some stakeholders in the context of work on strategically scaling up cash.7 A priori, it would
    seem reasonable at least to test the hypothesis of whether, and under what circumstances, a separation of
    functions and other quality assurance approaches may spur a more accountable division of responsibilities and




8   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
activities, and thereby enhance transparency, donor confidence, and predictable multiyear funding.8 At any rate,
it is critical that agencies fully participate in, engage with, and contribute their technical and sectoral expertise
to the assessment process and work to help build appropriate assessment systems in affected countries.9




   T     he Grand Bargain includes a commitment
         to “provide a single, comprehensive, cross-
   sectoral, methodologically sound and impartial overall
                                                                        commitment could set the stage for greater strategic
                                                                        use of cash. Specifically, it allows for harmonized
                                                                        diagnostics, response analysis, and other key activities
   assessment of needs for each crisis to inform strategic              as part of broader contextual analysis. It also unlocks
   decisions on how to respond and fund thereby reducing                opportunities     for   more     systematic     mechanisms
   the number of assessments and appeals produced by                    for coordination, implementation, monitoring and
   individual organisations.” The implementation of this                evaluation of cash transfers.



26.  Rigorous, credible and joint assessment of needs and markets should be complemented by
jointly prepared recommendations on response options. While such analysis is integral in connecting
diagnostics and programming, it is not clearly defined as a practice nor firmly situated within assessment
and operational processes. This analysis should explore how best to address the identified needs (i.e.,




   I   raq has focused on the minimum survival expenditure
       basket as a key entry point to assessment and
   monitoring. The Iraq crisis is one of the most complex
                                                                        upon the existing UNHCR registration database, which
                                                                        was important to beginning implementation quickly. The
                                                                        need for a greater understanding of vulnerability led to
   humanitarian environments, targeting 7.3 million people              a major Vulnerability Assessment of Syrian Refugees
   with 188 humanitarian partners. The Cash Working                     conducted in 2013, 2014, and 2015 in a multi-agency
   Group has developed an MPCT minimum package                          joint approach. The 2015 assessment survey of 4,105
   comprised of three components: (1) identifying and                   households was carried out by three UN agencies to
   agreeing on the survival minimum expenditure basket                  provide insight into many aspects of the living conditions
   among MPCT actors; (2) regular monitoring of prices                  and vulnerability of Syrian refugees at the regional
   in priority governorates; and (3) determining transfer               and country levels. WFP contributed the demography,
   amounts based on 70 percent of the basket, with                      livelihoods, expenditure, food consumption, coping and
   6  percent added to account for health expenditures.                 debt, food sources, food security, infant and young child
   The aim is to then gather feedback from beneficiaries via            feeding, and focus group discussion sections; UNHCR
   postdistribution monitoring and data analysis, and share             the specific needs, surveyed refugees, protection,
   with clusters for follow-up and gap filling, thus promoting          shelter, assets, health, and assistance sections; and
   complementarity in humanitarian interventions. The                   UNICEF the water, sanitation, and hygiene, education,
   CWG views the expenditure data as a better-targeted                  and child health sections. While WFP and UNHCR
   and streamlined approach overall than large multisector              analyzed the data by at the regional and district levels,
   assessments. Challenges include the need to develop                  UNICEF looked at the governorate level. The effort
   a common assessment tool that incorporates cash, the                 represents a best practice in terms of joint approaches,
   need for dedicated data management capacity, and the                 but points to the challenges cash brings as the partners
   resistance of implementing agencies to contracting a                 struggle with the inclusion of market analysis, the
   third party to conduct assessments.                                  complexity and time demands of the process, and how
          In Lebanon, the needs assessment process built                better to engage the government and the private sector.




                                               Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                        9
                  the “what” question). Response analysis would provide guidance on the appropriateness and feasibility
                  of cash and other transfers based on contextual information as detailed in section 4.4, as well as begin to
                  identify opportunities for common programming approaches from the outset. In other words, assessment
                  of needs and markets—as well as response analysis—would constitute an overall context assessment key
                  to understanding needs, vulnerabilities, capacities, and options to respond.




                  4.4  Drivers of transfer selection
                  27.  Cash transfers hold the potential to provide beneficiaries with choice, strengthen local mar-
                  kets, engage the private sector (e.g., banking and financial services), and empower people and
                  communities. However, in order for cash to be more effective and efficient than other modalities, certain
                  preconditions need to be in place. The goal should be to ensure that the most appropriate transfer modality,
                  including combinations, are context- and sector-specific and emerge from careful response analyses.


                  28.  Country-level experiences show that a range of factors should inform decisions on transfer
                  selection. These include program objectives, the level of market functionality, predicted cost-effectiveness,
                  implementation capacity and financial infrastructure, the ability to manage risks such as those around pro-
                  tection and gender, beneficiaries’ preferences, pragmatic considerations on humanitarian resource availabil-
                  ity, and government willingness to take actions necessary to develop or stimulate markets (see appendix A).
                  It is also important to consider second-round effects and externalities, including building on positive ones
                  (such as local economic multipliers) and anticipating possible negative ones (e.g., unintended effects on




W      hether    transfers    can    generate


economy generating more than an additional dollar—
                                                  economic
       multipliers—with ever dollar injected into the
                                                                examined the direct and indirect impacts on the
                                                                Lebanese economy of a WFP e-voucher program
                                                                for refugees. The scheme transferred about US$345
hinges on several factors, including the openness and           million to over 1 million vulnerable refugees in 2014,
structure of the local economy, the degree to which             using a network of 300 contracted stores throughout
goods and services bought are locally produced, and the         the country. The e-program has had a large direct
flexibility of local supply. For example, recent estimates      impact on participating stores, creating 1,300 jobs
on real multipliers for a pool of countries in Africa range     and leading to US$3 million in investments in capital
from about 1.1 in Kenya to 1.8 in Ethiopia (nominal             expenditure, as larger stores increased floor space
multipliers ranged from 1.25 to 2.52, respectively). Thus,      and storage. Around 100 large stores seem to have
in nominal terms, the initial transfer in Ethiopia of Br 5.58   captured the lion’s share of e-card transactions, and
million potentially generated Br 14.06 million of additional    there is evidence of high market concentration in over
income in the local economy. In Zambia, the Child Grant         half of the districts. The input-output model suggested
cash program raised incomes by a factor of K 1.34 for           the e-card program had significant indirect economic
every kwacha transferred; in Ghana, the multiplier was          benefits, with a multiplier value of 1.51 in the food
1.5; multipliers in Lesotho, Malawi, and Zimbabwe were          products sector. This means that US$345 million could
between 1.2 and 1.4.                                            create extra indirect benefits of US$517 million for the
     Regarding voucher programs, studies have                   Lebanese food system.




10                Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
prices or social tensions). Some objectives such as nutrition and health lack a tested “market” per se. Sup-
ply-side considerations typically are represented by (mostly public) services, the availability and quality of
which should be duly appraised alongside other social-cultural barriers for equitable access to services.10


29.  In the context of humanitarian crises, security issues involving either staff or beneficiaries
must receive utmost attention when selecting transfers. Both cash and in-kind transfers carry security
risks, with the fungibility of cash possibly making it more tempting to divert. Cash transfer and voucher pro-
grams have developed practices for reducing and managing fraud risks, such as digital payments, the use
of local institutions in inaccessible places (e.g., hawala systems), and a range of distribution strategies.11




4.5  Common programming approaches
30.  A priority reform area should be to reduce the current fragmentation in approaches through-
out the programming cycle by moving to common systems that work for all parties. This applies
whether a cash intervention is within a single sector or across multiple sectors. Clear entry points should
be defined, starting with a range of processes around targeting, the identification of beneficiaries, payment
platforms, and management and information systems (or social registries). A number of recent initiatives for
joint delivery have focused on devising common payment mechanisms, including electronic payment cards
often backed with multiple “wallets” for different objectives.




  D     uring the most recent displacement crisis, in
        2015 in Lebanon and in 2016 in Jordan, multiple
   agencies (WFP, UNHCR, and various international
                                                                    and stored on one beneficiary card. This simplifies
                                                                    the experience for the beneficiary, forces alignment
                                                                    of payment delivery mechanisms across agencies,
   nongovernmental        organizations,      among    others)      drives cost and process efficiency, and leverages
   successfully experimented with common payment                    greater bargaining power—especially with financial
   mechanisms       for   delivering   cash    responses    to      service providers. The use of common delivery
   humanitarian beneficiaries using agency-mandated                 arrangements allows for savings of 20 percent of
   platforms and a bank-managed common cash facility.               the card cost. Conversely, the use of uncoordinated
   The prepaid card and iris-based systems delivered                program-, agency-, or sector-specific beneficiary
   humanitarian assistance to more than 100,000 refugee             lists has led to beneficiaries receiving multiple grants,
   families in Lebanon and Jordan, from multiple agencies           some    beneficiaries   receiving    inadequate   grants,
   and multiple projects including the Multipurpose Cash            some of those in need receiving nothing, and has led
   Assistance Programme, the Winter Cash Assistance                 to inefficiencies in delivering support; this has been
   program, WFP voucher assistance, etc. Agreeing on                the case in several humanitarian contexts, including
   a common payments system has enabled the use                     Democratic Republic of Congo, Nepal, and Sri Lanka,
   of multiple “wallets,” provided by different agencies            among many others.




                                              Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                  11
                  31.  Where program design does not have the benefit of building on common approaches, human-
                  itarian programs can help develop them with an eye on linking these efforts to developing or
                  strengthening government systems. For example, in terms of identification, a range of innovations are
                  being developed, including initiatives collecting biometric data (e.g., SCOPE, ProGres, RAIS, BIMS). The next
                  step is to leverage such initiatives to help build a broader programmatic platform accessible by all actors,
                  and to ensure linkages are made to government systems. Humanitarian practitioners will immediately ben-
                  efit from a shared database that reconciles personal identification data, relevant variables for targeting, and
                  basic information on program participation. This holds great promise to enhance coordination by allowing
                  for a full mapping of who beneficiaries are, which program they participate in, why they are enrolled, and
                  where gaps exist in meeting needs based on a collectively owned set of metrics. In the best case, that
                  information is readily available through existing government systems at the time of crisis.12 If the information
                  is not available, it should be developed in close cooperation with governments whenever possible, including
                  ensuring that standards are compatible with those of any existing national databases. The objective is
                  to leverage existing operational imperatives to help develop nascent government systems as part of the
                  humanitarian-to-development continuum. Of course, the specific parameters and regulations governing the
                  protection of personal data on refugees and internally displaced populations are considerations that may go
                  beyond the scope of social registries.




I   n   Mauritania,   humanitarian    interventions
    build on national efforts to improve government
processes and to better link with social programs as
                                                       now       other    interventions—nutrition,     livelihood,   etc.—to
                                                                 exploit synergies or avoid duplications, including within
                                                                 humanitarian assistance itself.
relevant. First, during a “regular” emergency around                  In Senegal, the humanitarian response system
the lean season, the humanitarian actors can use                 can harness the National Unique Registry (RNU)
the social registry to identify the most vulnerable              to streamline the targeting process and coordinate
households in areas particularly affected by climatic            interventions. Until recently, the targeting process of
conditions—thereby cutting their response time by                emergency interventions was completely separate
using the existing targeting system. Using national              from that of programs that aim at addressing chronic
identification (ID) cards and numbers can streamline             poverty or vulnerability—based on different data
registration processes and limit errors, while using             approaches, methodologies, and data sources. But
the social registry and unique ID numbers can allow              with the RNU growing in size and covering the entire
humanitarian actors to “piggyback” on national                   country, and with the cyclical nature of emergencies,
programs for greater efficiency. For instance, for target        there seems to be scope for humanitarian actors to
groups that are already in the national conditional cash         take advantage of the RNU. A dialogue has started,
transfer program, a humanitarian intervention could              resulting in the inclusion of a broad range of variables
use the payment system put in place by that program.             in the RNU—including those that are highly relevant to
As more interventions use the same ID number, they               humanitarian response but not typically used by social
could identify the individuals that already benefit from         safety nets to identify beneficiaries.




12                Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
4.6  Leveraging and improving existing national
systems
32.  There is extensive scope for building upon and improving existing national systems as part
of a humanitarian response. The use of cash instruments in a humanitarian context provides a natural
bridge to many ongoing government initiatives and broader social protection systems. According to recent
estimates, in 2014 only about 3 percent, or US$1.1 billion, of total humanitarian funds was channeled
through national governments, with almost the entire volume of assistance directed outside government
structures.13 The model of operating with limited engagement of government systems may be based on a
range of potential constraints, including the lack of government sovereignty over a territory during conflict,
legislation regarding refugees, swiftness of response, and other factors. These are key challenges that the
humanitarian community is duty bound to consider to ensure the safety, dignity, and integrity of recipients
in emergencies.


33.  In general, humanitarian actors should demonstrate the rationale for not using existing national
systems to provide assistance. While retaining humanitarian principles—in particular impartiality—as a
guiding framework for engaging with governments, the use of national systems should be the first-best option
for providing humanitarian assistance whenever possible. To this end, as an option, the IASC could develop
a checklist of issues to consider in deciding whether and to what extent government structures can be
leveraged to attain humanitarian objectives. Such a checklist could be developed as part of preparedness
activities and would clarify the temporary bottlenecks or longer-term impediments to using existing national
systems. This could also serve as a bridge document between humanitarian and development worlds.


34.  While the agenda around building national systems has largely been developmental in
nature, the humanitarian community could play an important role in aligning with and comple-
menting these efforts where appropriate and consistent with humanitarian principles. As noted,
this is already happening in a number of contexts where humanitarian assistance leverages government
structures. At the same time, the IASC could promote the strengthening of national systems when these are
nonviable for immediate crisis operations, including by devoting a share of humanitarian funding—e.g., a
low single-digit percentage—to national systems-enhancing purposes.14 The IASC could develop guidance
on defining such a share in relation to the nature of the context and crises, including taking into account the
most appropriate use of limited humanitarian resources.


35.  When functional governments exist, there should be much greater engagement and a stron-
ger role for national actors in humanitarian assistance. Many national systems are increasingly cash-
based, including a variety of cash programs that operate in noncrisis times. In Africa alone, the number of
countries that have introduced an unconditional cash transfer program doubled in four years (from 21 in
2010 to 40 in 2014). As such, they can offer a platform for humanitarians to build upon during crises (e.g.,
Ethiopia, Lesotho, and the Philippines). National structures will in turn benefit from innovations developed
in humanitarian contexts, such as the recent extension by the government of Lebanon of the e-voucher
program for Syrian refugees to poor Lebanese citizens.




                                            Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts              13
T    here are a number of emerging case studies that
     are building on existing government systems for a
faster humanitarian response. In 2014, the response to
                                                                    provided in-kind and cash benefits to 162,000 families
                                                                    in 279 municipalities within 10 days of the floods.
                                                                    Its preexisting social registry played a central role in
the super-typhoon Yolanda in the Philippines included               helping identify the affected families. In Pakistan, the
leveraging by humanitarian actors of the national                   response to the 2010 and 2011 floods included the
conditional cash transfer program Pantawid. The                     government providing cash payments to millions of
existing delivery platform was used to provide cash by              affected households. The program made a one-time
WFP to 100,000 affected households registered in the                payment of Prs  20,000 (US$204) to beneficiaries
program. Emergency support was provided for two                     by issuing 2  million prepaid VISA-branded “Watan”
months and included a negotiation to lift conditionalities          cards. The government partnered with a private bank
of the regular program. Similarly, after massive floods             to deliver the cash to beneficiaries via debit cards.
and landslides hit Brazil in January 2011, causing 903              The program was later extended to support recovery,
deaths and leaving 17,000 homeless, the national                    delivering two additional payments of Prs 20,000 per
conditional cash transfer program, Bolsa Familia,                   recipient, totaling US$409 million per payment period.




                   4.7 Preparedness
                   36.  Preparedness refers to the activities carried out prior to a crisis in order to create favorable
                   conditions for a successful emergency response.15 There is an established and well-developed protocol
                   for in-kind preparedness, including early warning, contingency planning and financing, and pre-positioning
                   of essential items. However, preparedness for cash transfers is at a more incipient stage.


                   37.  There is a need for increased preparedness investments to use cash as a response. This includes
                   anticipating the evolving conditions of markets, ensuring an up-to-date cash-related mapping of service pro-
                   viders, forging pre-agreements with delivery institutions, developing risk financing strategies in advance to
                   ensure funds are available to rapidly respond, and gaining in-depth understanding of regulatory environ-
                   ments,16 among others. The possibility of a checklist as mentioned in section 4.6 could be one of the outcomes
                   of such preparedness activities. There is also a need for clear incentives and increased funding levels for
                   preparedness. In other words, more work needs to be done to incorporate cash into all preparedness activities.




D    FID is funding a collaborative effort with the Office
     for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), UNHCR, UNICEF, and WFP for Strengthening
                                                                    approaches such as joint feasibility studies, training, and
                                                                    an overall methodology for a model going forward. One of
                                                                    the outcomes of working through the operational details
Humanitarian Preparedness in High-Risk Countries. This              in a transparent process has been stronger relationships
initiative had set aside dedicated funding for cash and             and a high degree of trust.
vouchers to provide four prioritized countries (Afghanistan,            A successful entry point in Iraq and Nepal has been
Burundi, Myanmar, and Niger) with capacity-building                 to focus on developing standard operating procedures
activities to increase their ability to better assess and utilize   to help build the working relationship between the
cash-based approaches in their humanitarian response.               agencies and the joint work done by the four UN
This has been very useful in helping develop common                 agencies on preparedness under DFID funding.




14                 Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
The IASC should build on the recent joint UN agency collaborative work on preparedness and be a strong voice
for strengthening investments in preparedness in close cooperation with governments and the private sector.




4.8  Generation and use of evidence
38.  An agenda for evidence generation should be promoted to fill evidence gaps on the relative
performance of transfer modalities—particularly beyond food security objectives—including their
impact on livelihoods opportunities and job creation. There is significant variance in the availability of
comparative evidence on cash transfers across sectors, ranging from areas where evidence is substantial
(i.e., food security), to where it is limited (e.g., nutrition), and to where not a single comparative evaluation is
available (e.g., health, education, and shelter). This imbalance should be carefully considered when devising
interventions and reforms that affect multiple humanitarian sectors. However, there are also knowledge
gaps in relation to in-kind transfers (e.g., the extent to which they are resold by beneficiaries, their impact
on local markets or in achieving agreed-upon sustainable jobs) which are equally important to fill. Higher
evidence standards should apply to all modalities, not only cash.




   O      ne of the areas that should be prioritized for
          evidence generation is the provision of cash
   transfers for shelter purposes. As concluded in
                                                                       $125 million was directly provided to support the shelter
                                                                       needs of 30,000 households. These households, in
                                                                       turn, utilized the cash to contract for technical expertise
   appendix A, there are no solid impact evaluations that              while also contributing their own labor to housing
   examined the comparative performance of in-kind                     construction. According to implementation reports,
   housing materials versus an equivalent cash amount.                 the approach proved successful in offering more
   Yet there is experience emerging on cash-for-shelter                durable housing solutions than in-kind constructions.
   programming in humanitarian context. For example, in                Moreover, the program spurred interest among other
   postconflict Sri Lanka, UN-Habitat has promoted the                 actors which resulted in the injection of an additional
   use of cash in lieu of materials. Over 2010–16, a total of          $250 million in similar cash-for-shelter approaches.




39.  Evidence across existing studies shows that cash is, on average, more efficient to deliver
than in-kind transfers. However, results should be interpreted with caution because the wealth of nuance
is often not captured in standard cost analyses. Efficiency hinges on several factors, such as the scale of
intervention, type of humanitarian context, procurement practices, delivery platforms, political economy,
and various hidden costs17 (see appendix A). In addition, costs within and across agencies are not always
comparable. The IASC should encourage standardized approaches and work to comprehensively assess
the full cost of alternative modalities.


40.  Evidence also shows that the efficacy of specific modalities depends on the desired objec-
tive of the transfer. In the food security cluster, where evidence is substantial, data show that the relative
effectiveness of cash and in-kind transfers is similar on average and depends on the desired objective of
the transfer (e.g., calorie availability, dietary diversity) and the indicators used to measure them. Whether
in terms of effectiveness or efficiency, the use of combined transfers may be a useful yet underevaluated




                                               Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                    15
     program model. Regular feedback loops from beneficiaries on preferred modalities should also be pro-
     moted.


     41.  Further guidance is required on the choice and trade-offs between unconditional and condi-
     tional interventions. This note has already underscored the need for common definitions that clarify the
     different interpretations around conditionalities. Overall, whether transfers are provided conditionally or not
     should be the result of response analysis—i.e., conditionality is a design choice just like transfer selection.
     The provision of unconditional transfers is likely to be appropriate, among others, during the initial phases
     of a crisis, although the choice should be driven by the objectives, sectoral considerations, and contextual
     conditions. Guidance by the IASC on factors to consider in decision making would help address an import-
     ant information gap.


     42.  There is a need to clarify the concept and implications of multipurpose cash transfers. In
     some cases, MPCTs are defined as just cash, with no particular difference from traditional cash transfers,
     including in terms of transfer size. In other cases, MPCTs are conceived as a way to cover all needs of a
     household, which may imply transfers of substantial larger size than currently provided. The concept, how-
     ever, seems to generally assume that beneficiaries are receiving cash from multiple sources and that trans-
     fers can simply be consolidated. Yet, in the context of funding shortages, important trade-offs between
     benefit levels and coverage must be addressed up front. This could best be through commonly identified
     targeting criteria for different objectives and interventions, and a collegial operational review by the involved
     agencies. Thus, from a conceptual perspective, MPCT programs hold great promise as a multisectoral
     intervention, but at the same time present a range of operational and structural implications that need to
     be carefully clarified by the IASC.


     43.  Overall, humanitarian imperatives must be reconciled with accelerated applied research to
     inform decision making. Given the nature of humanitarian situations, it is understandable that in many
     circumstances action cannot wait for evidence. Yet as crises become more chronic and protracted, there
     will be increased demands to synchronize response analysis, operations, and an applied research agenda to
     compare the performance of alternative transfer modalities. Many cases show that such analysis is possible
     and necessary to serve people in need in the best way possible (e.g., Democratic Republic of Congo, Niger,
     and the Republic of Yemen). The IASC should promote a renewed drive to gather the broader evidence required
     to make informed choices regarding cash in humanitarian situations. The IASC should consider developing a
     global research strategy to fill major information gaps relevant to multiple agencies. This would help coordinate
     research initiatives currently undertaken by individual actors while still flexibly allowing for such research.




16   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
   E    vidence from 14 comparative experimental and
        quasi-experimental trials in 11 developing countries
   shows that cash was most effective in achieving
                                                                     delivering in-kind assistance, with cash being between
                                                                     two and seven times more efficient. Four studies that
                                                                     compared the equal value of transfers found that
   specific objectives in 48  percent of cases and food              between 13 and 23 percent additional households could
   in 36  percent. Vouchers and combined cash and                    have been reached if food transfers had been provided
   food modalities were most effective in the remaining              in cash instead. However, depending on the location
   16  percent of cases, which is remarkable, given that             of the distribution sites, some time and transport
   those modalities were used only in a few cases. The               costs are shifted from the agency to consumers.
   potential and likely underexplored effectiveness of               Factors affecting the comparative efficiency of cash,
   the mix of modalities mirrors the findings of an ECHO             vouchers, and in-kind transfers include the scale of
   evaluation, which found that combined transfers                   the intervention, the type of context and crisis, delivery
   exceeded the donor’s target results in one-quarter of             mechanisms, transfer size, procurement costs, and a
   the cases.                                                        range of hidden costs, such as transaction costs by
        When assessing costs or efficiency, it is useful             beneficiaries. When all these items are considered,
   to distinguish between the delivery of assistance and             there are cases where in-kind food was found to be
   other cost items. In this regard, the cost to agencies to         more cost-efficient than cash, as in Malawi and the
   deliver cash to people is generally less than the cost of         Republic of Yemen.




4.9 Coordination
44.  The emergence of over 20 country-level technical CWGs highlights the ability of the human-
itarian system to flexibly respond and adapt to change. Ad hoc CWGs have organically blossomed out
of operational expediency in different humanitarian contexts to meet technical needs and share experi-
ences. Most of these groups are not affiliated with particular clusters, although a number of them operate
under the auspices of the food security and livelihoods cluster. The CWGs represent a remarkable level
of innovation and responsiveness under very demanding circumstances, and provide a dynamic basis for
strengthened cash coordination. The IASC Principals should work to consolidate these gains by formalizing
the role of the CWGs within existing coordination structures.

45.  Strong leadership and guidance are required to clarify the rules of the game, the architec-
ture, and the roles and responsibilities that will best facilitate the scaling up of cash by individual
agencies as well as identify entry points for common programming. Because cash can be cross-cut-
ting in nature, coordination needs to be able to cut across the horizon of individual sectors. Yet, it is import-
ant that, at this critical juncture, no single IASC agency “owns” the cash agenda or has preferential access
to cash funding because of mandate or role. As mentioned, cash illuminates wider issues in the humani-
tarian response architecture, which may limit multisector approaches. There is room to build on the many
strong ad hoc attempts to include CWGs in the cluster system through both short- and long-term efforts.


46.  There are a number of options to consider in formalizing the role of cash in the humanitar-
ian coordination architecture. In addition to the broader issues being addressed in the context of the
Grand Bargain (including recently stated discussions on humanitarian governance), there is a need to make




                                             Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                    17
     an explicit distinction between the strategic “what” question (decision making and prioritization) and the
     “how” (technical issues regarding overall implementation). The current CWGs were primarily formed to
     deal with the latter; they have not been a forum for prioritizing resources. Below are some initial ideas on
     possible positioning of CWGs:


         ■■ Clarify the CWG function. The CWG should be a central point for overall technical support and
            sharing of information to include functions that support consistent standards, ways of working,
            and identifying opportunities for common programming approaches. These functions should be
            encouraged with an emphasis to ensure government is in the lead whenever possible, as in Liberia.
            Wherever possible, the CWGs should not prioritize resources or be a conduit for resourcing deci-
            sions. As a related systemwide issue, CWGs could provide a useful home for response analysis as
            noted above. As such, the CWGs could be formalized and replaced by Response Analysis Groups
            (RAGs) which would act as a help desk for both cash and in-kind transfers across clusters.18 Those
            groups would need to have clear terms of reference geared to provide technical support around
            aspects to consider to make informed choices on transfer selection across humanitarian objec-
            tives. They may also help in identifying options for the humanitarian country teams to consider for
            efficiency gains through common programming. Representation in the RAGs should be drawn from
            all clusters, and may include development partners with relevant expertise on social protection.


         ■■ Identify and formalize where the RAG function sits within the current cluster system. This
            has been dealt with differently across countries. One option is to allow flexibility for each country
            to decide where the CWG (or RAG) fits as long as it does not sit exclusively within only one sector.
            The RAG must meet the needs of all clusters equally. Four other options exist: (1) the RAG is
            established as an independent body that is neither under a cluster or is at intercluster coordina-
            tion level (this option may risk developing into yet another sector); (2) the RAG function is embed-
            ded within each cluster (the challenge then is how to ensure overall coordination across sectors);
            (3) the RAG function is embedded within an existing cross-cutting cluster such as logistics (the
            challenge here again is overall coordination and resource allocation); and (4) the RAG becomes
            a subgroup of an existing body that coordinates across the clusters (as noted, this is currently
            the intercluster coordination group). This latter option is the recommended short-term solution.


         ■■ The IASC should build on the many strong ad hoc attempts to include possible RAGs in the
            cluster system with both short- and long-term efforts. In the short term, there is a need to
            strengthen the intercluster coordination function and define clear roles and responsibilities vis-à-
            vis cash at each level, including the role of the Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator.19

         ■■ Clarify where resource allocation and prioritization decisions are taken. This systemwide
            issue relates to but is beyond the cash agenda. As noted, resources are currently prioritized and
            allocated within sectors but not across sectors. There is a need to work with donors and govern-
            ments to develop this capacity and decide where it should be situated in the structure. Commit-
            ment is needed from donors to then follow agreed prioritization decisions. These issues are part
            of the wider structural reform to the humanitarian coordination architecture.




18   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
47.  In order to make the IASC model fit for the future, it is important that the scope of CWGs be broadened
to include response for all modalities under the RAG, thus ensuring that all means of assistance—cash,
voucher, and in kind—are symmetrically sustained and coordinated. Continuing focus on cash assistance
through CWGs may create an unintended silo effect, and potentially fail to acknowledge and coordinate the
broader humanitarian support action in a given context.


48.  From a related perspective, the 2015 IASC Reference Module for Cluster Coordination at the country
level highlights key criteria for activating cluster coordination. These criteria state that activation is only
required if existing national capacity is unable to meet needs due to the scale of need, the number of
actors involved, the need for a more complex multisectoral approach, or other constraints on the ability to
apply humanitarian principles. In practice, cluster activation appears to be the default, regardless of these
factors. There are different levels of government involvement and interaction in existing CWGs.20 These
include positive examples such as Liberia that indicate a shift to greater government involvement. In line
with previous considerations laid out in this note, more emphasis on government leadership is required.




   T    he response to Ebola in Liberia has featured a
        prominent role by the government, and points
   to the need for greater linkages to government
                                                                         The Haiyan Typhoon in the Philippines pointed
                                                                    to several examples of best practice as well as the
                                                                    challenges of cash coordination. The cash transfer
   systems. Since the first case of the Ebola virus was             components of the response were approximately
   reported in March 2014, the virus spread quickly, with           40  percent of the entire relief portfolio and totaled
   devastating impacts on the lives and livelihoods of              US$845 million. At least 45 international humanitarian
   people with strong gender dimensions to the crisis.              agencies implemented cash transfers. Best practices
   The number of agencies responding proliferated as                included (1) building on the existing social protection
   the crisis peaked in January 2015, with 19 agencies              system, with UNICEF and WFP using the existing social
   implementing cash transfers with payments ranging                protection registry to quickly scale up; and (2) the use
   from US$42 to US$150 per household per month. The                of the CWG as a focal point for 3W mapping, setting
   need to coordinate efforts led to government assuming            standards for cash for work, seeking to harmonize grant
   leadership within the cluster system and to a number             sizes, sharing information about market assessments,
   of lessons: the need to map the 3Ws (who, why, what)             and working to standardize agreements with financial
   early on and to link to a national data set such as the          service providers. Challenges included the lack of clarity
   social protection registry, the need to be flexible and          of responsibilities and lines of communication for cash
   not overprescriptive in defining coordination structures,        coordination, the difficulty of harmonizing approaches
   the need for a strategic oversight structure as cash             (monitoring, targeting, market assessments, approaches
   was siloed in two clusters (food security and economic           to service providers), and lack of accountability of cluster
   recovery), and the importance of developing standard             leads to ensure appropriate or joint response analysis
   operating procedures before a crisis hits.                       with and between clusters.




                                            Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                     19
     4.10  Multi-actor agenda
     49.  Cash is a broad agenda that affects actors in both the humanitarian and development
     spheres. Its use has demonstrated that there is an increasing potential and demand to actively bridge the
     gap between these two worlds. However, roles and responsibilities are not clear, nor are incentives aligned
     to promote multi-actor collaboration.


     50.  While cash alone will not lead to the transformation required in the overall system, it does
     provide a window for the IASC to lead a discussion on the roles and responsibilities of different
     stakeholders. The IASC should advocate for governments to be in the lead and demonstrate that this is
     required in all contexts, starting with cash in humanitarian situations. Governments should be in the lead in
     preparing for and responding with cash-based initiatives, with agencies in support and strategically filling
     gaps. This is a fundamental shift in the way business is currently conducted.


     51.  Donors also have a key role to play in facilitating the use of cash. Limited upstream donor coor-
     dination has been cited as a bottleneck in the enhanced use of cash. An enhanced policy, communication,
     and technical harmonization among donors will provide needed clarity to operational agencies, particularly
     around reporting requirements. If much greater time and effort go into collaboratively assessing needs,
     donors need to increase their efforts to adapt reporting and other requirements accordingly. Similarly, if the
     IASC agencies produce joint and integrated response plans, donors should be strongly encouraged to not
     fragment their own funding.


     52.  Civil society and nongovernmental actors have been a key partner in the process to date
     and have much to add moving forward. Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) play an important role
     in managing transfer programs on the ground, and are often at the front line of implementation and at
     the forefront of practical innovations. While not an NGO per se, the CaLP is a good example of an active
     community of practice with wide NGO representation (and beyond) that has been instrumental in sharing
     lessons, generating documents, and helping engage in coordination.21 Civil society as a whole has proven
     to be innovative and responsive and should continue to play a strong role within an overall joint approach.

     53.  Finally, the private sector has a major role to play as a partner of humanitarian actors, espe-
     cially in terms of pipeline planning, assessments, implementation, and preparedness. Partnerships
     with the private sector can generate significant efficiencies in technical areas such as payments. At the
     same time, the limits and different incentives of private sector action should be carefully assessed and
     recognized, particularly in extreme humanitarian situations.




20   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
                                                                                          Notes
1.	 In 2014, more than 90 percent of countries with annual humanitarian appeals had had such appeals for three or
    more years, and 60 percent for more than eight years.

2.	 The Grand Bargain negotiations cover the following 10 issues: (1) more financial transparency, (2) more cash-
    based assistance, (3) more support to national first responders, (4) more multiyear funding, (5) harmonizing
    and simplifying reporting requirements, (6) reducing duplication and management costs, (7) periodic functional
    reviews on expenditures, (8) move to joint and impartial needs assessments, (9) more inclusion of beneficiaries
    in decisions that affect them—a “participation revolution,” and (10) strengthening humanitarian-development
    linkages.

3.	 Current practices also include the commissioning of postdisaster needs assessments or postconflict needs
    assessments that are multisectoral and reflect both humanitarian and development programming and financing
    needs.

4.	 The assessments should encompass broad sectoral issues with an emphasis on underlying core vulnerabili-
    ties, deprivations, and potential self-reliance of assessed populations. The inclusion of multimarket assessments
    should also be considered as part of a larger shift from needs to overall context analysis.

5.	 Data should be as comparable and interoperable as possible.

6.	 Some of these issues are starting to be addressed, including, e.g., under the multi-agency-designed Operational
    Toolkit for Multipurpose Cash Grants. This toolkit delineates the many assessment methods available and pro-
    vides a useful toolkit for multisector analysis. Situation and response analysis should include vulnerability analy-
    sis, the minimum expenditure basket, a multisector market assessment, and an analysis of protection risks and
    benefits. Other examples of good practice have occurred at the country level.

7.	 The same principle of checks and balances could also apply to evaluation functions.

8.	 This issue of lack of confidence in assessments is a sensitive one both for humanitarian agencies and donors:
    “It appears that, far too often, needs assessments are performed by aid organizations to service their own aid
    programmes rather than for the purpose of establishing the true extent of what is required, meaning that the real
    needs of affected communities may not be reflected. Organizations are suspected of ‘appeal inflation,’ overstat-
    ing requirements because they are unlikely to get 100 percent of what they request from donors. A lack of solid
    data means that the funding gap is also a credibility and accountability gap” (High-Level Panel on Humanitarian
    Financing Report to the United Nations Secretary-General, Too Important to Fail—Addressing the Humanitarian
    Financial Gap, New York: United Nations, 2016, p. 2).

9.	 A separate issue relates to postdisaster needs assessments, including how those assessments centering on
    physical damage of assets (such as infrastructure) and loss of income streams (such as private sector incomes
    and livelihoods) can be better connected to “people-centered” needs assessments. This becomes particularly
    compelling for urban crises as well as recovery needs.

10.	 In particular, unconditional cash transfers that are directed to health expenditures implicitly acknowledge the need
     to pay user fees when seeking health care. It has been noted that this may be in contradiction with international
     principles that primary health care should be provided free of charge at the point of delivery.




                                                Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                    21
     11.	 These strategies can include varying distribution locations (balanced with the need for transparency and enabling
          beneficiaries to plan), smaller/more frequent transfers, or distributions to reduce the amount of money transported
          at once.

     12.	 Data protection is an important factor here. There are legal limitations to which entities and how different actors
          can collect, store, and share personal data relating to vulnerability, especially if linked to ethnicity, location,
          migratory status, etc.

     13.	 See ALNAP, The State of the Humanitarian System (London: ALNAP, 2015). An additional research area could be to
          explore circumstances that had the potential to channel resources through governments, but did not in practice.

     14.	 Efforts by humanitarians could be matched with larger resources from development partners. This would send a
          strong positive message to donors in bridging the humanitarian-development divide—which, in turn, may assist
          with humanitarian resourcing.

     15.	 Emergency preparedness is the knowledge and capacity developed by governments, recovery organizations,
          communities, and individuals to anticipate, respond to, and recover from the impact of potential, imminent, or
          current hazard events or emergency situations that call for a humanitarian response. This requires long-term,
          comprehensive engagement in the framework of disaster risk reduction (DRR). DRR activities include strength-
          ening early warning and preparedness, and mobilizing and coordinating international disaster assistance. Priority
          Five of the Hyogo Framework for Action highlights the essential role of disaster preparedness in saving lives and
          livelihoods, particularly when integrated into an overall DRR approach (http://www.unisdr.org/we/coordinate/hfa).

     16.	 This might include discussions with central banks as overseers of overall payment systems.

     17.	 In some extreme humanitarian conditions, efficiency may not be the primary driver of transfer selection for
          life-saving purposes.

     18.	 The RAGs would to some extent mirror the work of the global “Engine Room” at the country level. The global
          Engine Room, which was instrumental in producing and reviewing this note, was comprised of technical staff
          drawn from different agencies that, as part of a wider initiative, collaborated to inform transfer selection pro-
          cesses. This may require further discussion among the IASC Principals to develop consensus on which options
          to take forward.

     19.	 In some countries, the Resident Coordinator assumes the additional role of Humanitarian Coordinator; in others,
          there is a separate Humanitarian Coordinator appointed depending on the scale of the crisis. The overarching role
          of the Humanitarian Coordinator as stated in the 2009 terms of reference “entails building consensus among rel-
          evant organizations involved in humanitarian action and actively facilitating cooperation among them, recognizing
          that the ownership of coordination rests with all relevant organizations.”

     20.	 The CaLP has developed various materials on the matter, including taxonomies of governments with regular,
          sporadic, or no engagement in working groups.

     21.	 See http://www.cashlearning.org/about-us/overview.




22   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
Appendixes
                                                                  Appendix A


                                Evidence paper



  Humanitarian Cash and In-Kind
    Transfers across Sectors:

     Selection, Performance, and
         Research Priorities

Background paper for the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC)

                    The World Bank Group




                                                                    25
     Executive summary
     This paper reviews the existing evidence on the performance of alternative modalities across humanitarian
     sectors, including cash, vouchers, and in-kind (food and non-food) transfers. The analysis focused on the
     comparative performance of transfers, that is, on robust studies assessing transfers against each other
     in the same context and objectives. Based on existing evidence, our analysis points to five main findings.

     First, there is large variance in the availability of comparative evidence across sectors. This ranges
     from areas where evidence is substantial (i.e., food security) to realms where it is limited (i.e., nutrition) or
     where not a single comparative evaluation was available (i.e., health, education, and shelter). This unbal-
     ance should be carefully considered when devising interventions and reforms that affect both single and
     multiple humanitarian sectors.

     Second, where evidence is substantial, like for the food security cluster, data shows mixed results
     for cash and in-kind transfers, that is, their effectiveness is similar on average. Specific differences
     among cash and in-kind transfers are not very significant and depend on sub-objectives (e.g., calories
     availability, dietary diversity) and indicators used to measure them. Also, transfers’ performance and their
     difference seem a function of the organic and fluid interactions among a number of factors (e.g., profile
     and “initial conditions” of beneficiaries, capacity of local markets), instead of inherent merits of a modality.

     Third, while the effectiveness of cash and in-kind is similar, the efficiency is generally in favor
     of cash. Cash transfers seem more efficient to deliver than in-kind modalities, suggesting it might be on
     average more cost-effective. However, results should be interpreted with caution, including because of the
     wealth of nuance that is often not captured in standard costs analysis. Delivery is only one dimension of
     cost assessments, and overall costs would hinge on the scale of interventions, crisis context, procurement
     practices, and hidden costs. Approaches for cost calculations are often not standardized and display high
     variance in the depth and breadth of analysis. More consistent and robust approaches are required so that
     efficiency analyses match the high-standards of effectiveness as offered by the examined impact evalua-
     tions. Whether in terms of effectiveness or efficiency, the use of combined transfers seems a promising and
     yet under-evaluated program model.

     Fourth, the appropriateness of transfers cannot be predetermined—there are no “first-best”
     options from the outset; rather, the best modalities are context and sector-specific and emerge
     from response analysis. A range of factors should be considered for appropriate selection of transfer
     modalities. These have been extensively discussed the empirical and operational literature and include pro-
     gram objectives, the level of market functionality, predicted cost-effectiveness, implementation capacity,
     the management of key risks such as on protection and gender, political economy, beneficiary preferences,
     and resource availability. The depth and breadth of response analysis would range from basic analysis in
     the immediate aftermath of disasters, to more sophisticated and comprehensive processes as emergencies
     get prolonged and protracted.

     Finally, it seems possible to reconcile humanitarian imperatives with solid research to inform deci-
     sion-making. Given the nature of humanitarian situations, it is understandable that in many circumstances
     “action cannot wait for evidence.” Notwithstanding humanitarian imperatives, as crises become more
     chronic and protracted there is an important case to be made to synchronize careful response analysis,
     operations, and a solid applied research agenda to compare performance of alternative transfer modalities
     (especially where the evidence base is unavailable or limited). Many of the cases in challenging environ-
     ments presented in the note, e.g. DRC, Niger, and Yemen, show that such analysis is possible and neces-
     sary to serve people in need in the best way possible.




26   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
1. Introduction1
Cash transfers are among the most rigorously evaluated fields in social sciences, including with a proven
track record of performance in attaining intended objectives and second-round multipliers.2 Cash-based
programs are now present in 130 developing countries, including representing between 30 and 70 per-
cent of total safety net spending in those contexts (World Bank 2015). The basic question that this paper
addresses, however, is not whether cash transfers work in general, but whether and when they do so rel-
ative to other transfer modalities. In particular, the paper examines such question with a humanitarian lens
and across the sectors that form the humanitarian architecture.

Three modalities of transfers are here considered, namely cash, in-kind and vouchers. Cash transfers pro-
vide people with money, while in-kind transfers include the distribution of items as procured internationally
or locally-sourced. Vouchers are also known as stamps or near-cash transfers and can be used in predeter-
mined locations, including selected shops, supermarkets, retail stores and fairs. Vouchers take two forms:
on one hand, “value-based” vouchers restrict choice of items as available in the chosen outlet; on the other
hand, vouchers can be “quantity-based,” or tied to a pre-defined bundle of goods. Therefore, vouchers are
a hybrid form of transfer that display features of both cash (value-based vouchers allow for some level of
choice) and in-kind transfers (quantity-based vouchers are very similar to a decentralized system of local
in-kind procurement). This basic taxonomy holds whether “in-kind” and vouchers refer to food, agricultural
inputs, shelter, or other goods.

Somewhat unsurprisingly, the highest-quality evidence around the comparative performance of transfer
modalities is generated in non-emergency contexts. The humanitarian situations in which multiple actors
operate, characterized by the scale and urgency of
required actions and the nature of impediments often Figure 1: Trends in in-kind food and humanitarian cash transfers
present, is different from the conventional sphere of
development interventions. Yet the field of humani-
                                                             12                                                                     8
tarian response is evolving rapidly, leading to greater




                                                                                                                                     Cash (million people)
                                                                 Food (million tons)




focus on the generation of rigorous data on effective-       10
                                                                                      Food                                          6
ness, including solid impact evaluations. As part of this      8
evolution, there is a growing use of cash transfers in         6                                                                    4
                                                                                        Cash
humanitarian settings, including as a complements or           4
alternatives to in-kind transfers. For example, as of          2                                                                    2
2012 cash transfers reached 6.8 million beneficiaries          0                                                                    0
(and 5.6 million in 2014), up from 2.4 in 2000. Over            2000      2002       2004      2006 2008            2010      2012
the same period, the quantity of global food aid halved,
dropping from 10.9 to 4.7 million metric tons3 (figure 1). Source: CaLP-Cash Atlas and WFP-FAIS online databases (accessed January 2016)

Indeed, humanitarian practitioners are increasingly called upon putting cash and in-kind transfers on an
equal footing. This basically entails a more systematic consideration of alternative transfer modalities for
a range of objectives and, as a result, across the sectors around which humanitarian assistance is “clus-
tered.” This is an important step since most of the eleven humanitarian clusters have limited experience
with cash-based programs.



     1
      This paper only concerns demand-side transfers; as such, there are other areas of research and evidence that
are beyond the scope of this paper but still relevant, like a range of supply-side issues and results-based financing.
For more information on those matters, see for example WHO (2010, 2008).
     2
         For example, see http://www.fao.org/economic/ptop/home/en/.

     The year 2012 is the last one for which data on food aid deliveries is recorded in the global Food Aid Information
     3

System housed by WFP.




                                                Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                   27
     This imbalance in practice (and evidence) is important to recognize. When it comes to choice of transfer,
     sectors may share a range of common principles, but they may also face specific implications. While the
     literature on food assistance mostly antagonizes transfers as alternative modalities, there is some a priori
     reservations in, for example, considering cash in lieu of vaccines, therapeutic nutrition, or shelter. In other
     words, “how far should cash go” in being considered as an alternative or complement to in-kind assistance
     is a key strategic, operational and empirical question for the humanitarian community. Within such context,
     efforts are underway to ensure that the use of a certain transfer is not driven by reflexive approaches, that
     all transfer modalities should be considered more systematically, and that any choice is the result of careful
     response analysis. This paper, therefore, intends to contribute to the broader movement around making
     choices contextual, objective-oriented, and evidence-based.

     The paper is organized as follows: the next section discusses the economics transfer modalities. In sec-
     tion 3, we assess the comparative impacts and costs of transfer modalities documented in solid impact
     evaluations. The discussion there revolves around food security, livelihoods, nutrition, health, education,
     shelter, and cross-sectoral approaches. Based on the available evidence base, section 4 lays out key issues
     to consider for transfer selection. Section 5 identifies evidence gaps and research priorities, while section
     6 concludes.


     2. Choice and paternalism: the economics of transfer
     selection
     Before assessing the evidence on comparative effectiveness, it is important to briefly discuss a set of
     cross-cutting issues affecting all transfer modalities. Among these, the issues of “paternalism” and choice
     permeate the debate in a way that makes is sometimes not only technically contentious, but even philo-
     sophically polarizing. This suggests the need for a short review of the economics of the cash versus in-kind
     debate, including with a view of shedding light on those thorny quandaries.

     Standard economic theory predicts that cash is a preferable and first-best option, that is, cash is more
     “utility-maximazing” than in-kind transfers. This is a mainstream view in economics and has solid empirical
     grounds: for example, a survey showed that 84% of economists agree with the statement that “cash pay-
     ments increase the welfare of recipients to a greater degree than do transfers-in-kind of equal cash value.”4
     This stems from the basic feature that cash is flexible and provides people with choice on how to spend it.
     Relatedly, cash may not only transfer income, but transfer power as well. As it was put by Devarajan (2013),
     “…cash transfers have the potential to shift not just poverty-reducing policies but also the balance of power
     between government and its citizens, in favor of the latter.” In other words, the normative argument in favor
     of cash is straightforward: cash is fungible and empowers, hence it is “transformative” or “redefinitional.”5
     While these are important considerations, the economics of the quandary is more nuanced.

     Indeed, an economic case for in-kind transfers can also be made on the grounds of taxpayer utility func-
     tions, interdependent preferences, externalities, and information asymmetries—all of which somewhat
     rest on the notion of “paternalism” (Currie and Gahvari 2008). Part of the concept postulates that while
     members of society care about the worse-off and disadvantaged, the modeling of taxpayer functions can
     vary. For example, under one assumption taxpayers maximize their own utility when the poor are allowed
     to maximize their own happiness, i.e., freely spend tax dollars. Under other assumptions, taxpaying voters



          4
              See http://gregmankiw.blogspot.com/2009/02/news-flash-economists-agree.html.
          5
            Paul Niehaus, keynote address at the event “Cash Transfers: The New Benchmark for Foreign Aid?” hosted by
     the Center for Global Development (9 May 2014, Washington, DC). Videos and materials of the event are available at:
     http://www.cgdev.org/event/cash-transfers-new-benchmark-foreign-aid.




28   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
typically exhibit a more parental form of altruism: they would like poor families to access a select few basic
items (e.g., food and housing) in adequate amounts, but specifically would not favor the poor to use tax-fi-
nanced subsidies to purchase whatever goods and services.6 In other words, the preference among voters
for bestowing on the poor benefits-in-kind rather than cash transfers may well rest in good part on that
characteristic of the typical tax payer’s utility function (Reinhart 2013).

From another standpoint, the notion of paternalism revolves around “over-provision” of goods.7 This involves
informational, principal-agent, or behavioral arguments that often provide the foundations for much of the
debate around conditionalities (Fiszbein and Schady 2009). In broad terms, the theory suggests that the
expected externalities of an in-kind transfer would be desirable when there is a private under-investment—
say, in nutrition or health—below an optimal social (or even private) level. Hence in-kind representing a
vehicle to influence behaviors, especially when people may not be well informed, may have inconsistent
preferences over time, and there are coordination failures (De Mel et al. 2012). This is the case, for example,
when there is a discrepancy between perceived and expected returns, for example, to nutrition or educa-
tion, which challenges the assumption that “people always know best.”8 For example, an experimental
study by Jensen (2010) showed that students provided with information on returns to education completed
0.2 more years of schooling over the next 4 years compared to students without information.

From another perspective, there are questions around the core concept of “choice” by beneficiaries: is
choice just the ability to freely dispose of a given transfer (e.g., cash), or should such definition also include
the opportunity to choose what to get in the first place (e.g., cash or food)? This is related to the thorny
issue of what people prefer.9 While it is difficult to generalize preferences, some stylized patterns can
be discerned: for example, in-kind transfers tend to be preferred in the context of high or volatile prices,
including due to seasonal or more unpredictable shocks (Sabates-Wheeler and Devereux 2010). Gender and
intrahousehold decision making processes tend to be another key factor in shaping preferences, including
the control that women exert over household in-kind or cash resources. Finally, people’s preferences can
be shaped by very pragmatic considerations, such as implementation performance of programs. In India,
where the public food distribution system worked poorly people preferred cash, while they preferred food
where existing food distributions were timely (Khera 2013). Somewhat relatedly, in some Indian states the



      6
        This has been referred to as “specific egalitarianism” and postulates that while many people have no problem
with income inequality per se, they would like to see that all individuals receive adequate food, medical services, or
housing (Tobin 1970). See also the early work by, among others, Garfinkel (1973) and Amacher and Sandler (1977)
exploring issues around paternalism and interdependent preferences.
     7
       In a stylized form, consider two individuals: for one, an in-kind transfer is defined as “extramarginal” because it
is provided for an amount greater larger than the person would have normally consumed in the absence of the transfer;
conversely, for another individual an in-kind transfer is inframarginal since it is smaller than the amount consumed
by recipients. In other words, these two individuals are positioned in different points in the frontier of consumption
possibilities. According to microeconomic models, an inframarginal in-kind transfer and a cash transfer of equal value
would have the same effect in bolstering household food consumption—i.e., beneficiaries’ marginal propensity to
consume food out of an additional income out of an in-kind or cash transfer should be the same. Put it differently, there
is only an “income” effect and no “price” effect associated with inframarginal transfers. However, if in-kind transfers
are extramarginal, then food consumption out of in-kind transfers would be larger than for an equal cash transfer due
to the price effect. For an elegant exposition, see Mankiw (2011).
     8
       For various examples in the health sector, see Dupas (2009), Duflo and Saez (2003), Hastings and Weinstein
(2008), and Nguyen (2008).
     9
       Note that the issue of expressing and capturing preferences is notoriously difficult, including due to a number
of factors that may distort feedback such as how the question is posed, who conducts the survey, and expectations
by beneficiaries.




                                                 Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                    29
     use of technology in distribution has allowed beneficiaries to choose not necessarily what to get, but to
     select the service provider of preference10 (Gentilini 2015).

     In other words, “paternalism” is not necessarily a pejorative feature and can even be justified on economic
     grounds. Perhaps more generally, paternalism as an approach seems less related to modalities per se and
     more to processes to provide them. For instance, it can be argued that whether an intervention is paternal-
     istic may hinge on the extent to which it considers beneficiaries as key stakeholders throughout the life of
     the program, 11including balancing what might be desirable to provide from a public perspective and what
     beneficiaries would prefer to receive.


     3. Comparative performance
     Food security

     Programs intended for food security have played a dominant role in shaping views on cash versus in-kind
     modalities, albeit through a narrower “cash versus food”lens. For instance, over 2010–2015 a total of 788
     projects were implemented by the humanitarian community, including reaching 29 million beneficiaries for
     a value of over US$3.9 billion. Out of this portfolio, over half or 56% were implemented around the food
     security sector.12

     We examine the complete set of robust impact evaluations that, to our knowledge,13 have been published
     over the last decade, 2006–2016 (Gentilini 2016). These include 14 comparative experimental and qua-
     si-experimental trials in 11 developing countries that have deliberately compared alternative transfer
     modalities under the same evaluation framework. The specific design parameters of the programs are
     presented in annex 1. Some of the case studies include stable contexts, such as Bangladesh, Cambodia,
     Malawi, and Mexico, but most of them are particularly relevant to inform humanitarian debates. These



            10
               The Chhattisgarh state in India has undergone a major reform of its Public Food Distribution (PDS) program.
     Between 2004 and 2010, the program was able to cut the share of people that “reported no PDS purchase” from 75
     percent to 32 percent, hence expanding coverage among eligible beneficiaries. Also, the diversion of PDS grains was
     reduced from 51 percent to 10.4 percent. Compounded with political commitment and other factors, a key ingredient
     behind Chhattisgarh’s progress was the introduction of an automated system (COREPDS) in each participating fair
     price shop. This included the equipment of PoS devises with GPRS connectivity, biometric authentication scanner, and
     smart card slot. The piloting of such system commenced in 2007, including 151 shops and 170,000 beneficiaries in
     Raipur city. Differently from the previous models, it allowed beneficiaries to choose the shop where to access the ben-
     efits. In other words, benefits were made portable. This introduced a strong element of competition among shopkeep-
     ers and, as early evidence shows, a number of challenges with underprovision were eliminated. While comprehensive
     evaluations are underway, the experience suggests that technology alone can improve but not fully address issues of
     transparency. The pilot instead shows that the empowerment of participants through choice (as provided by portabil-
     ity) was a key determinant in elevating people “from beneficiaries to customers,” hence letting market mechanisms
     and competition to largely address previous inefficiencies.
          11
            For example, in 2006 a combined cash and food transfer program was implemented in rural Malawi. The fol-
     low-up evaluation explored participants’ preferences over one or both transfers and found that “…most beneficiaries
     were very satisfied with receiving both food and cash” (Devereux 2008). Yet, the redesign of the project in 2007 only
     envisaged cash transfers.
          12
               CaLP Cash Atlas online database (accessed February 2016). The figure also includes livelihood interventions.
          13
            A new experimental study by Ahmed et al. (2016) will soon be released, including comparing cash, food and
     several combined modalities (and with and without nutritional information campaigns) in Bangladesh.




30   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
include evaluations fielded in Uganda’s fragile Karamoja region, Ecuador’s periurban program for Colom-
bian refugees, the project in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) for internally-displaced populations,
crisis-affected regions in Yemen, Ethiopia’s high food prices-induced emergency, drought-hit regions in
Niger, and post-tsunami Sri Lanka (Ahmed et al. 2010, Aker 2015, Barker et al. 2014, Cunha 2014, Gilligan
and Roy 2013, Hidrobo et al. 2014a, Hoddinott et al. 2014, Leroy et al. 2010, Schwab 2013, Sharma 2006,
Skoufias et al. 2008).

A summary of the impacts is proposed in table 1, including displaying the most effective transfer modality
according to different dimensions. The absolute differences in impacts are reported in Annex 2. Overall,
cash was most effective in achieving specific objectives 48% of the time, and food was so in 36% of the
cases. Vouchers and combined cash and food modalities were the most effective in the remaining 16%
of the times, which is remarkable given that those modalities were used only in few cases. The potential
and likely underexplored effectiveness of mix of modalities mirrors the findings by Maunder et al. (2015),
including reporting that combined transfers exceeded a donor’s (ECHO) target results in one-quarter of the
cases.14

Table 1: Summary of impacts from comparative studies

                                                                               MORE EFFECTIVE MODALITY
                                                           CAL-                    DIETARY
                    TRANSFERS          FOOD CON-           ORIE         FOOD        DIVER-         POV-       ANE-       CHILD MAL-           CHILD
                     PROVIDED          SUMPTION           INTAKE         GAP         SITY          ERTY       MIA        NUTRITION          MORTALITY
 Bangladesh          Cash, food            Cash            Cash           −             −          Food         −               −                 −
 Cambodia            Cash, food            Cash              −            −           Food           −          −               −                 −
 Dem. Rep.          Cash, vouch-        Vouchers             −            −           Cash           −          −               −                 −
 Congo                  ers
 Ecuador             Cash, food,           Food            Food           −        Vouchers          −          −               −                 −
                      vouchers
 Ethiopia            Cash, food                                         Food                         −          −               −                 −
 Malawi             Cash, food,             −                −            −           Cash           −          −               −                 −
                    cash + food
 Mexico              Cash, food            Cash            Food           −             −          Food         −               −                 −
 Niger*              Cash, food             −                −            −           Food           −          −               −                 −
 Niger**            Cash, food,                                                                                           Cash + food       Cash + food
                    cash + food
 Sri Lanka           Cash, food            Cash            Cash           −             −            −          −               −                 −
 Uganda              Cash, food             −                −          Cash            −            −        Cash              −                 −
 Yemen               Cash, food            Cash            Food           −           Cash           −          −               −                 −

Note: – = impacts of modalities are either similar or not reported; dietary diversity is measured by the dietary diversity index, except for Cambodia and DRC
where it was measured by food consumption scores and household dietary diversity scores, respectively; Niger* = Hoddinott et al. (2014), Niger** = Langendorf
et al. (2014), see nutrition section.



One of the most widely used indicators in the examined compilation of evaluations is food consumption.
Collected in 7 out of the 11 countries, food consumption was measured in terms of expenditures or value of




      14
           When provided individually, transfers didn’t exceed targets.




                                                     Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                                   31
     food consumed at household level.15 Only in Ecuador impacts of food consumption were larger for food-re-
     ceiving beneficiaries, including relative to both cash and voucher transfers. In Yemen, Cambodia, Mexico,
     Sri Lanka and Bangladesh the impacts on food consumption are higher for cash than for food-beneficiary
     households. In the case of Bangladesh, one possible explanation is that the size of the cash transfer was
     70 percent higher than the food transfer. In Yemen, Cambodia, and Sri Lanka, the difference in percentage
     points was double digit. However, the difference in impacts is statistically significant only for Yemen and
     Sri Lanka. In DRC, cash households spent approximately US$ 0.34 less than voucher households on food,
     or about US$ 0.11 less per capita. This was largely due to the fact that vouchers were commodity-based.

     Measures for quantifying calorie in-take may present additional information regarding the difference in
     impacts on food availability at household level. In contrast with measures of food consumption, food trans-
     fers tend to have a larger impact on calorie in-take relative to cash in most contexts. In Ecuador, the larger
     effect on calories from food was mainly due to larger increases in consumption of cereals (which repre-
     sented 41 percent of households’ caloric intake). In Yemen, higher caloric consumption from food stemmed
     from the basket composition, including wheat and oil. In the case of Sri Lanka, cash had a larger impact
     than food. Such effect can be explained by a change in diets, i.e. a shift in consumption from highly caloric
     foods to diets of higher-quality (e.g., eggs, meat). In the case of Mexico, the result is consistent with another
     study by Leroy et al. (2010) showing that, compared to the cash group, the effect of food was higher for total
     energy, energy from animal-source foods, and energy from cereals and legumes. According to the authors,
     this was most likely due to the fact that the food basket contained relatively large quantities of grains and
     legumes.16

     Another reviewed indicator is the food gap, which measures months of food shortage by households. In
     the case of Ethiopia, a two year exposure to food rations led to less months of food shortage compared to
     household participating in cash transfers. In Uganda, among cash and food treated household there was a
     reduction of 0.6 and 0.4 months of food insecurity respectively. However, the difference is not statistically
     significant.

     In order to explore the quality of consumption patterns and diets, evaluations have analyzed dietary diver-
     sity indicators. Three include the Dietary Diversity Index (DDI), Food Consumption Scores (FCS) and House-
     hold Dietary Diversity Score (HDDS).17 Results on FCS in Cambodia, Niger (July and October), Ecuador and
     Yemen. Results are mixed, with cash being more effective in three cases (Ecuador’s cash and vouchers
     arms and Yemen), and food in the other three (Cambodia and Niger, both seasons). In Ecuador, the larger



          15
             Food consumption can be measured in terms of consumption or expenditures. Food expenditures are the
     amount of money spent on food in any given time period, while food consumption is the value of food actually con-
     sumed during the given time period. Food consumption/expenditures can be constructed in reference to daily, monthly
     or yearly values.
           16
              Leroy et al. (2010) recommended that in order to avoid overconsumption of energy, “programs should not be
     implemented without an effective behavior change communication component… [and] the use of low-fat milk…or
     the use of micronutrient supplements not containing energy, such as micronutrient sprinkles, should be considered as
     alternatives in this program” (p. 616).
          17
              The Dietary Diversity Index (DDI) is the number of different foods or food groups consumed over a given ref-
     erence period. The Food Consumption Scores (FCS) index is calculated using the frequency of consumption of 8 food
     groups consumed by a household during the seven days before the survey. The Household Dietary Diversity Score
     (HDDS) is a proxy indicator of household food access. The score is calculated by summing the number of food groups
     consumed in the previous seven days from 12 groups. It differs from the DDI in that frequency is measured across
     standardized food groups instead of individual food items. Among other factors, it differs from the FCS in that the
     reference period is one day and not seven, and it does not take into account the frequency of food consumption (and
     it is not weighted).




32   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
increase in dietary diversity for vouchers was mainly due to larger increases in the number of days consum-
ing vegetables, eggs, milk and dairy. Similar effects of transfers were noted for the DDI, which included the
same sample of countries except Cambodia. One reason that the cash recipients had less diverse diets lies
in their choice of using a significant proportion of their transfers to buy grains in bulk, the least expensive
form of calories present on local markets. As it was pointed out by Hoddinott et al. (2014), such purchasing
strategy was a reflection of uncertainty regarding future food prices (as well as being easier at harvest).

The two studies in DRC and Ecuador also allowed for comparing dietary diversity among cash and vouch-
er-receiving arms. In the former, cash households used their transfer to purchase a more diverse set of
food and non-food items. In particular, cash program recipients were significantly more likely to purchase
staple grains (a 24 percentage point increase), beans (a 38 percentage point increase), condiments (a 27
percentage point increase), as well as oil, meat and vegetables as compared to the voucher group. Vouch-
ers, instead, directed or restricted household purchasing decisions toward specific food items, including
voucher recipients being 10 percentage points more likely to purchase other grains (namely rice) and 13
percentage points more likely to purchase salt than cash recipients.

In Ecuador, the impact among cash and voucher recipients was considerably lower. Bearing in mind the dif-
ference in the size and frequency of the voucher transfers,18 cash-receiving households not only invested
large share of the transfer for food (83%), but the money was used to purchase various foods across 7
groups (rots and tubers, vegetables, meat and poultry, eggs, fish and seafood, pulses and legumes, and
milk and diary). Yet vouchers led to increases in 9 out of 12 food groups and, compared to cash, it sparked
an increase in the frequency of consumption of fish and seafood, and pulses and legumes. Instead, in the
Democratic Republic of Congo vouchers were used for a variety of food purchases, while cash transfers
were more likely to be used for alternative purposes, such as for paying for school fees or being saved.19

Finally, a key dimension of food security is “access” to food, hence being closely related to income and
monetary poverty issues. The evidence showed that both food and cash transfers reduced poverty in
Mexico and Bangladesh. In Mexico and Bangladesh, estimates on the impacts of cash and food transfers
on the extreme poverty headcount ratio show that food had larger impacts, with a difference on 3.8 and
1.9 percentage points in Bangladesh and Mexico, respectively (Skoufias et al. 2008, Ahmed et al. 2010).
The overall impacts of transfers on the poverty gap are larger. In the context of Mexico, food transfers
decreased the poverty gap by 22.3 percent and cash transfers by 18.9 percent; moreover, the severity of
poverty decreased by 27.8 percent and 22.9 percent, respectively.

A number of factors affect the comparative efficiency of cash, vouchers and in-kind transfers. These
include the scale of the intervention, the type of humanitarian crisis, delivery mechanisms, transfer size,
procurement costs, and a range of “hidden” costs. We’ll briefly discuss these factors individually. For exam-
ple, in a comprehensive evaluation of ECHO’s cash and vouchers portfolio, Maunder et al. (2015) assessed
the cost-efficiency of 163 transfer projects through the use of an index called Total Cost-Transfer Ratio
(TCTR). Such indicator measures the cost of delivering one dollar worth of transfer to a beneficiary, that is,




     18
        In DRC, the size of the voucher transfer in the first distribution was over twice that of Ecuador (US$90 versus
US$40), while the subsequent two installments were half the Ecuador’s value (US$20 versus US$40). The Ecuador
project envisaged 6 monthly distributions, while the ones in the Democratic Republic of Congo only three over 7
months (see table 2). Also, in the latter vouchers could being freely spent on foods available, while in Ecuador there
were caps on spending by food groups (e.g. out of US$40, a maximum of US$10 could be spent on cereals).
     19
       In the first of three distribution cycles, vouchers could be used for food and non-food items, while in the latter
two for food only. Under the project, vouchers could being freely spent on all foods available in the fairs, while in Ecua-
dor there were caps on spending by food groups (e.g. out of US$40, a maximum of US$10 could be spent on cereals).




                                                 Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                     33
                       the more the TCTR exceeds unity, the less cost-efficient the program is.20 The analysis by Maunder et al.
                       (2015) estimated that larger-scale projects were in general more efficient than smaller projects. Because
                       in-kind projects were between 6 and 16 times larger than other modalities, the average TCTR for sampled
                       in-kind programs was lower than for other modalities. However, the data suggest that, once at scale, cash
                       transfers are more efficient than in-kind transfers (table 2).

Table 2: Cost of transfer modalities by scale of operations

       BENEFICIARIES (‘000)               CASH              VOUCHERS              IN-KIND             COMBINATIONS                TOTAL
 <10                                      2.72                 3.23                   2.40                1.82                   2.74
 10–50                                    1.46                 1.87                   1.86                2.08                    1.70
 50–100                                   1.30                 1.44                   1.55                2.37                    1.70
 100–500                                  1.28                 1.36                   2.05                1.68                    1.60
 >500                                        −                    −                   1.63                   −                    1.63
 Average                                  1.93                 2.11                   1.84                2.03                    1.96
 Number of cases                        76                   34                    30                   23                     163

Source: Maunder et al. (2015)


                       Also, the evaluation showed that the operating context can significantly influence the average TCTR of the
                       different modalities. Overall, TCTR values were highest in complex emergencies, followed by slow onset
                       natural disasters (e.g. drought), then rapid onset natural disasters (e.g. other extreme weather events,
                       earthquakes) and lowest in refugee responses. It is hypothesized that the high costs of complex emergen-
                       cies are related to increased operating costs (such as security), whilst well established refugee settings
                       allow the greatest opportunity for cost savings through forward planning and longer term distributions. A
                       possible explanation for rapid onset disaster response having a lower TCTR than slow onset is that the for-
                       mer tend to occur in countries with less developed infrastructure and markets. Whilst cash transfers usually
                       have the lowest TCTR in most contexts, data shows it has the highest TCTR in complex emergencies. The
                       TCTR for vouchers is also significantly higher in responding to sudden onset disasters (table 3).


Table 3: Cost of transfer modalities by humanitarian context

            CONTEXT                       CASH              VOUCHERS              IN-KIND            COMBINATIONS                TOTAL
 Complex emergency                       2.81                 2.11                1.86                   2.33                     2.37
 Slow onset                              1.64                 1.54                2.44                   1.96                     1.81
 Sudden onset                            1.39                 2.72                1.46                   1.61                     1.62
 Refugees                                1.15                 1.81                1.48                   1.40                     1.44
 Average                                 1.93                 2.11                1.84                   2.03                     1.96
 Number of cases                        76                   34                  30                    23                     163

Source: Maunder et al. (2015)




                             For example, a project costing a total of EUR 30 million delivers US$20 million in transfers to beneficiaries (and
                                20

                       spends US$10 million on administrative costs), the TCTR is 30/20 or 1.5.




34                     Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
When assessing efficiency, it is also useful to distinguish between the delivery of assistance and other cost
items. Delivery is here defined as encompassing costs related to “moving” transfers from the agency to
beneficiaries. These may include transportation, handling and storage of food, as well as costs related to
benefit payment, e.g., debit card fees per transaction, printing of vouchers or issuance of magnetic cards.
In this regard, our findings corroborate those of Cabot Venton et al. (2015) in that cash, when compared to
in-kind approaches, consistently emerges as more efficient to deliver (see table 4). Put it differently, Mar-
golies and Hoddinott (2015) estimated that at the particular levels of transfers in four studies that compared
equal value of transfers, between 13 and 23 percent additional households could have been reached if the
food transfers were in cash instead.


Table 4: Summary of efficiency from comparative studies

                                                                                          MORE EFFICIENT MODALITY
                                  TRANSFERS PROVIDED                      DELIVERY COST         TRANSFER COST           OVERALL EFFICIENCY
 Bangladesh                  Cash, food                                       Cash                      −                      Cash
 Dem. Rep. Congo             Cash, vouchers                                   Cash                      −                      Cash
 Ecuador                     Cash, food, vouchers                             Cash                     Cash                    Cash
 Yemen                       Cash, food                                       Cash                     Food                    Food
 Uganda                      Cash, food                                       Cash                      −                      Cash
 Niger*                      Cash, food                                       Cash                      −                      Cash
 Niger**                     Cash, food, cash + food                          Cash                     Food                    Food
 Malawi                      Cash, food, cash + food                                                   Food                    Food
 Mexico                      Cash, food                                       Cash                       -                    Cash

Notes: Niger* = Hoddinott et al. (2014), Niger**= Langendorf et al. (2014).


In terms of cost of “transfers” as opposed to just delivery, it is important to contrast the cost for agencies
and the local value of such transfer for beneficiaries. For cash transfers, the issue is straightforward: the
cost of the transfer and its local value are always the same, that is, the procurement cost of cash is exactly
the amount of cash provided to beneficiaries. Indeed, in most food assistance projects the size of cash
transfers is generally calculated as the monetary value of a bundle of food commodities on local markets.

When it comes to food transfers, costs for agencies and local market values may not be the same. Specif-
ically, there might be economies of scale from purchasing large quantities of commodities from producers,
wholesale traders, and, in the case of vouchers, small retailers.21 In other words, under the right circum-
stances agencies can “buy low and transfer high:” if the difference between the purchase cost and the
recipient transfer value is large enough, such differences can offset possible delivery cost savings from
cash transfers, such as observed in Malawi, Niger, and the West Bank and Gaza (Creti 2011; Audsley et al.
2010). An illustration with data from two projects is proposed in box 1.

Devising robust and standardized tools and methods for identifying, collecting and analyzing cost data
should be a key priority for the transfer debate. In this regard, it’d be important that cost calculations



      21
        Cabot Venton et al. (2015) document that, in Ethiopia, the cost of local food is typically lower than international
food aid in the harvest season, but international food prices can be cheaper than local prices in the lean season. In
the Philippines, local procurement was 27% less costly than overseas food aid once transport was considered; in Leb-
anon, instead, the cost of hygiene items and non-food items is much cheaper when procured internationally in bulk.




                                                     Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                   35
                                                                         are based on a more nuanced understanding of supply
Box 1: Procurement versus delivery costs: evidence from                  chains and agricultural markets. Indeed, implemen-
Ecuador and Yemen                                                        tation models can vary considerably pending on the
                                                                         specific approaches and actors involved at different
Let’s illustrate these considerations by contrasting results             points in supply chains. For instance, Gelli and Suwa
between two countries. In Ecuador, the procurement costs                 (2014) noted that “…different approaches can even
                                                                         co-exist within the same country, where, for instance,
for food were higher than their local market value: indeed,
                                                                         programme implementation is owned by decentralised
accounting for the local procurement of most of canned                   institutions (e.g. individual states in Brazil or India), or
fish, rice, lentils and oil, and including the international             where agencies…are complementing the national pro-
procurement of some oil and lentils, it turns out that it                grammes (e.g. Ghana and Kenya), [or models] linking
cost US$46.76 to provide a transfer that is locally-valued               the provision of goods and services for school feeding
at US$40. This led to a total cost of providing food of                  to smallholder farmers and the community.” Those
                                                                         nuances need to be taken into account for compre-
US$58.25 (US$46.76 plus 11.46), which even exacerbated
                                                                         hensive cost analyses, and so would a range of hidden
the cost differences – that is, total cost for cash is US$42.99          costs.
while for vouchers is US$43.27 (the value of both voucher
and cash transfer is, by definition, US$40). Indeed, the                 Indeed, one key issue for program efficiency relates
difference between food and cash is now US$15.26                         to the time, forgone income and transportation costs
per transfer compared to US$8.47 (i.e., US$11.46 minus                   that people may incur to access the benefit. For exam-
                                                                         ple, Margolies and Hoddinott (2014) estimated that
US$2.99) when transfer values were excluded. In Yemen,
                                                                         in Yemen, cash was more efficient than food for the
instead, the market conditions were such that it was                     agency, but not for beneficiaries: it cost 2.7 hours of
possible to procure for US$39 a food basket locally valued               travel/waiting time and high transportation costs (8.6%
at US$49. In this case, the cost difference between food                 of transfer value) to access cash, as opposed to 1.9
and cash cost even reversed, with cash being US$2.8                      hours and 2% of transfer’s value for transportation cost
more expensive than food (figure 2).                                     for accessing food. This is because food was distributed
                                                                         closer to people’s villages, which increased the cost for
                                                                         the agency and lowered that of beneficiaries. In Ecua-
USD                                                                      dor, instead, food distribution sites were located farther
20                                                                       than cash and voucher payment points, hence increas-
                        15.26
                                                                         ing private costs (in terms of both time and income); in
16                                                                       Uganda and Niger, there appears to be no difference in
12                                                                       transaction costs since both transfers were distributed
                                                                         at village-level.
               8.47
  8                                         7.19
                                                                         In general, there appears to be a trade-off between
  4
                                                                         costs for the implementer and those for beneficiaries:
  0                                                                      as payment or distribution points get closer to bene-
                Ecuador                      Yemen                       ficiaries, costs for the implementer get higher, while
 -4                                                  -2.8                the transaction costs for beneficiaries dwindle. In other
      Food-cash cost difference       Food-cash cost difference          words, programs that seem less expensive could be
      (excluding cost of              (with cost of procurement)         so because the cost of accessing transfers had been
      procurement)                                                       shifted from the implementer to the beneficiary.

                                                                          Efficiency is also influenced by whether cash is pro-
                                                                          vided as a substitute for in-kind assistance or whether
                      in addition to it (i.e., when agencies can operate both cash and in-kind delivery system). For example, a
                      refugee program in Ethiopia replaced a portion of the in-kind basket with cash. Data suggest that cash was
                      25–30% cheaper to deliver than in-kind aid (Cabot Venton et al. 2015). Many of the gains of cash transfers
                      arise because the agency delivering food did not set up a separate system for cash, but rather maintained
                      efficiency by using the existing food delivery system. Similarly, in Lebanon WFP’s corporate relationship




36                    Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
with Mastercard and the bank with which it partnered resulted in waived fees for certain costs, and econ-
omies of scale and competition led a card service company working with UNHCR partners to reduce costs
associated with ATM-distributed cash.

In a range of circumstances, beneficiaries receiving food transfers may resale them in full or in part in local
markets. This may happen not necessarily because food was not needed per se, but because the need
to meet non-food expenditure priorities (e.g., medicines) or for buying foods of different quality. While a
comprehensive review of resales of commodities may not be available, anecdotal evidence suggest that the
practice mat occur in a number of contexts. Given that resales may entail transaction costs by beneficiaries
and sales may occur at prices below market ones (and at a cost below that of procurement incurred by the
agency), it would be important to document and quantify those practices more systematically and include
them in cost analyses.

Finally, the potentially large logistics costs entailed by food-based programs, including procurement, trans-
port, storage, and distribution, may posit particular risks for accountability, transparency and “leakages.”
In India, for example, it was estimated that, in the early 2000s, about 58 percent of the food under the PDS
program did not reach the intended beneficiaries (World Bank 2011). Such losses throughout the logistics
chain should also be accounted for comprehensive cost-effectiveness assessments of alternative modal-
ities.

Livelihoods and entrepreneurship

In order to gauge the appropriateness of providing cash grants to enhance earning opportunities, it’s
important to identify key constraints faced by the poor. These might include market failures around labor
markets (e.g., information to match skills and job opportunities), credit and capital constraints, lack of
coordination among different actors involved in job markets, and low individual capacities (e.g., lack of
information, cognitive and psychological limitations). These represent forms of barriers that may demand
distinct government interventions (Almeida et al. 2012).

Specifically, the choice between cash and in-kind transfers for livelihoods tends to occur when people’s
main constraint is lack of capital or an individual limitation. In other words, “in-kind” here refers to physical
capital, assets, materials, or training.22 A range of interventions providing mostly-cash or mostly in-kind
grants have been implemented and evaluated, often as part of “graduation” approaches (see box 2). These
are not necessarily “pure” cash or in-kind grants, but provide a blend of cash and in-kind interventions in
different proportions.

As in the food security realm, evidence from a direct comparison of cash versus in-kind transfers within
the same intervention is more limited and available only for a handful of countries (see table 5 for a sum-
mary). These found that cash grants alone were not always the most effective modality, while in-kind or
combinations of modalities could at times do better. A limitation of these studies is that many of them have
insufficient statistical power to rule out large differences between cash and in-kind. Comparative cost
analysis is also rarely available.

In particular, in Uganda Fiala (2013) evaluated a program for business owners who were randomly selected
to receive loans, cash grants, business skills training or a combination of these programs. Six and nine



     22
         The question is part of larger investigation around how people behave in the presence of poverty traps and
under-investment, if there are “self-control” problems and time-inconsistent preferences (e.g., if an individual prefers
that tomorrow he or she reinvests profits in the business, but when tomorrow comes prefers to spend the money), or
the occurrence of coordination failures, such as when there is a discrepancy between perceived and expected returns
to training (De Mel et al. 2012).




                                                Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                   37
  Box 2: Cash and in-kind-based grants

  Among cash-oriented grants, the Northern Uganda Social Action Funds Uganda targeted mostly young males
  (mean age of 25), underemployed, and with above median wealth and education (75% had primary school
  education) in a credit constrained environment (Blattman et al. 2014). Participants formed groups of 20 individuals
  and submitted investment proposals, with selected ones receiving an average transfer of US$382 per group. This
  was not an unconditional cash transfer per se, since proposals should include training and capital investment
  components. After 4 years, large improvements were shown in skilled trade, work hours and earnings. However, a
  similar program in Tanzania targeted to ‘vulnerable households’ did not have same success (Ozler 2015). Also, less
  pronounced findings for cash grants to young people were found in Liberia (Blattman et a. 2015).
  Among in-kind-oriented grants, a prominent one is the Multifaceted Graduation Approach (MGA). This provides
  ‘ultra-poor’ beneficiaries with productive assets (e.g., livestock), training and support for those asset, life skills
  coaching, consumption support with cash or food for about a year, access to savings accounts, and health
  information and services. In other words, as opposed to cash-oriented grants, MGA offers intense ‘hand-holding’
  towards graduation and mostly through in-kind transfers. After a year from the program’s end, Banerjee et al.
  (2015) assessed 6 country case studies and found significant effects across the board (consumption, income,
  food security, asset accumulation, mental health, political involvement, etc.). Yet the size of the effect sizes were
  modest[2] (0.05–0.25 SD). The total program costs for the full duration of the program ranged from US$1,455 per
  household (India) to US $5,962 (Pakistan). Transfers accounted for about a third of total direct costs, but with high
  variation (19% in Ghana to 63% in India). After two years from program completion, a study by Bandiera et al. (2013)
  for Bangladesh found similar effects on asset accumulation, expenditures, earnings, and life satisfaction. They
  also found a significant shift from wage labor to self-employment, with growing hours worked and hourly wages
  increasing. A simulated comparison to a hypothetical equal-valued cash grant was favorable to an in-kind MGA.



Table 5: Summary of evidence from comparative studies

  COUNTRY                TRANSFERS PROVIDED                     MOST EFFECTIVE MODALITY               COMMENTS
Uganda         Cash, loans, in-kind (trainings), combinations   Loans + in-kind           Program designed for business
                                                                                          owners
Ghana          Cash, in-kind (equipment, materials)             In-kind                   Effects only for larger busi-
                                                                                          ness-owners
Sri Lanka      Cash, in-kind (training), Cash + in-kind         Cash + in-kind            Effects only for women already in
                                                                                          business
Bangladesh     Cash, in-kind (full graduation package)          In-kind                   Estimates for cash based on simu-
                                                                                          lations

                  months after the interventions, men with access to loans with training report 54% greater profits. The
                  loan-only intervention had some initial impact, but this dissipated by the nine month follow-up. No signifi-
                  cant impacts were found from the unconditional grant interventions but the confidence intervals allow for
                  relatively large effects.

                  In urban Ghana, Fafchamps et al. (2014) randomly gave cash and in-kind grants to male and female-owned
                  microenterprises. For women running subsistence enterprises, there were no gains in profits from either
                  treatment. For women with larger businesses, only in-kind grants caused growth in profits, suggesting a
                  flypaper effect whereby “…capital coming directly into the business sticks there, but cash does not.” How-
                  ever, for men the authors cannot reject that cash and in-kind grants have the same effect.




38                Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
Finally, two different experiments were conducted in Sri Lanka. In the first one, De Mel et al. (2008) eval-
uated the effects on firms of the provision of capital stock on business profits. The median firm owner in
the sample was 41 years old, had 10 years of education, and had been running his or her firm for 5 years.
Participants were provided with capital in cash or in-kind (equipment). The study found that those forms of
capital had similar effects and increased profits of microenterprises by over 5% per month, or at least 60%
per year. However, these effects only occurred for men, with no impact of either in-kind or cash grants for
women.

In the second experiment, De Mel et al. (2012) assessed the performance of business training with and
without cash grants among two groups of women: one operating subsistence enterprises and the other
who were out of the labor force but interested in starting a business. After 2 years, for women already
in business, training alone had no impact on business profits, sales or capital stock. In contrast, a mix of
training and grant led to large and significant improvements in business profitability, although impacts dis-
sipated over time. For women interested in starting enterprises, business training accelerated labor market
entry but showed no increase in net business ownership. Both profitability and business practices of the
new entrants are increased by training, suggesting training may be more effective for new owners than for
existing businesses.

In general, this brief discussion points to the importance to understand which constraint binds: cash or
in-kind grant programs can likely be effective when the key constraint is lack of capital or of information/
skills, but not others. Also, objectives and targeting matter: some of the most successful grant programs
(e.g., Uganda) targeted relatively educated and wealthy youth. Programs targeting the poorest and vulner-
able generated more limited impacts. Finally, only a handful of programs have deliberately compared cash
and in-kind interventions, and relative cost-efficiency data is limited.23

Nutrition

The determinants of child malnutrition are multifaceted and involve a range of issues around access to
food, feeding practices, and broader environmental and sanitary conditions. This is important to underscore
since transfers should be mostly interpreted in relation to the component around access to (nutritious) food
as a key cause of malnutrition. In this regard there is a significant research gap in exploring the ability of
alternative transfers to achieve nutritional goals.24

Indeed, as laid out by Webb et al. (2014) the specific interventions to pursue those goals largely or almost
entirely include in-kind approaches. These include general food assistance, management of severe and
moderate acute malnutrition, delivery of micronutrient, infant and young child feeding in emergencies,
treatment of diarrhea with oral rehydration therapy/zinc, prevention and treatment of vitamin a deficiency,
food and nutrition assistance for people living with HIV, the psychosocial components of nutrition, and
nutritional care for groups with special needs. Similarly, a recent Cochrane review by Page et al. (2015)



     23
        This, again, doesn’t mean that evidence for individual interventions is limited. As noted, for a review of the
multiplier impact of cash transfers, see FAO (2015) and http://www.fao.org/economic/ptop/home/en/.
     24
        Objectives of nutrition actions in emergencies typically include reducing levels of wasting (GAM and SAM
with or without oedema) to below conventionally-defined emergency rates or thresholds; reducing and/or preventing
micronutrient deficiencies, because these markedly increase mortality; (reducing the specific vulnerability of infants
and young children in crises through the promotion of appropriate child care, with special emphasis on infant and
young child feeding practices; and preventing a life-threatening deterioration of nutritional status by ensuring access
by emergency-affected populations to adequate, safe and nutritious foods that meet minimum nutrient needs; these
should be assessed in relation to the prevailing disease burden, pre-existing nutrient deficiencies, temperature con-
siderations, and others.




                                                Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                  39
     concluded that “…compared with in-kind food, there was no evidence that cash influenced the chance of
     child death or severe acute malnutrition.”

     However, some studies present data on relative impacts of transfers on short and longer-term nutrition-re-
     lated dimensions. In Mexico, both food and cash transfers increased the in-take of micronutrient (iron)
     amongst children by 1.61 mg and 1.10 mg, respectively. However, the difference is not statistically signif-
     icant. The same pattern holds for increases in zinc and vitamin C. Anemia prevalence was reduced by 2
     percent in food-receiving households and 4 percent in the cash arm. In Uganda, cash decreased anemia by
     about 10 percentage points among children (at 10 percent confidence level). In this context, food transfers
     had no significant impact. In Cambodia neither treatment modality in the food-cash scholarship program
     had significant impacts on anthropometric indicators, possibly because of the small transfer size and short
     exposure to treatment.

     The most robust and recent study in humanitarian settings includes a perspective study in Niger’s region
     of Maradi (Langendorf et al. 2014). The study compared several types of cash and food combinations—
     including a rage of different high-quality foods (e.g., lipid-based supplements and fortified cereals) as well
     as more traditional ones (oil, pulses)—with the objectives to reduce severe and moderate acute malnu-
     trition as well as mortality rates among children. The findings indicated that combining food and cash
     transfers reduced the incidence of malnutrition at about twice the rate compared to either a cash transfer
     or to supplementary food alone.

     Health

     Just like nutrition, the determinants of health are complex and multidimensional. Health can be considered
     a broader domain than nutrition, with issues such as morbidity and child malnutrition being key causes
     of child health and mortality. Those domains underscore the importance of the quality and availability of
     services: while the cash versus in-kind transfer debate is largely about “demand-side” issues, there is a
     much wider agenda around the supply-side of services, with health being at the center of it (UNHCR 2015).
     In other words, the issue is closely related to the debate around conditionality in transfers, including when
     they are appropriate, the type of conditions, and degree of enforcement.25

     While an extensive discussion on conditionality goes beyond the scope of this note, the issue stresses
     the importance of understanding causality chains and the role of transfers within them. In other words,
     transfers cannot replace services, and when it comes to health, their quality and availability are key in
     influencing the effectiveness and efficiency of transfer-based interventions—whether in cash or in-kind.
     For instance, while transfer programs have been successful in increasing utilization of health services, the
     subsequent link that programs improve the health of the population is not always evident in the data (Meier
     et al. 2011).

     Although in the nutrition field we were able to document at least a few comparative studies of alternative
     modalities, in the health sector there seems to be a dearth of relative evidence. Although some experi-
     ence exists (see box 3), a comprehensive evaluation concluded “…there is no documentation on the cost



          25
             Conditional cash transfers (CCTs) may vary considerably in terms of level of planning, monitoring, and enforce-
     ment of compliance. For example, the World Bank (2015) distinguishes four categories of conditionalities with respect
     to education-related conditions: (i) explicit conditions on paper and/or encouragement of children’s schooling, but no
     monitoring or enforcement (an example is Ecuador’s Bono de Desarollo Humano); (i) explicit conditions, monitored
     with minimal enforcement (examples are Brazil’s Bolsa Familia and Mexico’s PROSPERA); (iii) explicit conditions with
     monitoring and enforcement of enrollment condition (an example is Cambodia’s CESSP Scholarship Program); and (iv)
     explicit conditions with monitoring and enforcement of attendance condition (examples are Malawi’s SIHR CCT arm
     and China’s Pilot CCT program).




40   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
efficiency or cost-effectiveness of using cash transfers,
vouchers or value-based vouchers in providing health           Box 3: Vouchers for emergency health and sanitation
services during humanitarian crisis” (Gorter et al. 2012).
This might be due to the unfamiliarity among health            Vouchers for reproductive health in Syria were implemented
workers with these tools, the complex determinants of          by UNFPA and funded by ECHO. The vouchers enabled
health, and the need to ensure quality in provision.
                                                               women to obtain free-of-charge maternal and obstetric
Education                                                      services at the Obstetric University Hospital and Syrian
                                                               Family    Planning      Association   clinics.   The   vouchers
Many of the considerations advanced for health and             widened the spectrum of health centers, which increased
nutrition can apply to education as well. Being a ser-         the chances of beneficiaries to get services. In 2012 and
vice, also education rests on both supply and demand-          2013, UNFPA distributed around 40,000 vouchers in
side issues: where the former include things like
                                                               violence-affected areas through outreach mobile teams
classrooms, text books, and quality of education, the
latter includes transfers that incentivize the usage of a      or medical volunteers providing reproductive health
specific service (i.e., schools). Also in this case, we find   services and information. The distribution was systematic
that sequence and preconditions matter—there is lit-           and focused not only on shelters for Internally Displaced
tle rationale (beyond political economy) to implement a        Persons (IDPs) but also in most needed communities
conditional transfer if the supply of services is unavail-     through NGOs mobile teams and medical professionals
able or of inadequate quality.
                                                               working in the most affected communities in the targeted
On a related point, in Tanzania there is extensive exper-      governorates in Damascus, Rural Damascus, Homs and
imental evidence documenting the effectiveness of              Aleppo. The services covered by RH vouchers include
national CCT programs (Evans et al. 2014). However,            mainly emergency and life-saving activities (C-section,
polls show that 92% of a sampled Tanzanian voters              hysterectomy, bleeding). In Gaza, a voucher was
would rather spend government revenues on sup-                 introduced in 2012 over a three-month period to cover
ply-side services (including education) rather than cash
                                                               the drinking water needs of 696 households. In particular,
transfers (Sandefur et al. 2015). One reason respon-
dents cited for favoring government services over direct       the voucher provided access to 6.5 liters of chlorinated
distribution was that social services encourage a col-         and desalinated water per person/day provided by water
lective voice that helps increase accountability, while        vendors (truckers). In Lebanon, Syrian refugees families
transfers would focus people on private interests. These       sharing household latrines (270 latrines, each shared by
are important factors that complement more technical           3 families) were given a $30 commodity voucher that
considerations when gauging the overall supply versus
                                                               enabled them to empty their latrines via a local contractor
demand approaches.
                                                               (market actor) identified by NGOs and their partners. In
That said, the demand-side of the in-kind versus cash          the aftermath of the 2010 Haiti earthquake and following
debate can be summarized by school feeding ver-                a market assessment, a commodity voucher program
sus CCT programs, both of which are largely geared             was introduced to provide 440 households with essential
toward education objectives. School feeding programs           hygiene items through local shops. The vouchers could be
are among the largest education-related, in-kind trans-
                                                               exchanged through 7 contracted shops for a fixed quantity
fer schemes globally. The volume of spending is about
US$75 billions annually and these programs have been           of specified hygiene commodities. In Jordan, about 3,000
widely used also in humanitarian contexts: for exam-           households were provided with a voucher value of US$21.
ple, during the 2007/08 food and fuel crises at least          This could be redeemed in 11 contracted shops against a
38 low and middle income countries scaled-up their             relatively broad selection of hygiene items, including soap,
school feeding schemes (WFP, 2013). These interven-            buckets, baby diapers, and others.
tions, which can take the form of school meals and take
home rations, are currently present in 131 countries           Source: Maunder et al. (2015)
and reach 105 million beneficiaries in India, 47 million in
Brazil, and 26 in China—and about 375 million people
around the world. Conversely, CCTs are implemented in




                                              Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                  41
     64 countries, with the largest-scale schemes reach 49 million beneficiaries in Brazil, 26 million in Mexico
     and 19 million in the Philippines (World Bank 2015).

     Just like CCTs, school feeding can generally pursue a mix of objectives in enhancing education as well
     as nutrition, provide an income transfer, and more recently in promotion of agriculture through “home
     grown school feeding” (Sumberg and Sabates-Wheeler, 2011). The first of these objectives is regularly met,
     including in terms of attendance and reduction in school-drop out (Bundy et al. 2011). Nutritional impacts,
     however, are less often documented, in part because the age group reached directly is less at risk of
     undernutrition than are younger children. Moreover, given trends in obesity, it is not even clear what gains
     should be monitored. There are similar findings emerging in the extensive empirical literature around CCTs
     (Ravallion 2016; World Bank 2014; Fiszbein and Schady 2009).

     As Alderman and Bundy (2012) put it, school feeding “…is a plausible candidate for a social protection
     investment on a par with CCTs.” Precisely for this reasons, it is remarkable that, considering also the mas-
     sive scale of the programs, there is virtually no comparative impact evaluation that contrasts school feeding
     to CCTs in attaining educational goals.

     Shelter

     According to a recent position paper, the increasing momentum behind cash transfers in general, and
     unconditional multi sector grants in particular, does not take into consideration some of the specifics, com-
     plexities and technical challenges of shelter programming (GSC 2015). One key issue concerns the stage in
     crisis. While providing cash can allow people to find short term rented accommodation or purchase materi-
     als for temporary or emergency shelters, cash approaches for the medium-term have raised concerns. This
     centers on risks, liabilities and quality standards related to construction of more permanent shelter as part
     of the early recovery and reconstruction phases (Juillard and Opu 2014).

     Relatedly, the high-value payments that result from “cashing-out” shelter support may amplify protection
     risks. As in other sectors, there is a strong need for monitoring, communication and engagement with
     communities to ensure a clear understanding program objectives beyond getting families “under a roof,”
     including forging a shared vision between communities and humanitarian actors. Some initial pilots, how-
     ever, show that some of those challenges can be overcome with incentives-based design (see box 4).

     An overall national housing market encompasses a constellation of individual markets, and it is essential to
     gain an understanding of their dynamics. This includes the capacity of the construction industry, the volume
     of usable housing stock for purchase or rent, availability of land, key construction materials, skilled and
     unskilled labor, credit, loans, mortgages and other housing finance mechanisms. In crisis contexts, tracking
     key shelter markets such as the rental sector has proven significantly complex, and the shelter sector and,
     at the moment, the broader humanitarian community does not seem to possess the means or capacity to
     produce such assessments in any systematic manner. However, the same set of considerations can apply
     to in-kind provisions, that is, in-kind transfers for shelter should also be informed by market assessments.

     Cross-sectoral or “multi-purpose” transfers

     The concept of multi-purpose cash transfers (MPCT) is a recent innovation envisioning the provision of
     cash to individuals for an amount large enough to cover several needs that transcend sectoral boundaries
     (e.g., food security, health, education, shelter). Arguably, several contextual factors driving cost efficiency
     and effectiveness around food security transfers, for example, can be extended to MPCTs. Also, some of
     the evidence presented around livelihoods could be relevant for this transfer model. For instance, the grant
     programs described in box 2 provide a range of interventions that add-up to a grant, but these are generally
     geared to pursue a core objective, not a multitude of them.




42   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
   Box 4: Piloting cash for shelter needs

   In urban contexts in Jordan, a cash grant was designed to cover shelter needs for 4,000 Syrian refugee
   households. It is using a combination of the following: (i) a phased conditional cash grants for landlords who are
   asked to complete unfinished buildings or rooms and to host Syrian refugees for a year and a half (for free); and (ii)
   unconditional payments to refugee households to cover move-in fees and basic furniture.
   In the Philippines, an NGO implemented a cash grant for shelter. After implementation, monitoring data highlighted
   that much of the grant intended for shelter was being spent to cover household’s food needs. This led to restructuring
   of the intervention as follows: a single transfer of PhP 5,000, for food and basic needs to be determined by the
   household; a conditional cash grant for shelter, delivered in three tranches, with later tranches provided once
   progress in the construction of the shelter was confirmed; and a single livelihoods grant of PhP 6,700, provided
   after attendance at skills training and development of a business proposal. Subsequent monitoring found that 96%
   of families then spent their shelter money on shelter and that the household didn’t have other unmet needs.
   During the peak of the Haitian displacement crisis, more than 1.5 million people were living in over 1,500 camps;
   in early 2013, these were reduced to 320,000 people living in 385 camps. The Rental Support Cash Grant aimed
   to help closing the cycle of displacement and putting families back to living conditions comparable to those pre-
   earthquake. Despite the huge scale of the displacement, the program enabled over 500,000 Haitians to leave
   unplanned displacement camps. In particular, it provided financial payments to displaced families/individuals for
   a fixed-term lease in accommodation rented from a private-sector landlord. Housing conditions were subject to
   rigorous assessment, including only allowing those classified as viable or ‘green’ to be part of the program. Cash
   grants included $500 per family, $25 for transport costs, and an unconditional $125 if the family was still in the
   rental property 6–8 weeks after the program. A decision was made early on to assess vulnerability and needs
   using camps as the unit of analysis. In other words, if a camp was judged to be a priority for assistance, all the
   families inside that camp would benefit from the program. After a process of registration and communication,
   implementing agency staff guided the beneficiary to a low cost rental property of choice. The agency member
   may choose to pay beneficiaries through banks, or through mobile phone money applications. The next step is the
   relocation, and the need to dismantle tents and closing the camp to avoid among other, security and health risks.
   Haitian protection teams were however mainstreamed into all steps of the process.




As a result, multi-sectoral programs present specific features, including in terms of design, monitoring,
reporting, coordination, and evaluation parameters. While a discussion of the conceptual and operational
feasibility of such programs goes beyond the scope of this paper, we note that there is a limited, if any,
evidence on comparative impacts relative to in-kind grants.

Following Maunder et al. (2015),“…no quantitative evidence was found from research, evaluations or com-
parative studies—reflecting the relatively new status of both MPCTs and cost efficiency analysis—and
there is a need to generate more quantitative evidence.” In addition, the authors further argued that“…
not all needs can be effectively addressed through a single consolidated transfer—certain, specific needs
may be more appropriately addressed through single sector transfers as a complement to MPCTs—such
as shelter and nutrition. Consequently a need for multiple agencies and programs may remain and cost
efficiency gains will be limited.”




                                          Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts              43
     4. Factors to consider in transfer selection
     Against the background of the previous sections, we distill six main factors to consider for appropriate
     decision-making in selecting between transfer modalities. These have been extensively discussed in the
     literature and include program objectives, the level of market functionality, predicted cost-effectiveness,
     implementation capacity, protection and gender, and political economy (Gentilini 2016; Levine and Bailey
     2015; WFP 2015; DFID 2013; ECHO 2013; UNHCR 2012; Harvey and Bailey 2011; Lentz et al. 2013).

     Objectives and initial conditions

     Setting clear objectives is key for gauging performance as they are the lens through which effectiveness
     and efficiency are examined. In a number of cases, programs can pursue multiple objectives and it would
     be important to lay them out as specifically as possible as well as prioritize them. For example, just pursuing
     “food security” objectives may not be very informative, and practitioners may consider focusing on specific
     dimensions such as calories availability or dietary diversity. In the case of cash, the setting of specific met-
     rics becomes key to ensure appropriate performance measurement: while cash is fungible, fungibility is not
     an impact per se but a feature of the modality.

     The setting of objectives should also be closely aligned with beneficiaries’ profiles. Accounting for “initial
     conditions” plays a key role in clarifying the objectives of the cash or in-kind program and interpret results.
     This is closely related to considerations around targeting and setting realistic expectations for what a
     modality can achieve for people with different characteristics. Our discussion around livelihoods showed
     that it is harder to achieve entrepreneurial results when cash or in-kind grants are provided to the poorest.
     Similarly, the starting point of beneficiaries in terms of, say, calories availability, may likely affect the size
     of impacts: where the initial level of calories is very low, we may probably observe an impact of larger size
     compared to the effects on households whose initial level of calories is higher (Leroy et al. 2010; Asfaw
     2006). Hidrobo et al. (2014b) present evidence on this relationship: based on a meta-analysis of evaluations
     of transfer programs, the authors show that impacts tend to decrease by about 2 percent every increase in
     100 kilocalories at baseline.

     Finally, the setting of objectives should be the result of a nuanced understanding of the determinants of
     a given problem. It can be argued that the humanitarian imperative motivating the provision of cash or
     in-kind assistance in the 2–3 weeks following a disaster poses particular pressure for swift action. This
     implies that the depth and breadth of response analysis would range from basic analysis in the immediate
     aftermath of disasters, to more sophisticated and comprehensive processes as emergencies get prolonged
     and protracted. Those approaches should be nested within a theory of change on why and how transfers
     will affect a given dimension, particularly around nutrition, health, education and shelter issues. In other
     words, the setting of objectives should be closely intertwined with a process of understanding the causes
     of the problem at hand and how to address it.

     Understanding markets

     Turning “needs” into “effective demand” is a key rationale for cash transfers. Yet this might be challenging
     in presence of weakly-integrated or poorly-competitive markets. In those contexts, price transmissions
     across areas might be fragmented and hampered by policy or physical bottlenecks (e.g., trade policy, dam-
     age of roads and infrastructure, limited information, or hoarding practices), and localized cash injections
     may result in price spikes leaving consumers or net buyers worse-off. In other words, there are circum-
     stances where local markets may perform poorly, food prices may be excessively high or volatile, and pri-
     vate traders may not have incentives to supply commodities. In those contexts, a cash transfer may neither
     lead to more choice nor purchasing power, and in-kind food may be a more appropriate response (i.e., it
     ensures both availability of and access to food). From this perspective, a basic level of market functioning is
     a prerequisite for the effective provision of cash transfers and to enable local economic multipliers.




44   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
The discussion on market analysis has important practical implications for program design, implementation
and efficiency. In some cases, price forecasts may be particularly uncertain in the program design stage.
These could turn a program that was efficient in the planning phase into a cost-inefficient one during
implementation. Indeed, keeping purchasing power constant in the wake of sharp price increases may
escalate costs due to extensive use of contingency funds, such as shown in Zambia (Harvey and Savage
2006). Similar issues are also faced in contexts of more predictable price dynamics: in Malawi, for exam-
ple, analysis on price trends over 20 years shows mean inter-seasonal price fluctuations in the order of 60
percent (Ellis and Manda 2012).

While understanding food markets, supply chains and demand dynamics is no easy task, standards and
tools are being developed to measure a “working market” and link it to response analysis (Michelson et al.
2012; Barrett et al. 2009). As cash is becoming more “intersectoral” and used to pursue multiple objec-
tives across traditional sectors, this raises the question of how to ensure a comprehensive assessment of
markets beyond food, and including for example shelter markets.

Expected cost-effectiveness

The expected cost-effectiveness of alternative transfers is challenging to predict. But as evidence is
increasing (i.e., for food security), decision-makers can begin observe a mild tendency on what to expect
from a given transfer. This would help anticipate the likelihood of objectives being achieved. New tools are
now being developed to help inform such ex-ante decision-making process of calibrating anticipated effec-
tiveness (Ryckembusch et al. 2013).

Clearly, the effectiveness equation has many variable, and many of them would depend on a host of design
issues. These may include the characteristics of targeted beneficiaries (see discussion on objectives), the
size of transfers, the duration of programs, the timing and frequency of payments, household expenditure
patterns, the commodities that constitute the composition of food baskets, and how manages resources
at household level. These decisions may actually shape effectiveness more than the modality of transfers
(Levine and Bailey 2015). Potential negative impacts should also be anticipated and managed—e.g., on
food prices or intracommunity relations (MacAuslan and Riemenschneider 2011)—as well as possible
externalities such as economic multipliers (FAO 2015).

As we have seen, the issue of cost can be less straightforward than often assumed. The nuances around
scale of interventions, the presence of common programming approaches, type of humanitarian crisis, pro-
curement costs, and a host of hidden costs all call for more comprehensive costs assessments than those
based on sole delivery costs26. Also in this case, costs should be interpreted against objectives. Especially
when it comes to humanitarian situations, there might be circumstances where higher costs could be justi-
fied on life-saving grounds, but these should take into account alternatives more systematically.

Both effectiveness and efficiency considerations should take into account risks. Different transfers might
entail different risks, including around security, corruption or diversion, delays in providing transfers and
market failures, or protection (see point discussed below). If a transfer modality was rejected because
of identified risks, decision-makers should consider whether these or comparable risks existed for other
choices, if the risks could be managed, and whether an unjustified degree of risk aversion was shown and
hindered program cost-effectiveness.




    26
         This is particularly compelling for health and other objectives that may envisage the use of social services.




                                                  Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts               45
     Implementation capacity

     A number of humanitarian actors may have more experience managing in-kind transfers than other modali-
     ties. There is, though, a responsibility to provide appropriate assistance, and so choices should not be justi-
     fied based only on pre-existing skills and experience. However, it might be unreasonable to expect capacity
     to deliver “new” transfer types to be built up immediately or during a massive, urgent emergency response.

     Also in this case, the global trends in humanitarian situations being increasingly protracted suggests that
     crises should be dealt with a longer operational time frame, not just with a 6–12 months lens. Two consid-
     erations emerge: on one hand, there is a clear opportunity to link with existing national safety nets when
     possible. This would imply a nuanced analysis of local government implementation capacities across the
     delivery spectrum. On the other hand, technology is helping to leap-frog a number of traditional bottlenecks
     that hamper operational processes.

     Yet innovations in identification through biometrics, the use of smart cards and phones for payments, and
     e-tools for monitoring affect all modalities, whether food, cash or vouchers. For example, a growing share
     pf vouchers are now digital and delivered through phones (e.g., Syria and Zambia) and swipe cards (e.g., the
     West Bank and Gaza), hence sharply reducing the administrative burden that paper-based models entailed
     (Omamo et al. 2010). Food transfers increasingly use satellite technology to map and track movements
     throughout supply chains;27 at the same time, the delivery of cash transfers is also increasingly moving
     away from hard cash, on-site distributions to various versions of digital payments. In other words, the
     backbone of technology across delivery systems is increasingly putting transfers to somewhat an equal
     footing, and particularly so when it comes to compare cash transfers and voucher. This doesn’t mean that
     differences cease to exist, but it puts even more pressure on quality of design as a key aspect in spurring
     comparative effectiveness and efficiency (see previous discussion).

     Protection and gender

     The transfer and delivery mechanism should be acceptable and accessible to those who face constraints,
     including issues related to gender, age and other factors that might affect access to assistance. The effect
     of transfers on the safety, dignity and integrity of recipients should have been constantly considered. No
     intervention can guarantee an absence of risk, but decision-makers should be able to show that they have
     considered risks related to protection (i.e. social tensions, intra-household dynamics) and balance those
     considerations against the short and medium-term effects on empowerment and social norms.

     Political economy

     Although technical considerations should be the first-order considerations, political economy factors play
     an important role. This may not only include societal values and interests among both donor and receiving
     governments, but also specific preferences by beneficiaries. We briefly discussed this point in section 2,



          27
             The Logistics Execution Support System (LESS) is a new tool launched by WFP that is able to locate food
     commodities in real-time, including when they are shipped, unloaded in ports, stocked in warehouses, or distributed
     to beneficiaries. LESS covers the entire food supply chain by integrating programmatic, financial, procurement and
     logistics functions. With real-time tracking capabilities, LESS provides precise information on food stock quantities
     and locations, which is key for planning and preparedness for scale-up in emergencies. The information allows better
     management in many areas. For example, it keeps track of best-before and use-by dates on food stock. This helps
     managers to intervene earlier to avoid waste by diverting underutilized stock in a particular project. LESS can also
     assist in the event of a product recall since it can track exactly in which warehouse, or even on which truck, a specific
     batch from a vendor is located. The system was successfully adopted in Afghanistan and Pakistan in October 2014
     and by the end of 2016 it will be mainstreamed worldwide (WFP 2015b).




46   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
including how those preferences are not fixed over space, time and individuals. This is also related to the
more prosaic question of resource availability: while in an ideal world technical decision-making process
would determine transfer modalities, in practice the availability of certain modalities may influence decision
making by tiling it toward what’s feasible instead of what’s desirable. This is particularly compelling for large
scale, humanitarian operations that often find themselves relatively udner0funded compared to needs.


5. Evidence gaps and research priorities
In order to identify evidence gaps and applied research priorities, we consider a basic metric of “level of
evidence” as measured by the number of comparative randomized controlled trials, quasi-experimental
evaluations, and other robust quantitative methods utilized for the generation of evidence. This, of course,
should be interpreted with caution, including due to the possible limitations stemming from external validity
(or generalization of results), and because of the inherent limits of conducting scientific research in humani-
tarian contexts. At the same time, where such evidence level is relatively rich, we observe the emergence of
somewhat consistent patterns in findings. We also notice recent efforts to bolster evidence-generation in the
humanitarian space or in similar challenging circumstances. This seems promising especially for protracted
crises, although it holds obvious limitations for sudden, covariate disasters and areas affected by conflict.

Against this background, we define as “substantial” the       Table 6: Relative level of comparative evidence
evidence base informed by more than 10 solid com-
parative evaluations that contrast cash, in-kind and/              NUMBER OF EVALUATIONS                   LEVEL OF EVIDENCE
or vouchers. In cases where such number is between             None                                                  Absent
5 and 10, the evidence can be considered “emerg-
                                                               From 1 to 5                                       Limited
ing,” while if only a handful (or lower than 5) it may be
deemed “limited.” Where no evaluations were available,         From 6 to 9                                      Emerging
evidence is clearly “absent” (table 6).                        10 and above                                    Substantial

What is the level of evidence across the examined objectives? It can be reasonably argued that food security
objectives have an overall substantial evidence base, although stronger for impacts than for costs. For liveli-
hoods objectives, the general state of the evidence is emerging, although also in this case with relatively larger
gaps in comparative cost assessments (table 7). The issue of comprehensive and comparative cost analyses
in food security objectives should be carefully considered given the sheer size of interventions in that domain.

Table 7: Level of comparative evidence by objective

       OBJECTIVE                OVERALL EVIDENCE BASE               IMPACTS OR EFFECTIVENESS               COSTS OR EFFICIENCY
 Food security                          Substantial                           Substantial                            Emerging
 Livelihoods                             Emerging                              Emerging                               Limited
 Nutrition                                Limited                               Limited                               Limited
 Health                                   Absent                                Absent                                Absent
 Education                                Absent                                Absent                                Absent
 Shelter                                  Absent                                Absent                                Absent
 Multisector                              Absent                                Absent                                Absent

For nutrition, we have documented some comparative studies, including in relation to micronutrients and
child severe and acute malnutrition. Based on the available studies, the evidence based is defined as lim-
ited. For the “services-oriented” objectives of health and education, there is a clear evidence gap in both
impacts and costs, with the resulting evidence base being absent or unavailable. Comparative evidence is
equally lacking for shelter and multisectoral approaches such as multi-purpose cash transfers.




                                              Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                          47
     6. Conclusions
     This paper reviews the existing evidence on the performance of alternative transfer modalities across
     humanitarian objectives or sectors. The analysis focused on the comparative performance of transfers, that
     is, to studies that employed robust statistical methods to assess transfers against each other. This allows
     not only to understand how transfers work in general, but which works best relative to the other. We did so
     for a variety of objectives which generally match the humanitarian clusters. Based on existing evidence, we
     identified possible criteria for transfer selection and key priority areas for future research. Taken together,
     our analysis suggests five main conclusions.

     First, there is large variance in the availability of comparative evidence across sectors. This ranges
     from areas where evidence is substantial (i.e., food security) to realms where it is limited (i.e., nutrition) or
     where not a single comparative evaluation was available (i.e., health, education, and shelter). This unbal-
     ance should be carefully considered when devising interventions and reforms that affect both single and
     multiple humanitarian sectors.

     Second, where evidence is substantial, like for the food security cluster, data shows mixed results
     for cash and in-kind transfers, that is, their effectiveness is similar on average. Specific differences
     among cash and in-kind transfers are not very significant and depend on sub-objectives (e.g., calories
     availability, dietary diversity) and indicators used to measure them. Also, transfers’ performance and their
     difference seem a function of the organic and fluid interactions among a number of factors (e.g., profile and
     “initial conditions” of beneficiaries, capacity of local markets), instead of inherent merits of one modality
     over the other.

     Third, while the effectiveness of cash and food is similar, the efficiency is generally in favor of
     cash. Cash transfers seem more efficient to deliver than in-kind modalities, suggesting it might be more
     cost-effective on average. However, results should be interpreted with caution, including because of the
     wealth of nuance that is often not captured in standard costs analysis. Delivery is only one dimension of
     cost assessments, and overall costs would hinge on the scale of interventions, crisis context, procurement
     practices, and hidden costs. Approaches for cost calculations are often not standardized and display high
     variance in the depth and breadth of analysis. More consistent and robust approaches are required so that
     efficiency analyses match the high-standards of effectiveness as offered by the examined impact evalua-
     tions. Whether in terms of effectiveness or efficiency, the use of combined transfers seems a promising and
     yet under-evaluated program model.

     Fourth, the appropriateness of transfers cannot be predetermined—there are no “first-best”
     options from the outset, but rather first-best options are context and sector-specific and emerge
     from careful response analysis. We distilled main factors to consider for appropriate decision-making
     in selecting between transfer modalities. These have been extensively discussed the empirical and opera-
     tional literature and include program objectives, the level of market functionality, predicted cost-effective-
     ness, implementation capacity, the management of key risks such as on protection and gender, political
     economy, beneficiary preferences, and resource availability. The depth and breadth of response analysis
     would range from basic analysis in the immediate aftermath of disasters, to more sophisticated and com-
     prehensive processes as emergencies get prolonged and protracted.

     Finally, it seems possible to reconcile humanitarian imperatives with more and better research to
     fill key information gaps. Given the nature of humanitarian situations, it is understandable that in many cir-
     cumstances “action cannot wait for evidence.” Notwithstanding humanitarian imperatives, as crises become
     more chronic and protracted there is an important case to be made to synchronize careful response analysis,
     operations, and a solid applied research agenda to compare performance of alternative transfer modalities.
     Many of the cases in challenging environments presented in the note, e.g. DRC, Niger, and Yemen, show that
     such analysis is possible and necessary to serve people in need in the best way possible.




48   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
References
Ahmed, A., Hoddinott, J., Roy, S., Sraboni, E., Quabili, W., and Margolies, A. 2016. “Which Kind of Social
Safety Net Transfers Work Best for the Ultra Poor in Bangladesh? Operation and Impacts of the Transfer
Modality Research Initiative.” IFPRI and WFP. Dhaka.

Ahmed, A., Quisumbing, A., Nasreen, M., Hoddinott, J. and Bryan, E. 2010. “Comparing Food and Cash
Transfers to the Ultra Poor in Bangladesh.” IFPRI, Research Monograph 163. Washington, DC.

Aker, J. 2015. “Comparing Cash and Vouchers in a Humanitarian Context: Evidence from the Democratic
Republic of Congo.” World Bank Economic Review, in press.

Alderman, H. 2002. “Subsidies as Social Safety Nets: Effectiveness and Challenges.” World Bank, Social
Protection Discussion Paper 0224. Washington, DC.

Alderman, H., and Bundy, D. 2012. “School Feeding Programs and Development: Are We Framing the Ques-
tion Correctly?” World Bank Research Observer 27(2): 204–221.

Almeida, R., Behrman, J. and Robalino, D. 2012. “The Right Skills for the Job? Rethinking Training Policies
for Workers.” (Eds) World Bank. Washington, DC.

Amacher, R. and Sandler, T. 1977. “The Externality Argument for In-Kind Transfers: A Defense.” Kyklos
30(2): 293–96.

Asfaw, A. 2006. “The Role of Food Price Policy in Determining the Prevalence of Obesity: Evidence from
Egypt.” Review of Agricultural Economics 28(3): 305–12.

Audsley, B., Balzer, N. and Halme, R. 2010. “Comparing the Efficiency of Cash and Food Transfers: A
Cost-Benefit Analysis from Rural Malawi.” In Omamo, S.W., Gentilini, U., and Sandstrom, S. (eds) Revolu-
tion: From Food Aid to Food Assistance. Innovations in Overcoming Hunger. WFP. Rome.

Bandiera, O., Burgess, R., Das, N., Gulesci, S., Rasul, I and Sulaiman, M. 2012. “Can Basic Entrepreneurship
Transform the Economic Lives of the Poor?” International Growth Centre. London.

Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., Goldberg, N., Karlan,D., Osei, R., Parienté, W., Shapiro, J., Thuysbaert, B. and Udry,
C. 2015. “A Multifaceted Program Causes Lasting Progress for the Very Poor: Evidence from Six Countries.”
Science 348(6236): 772–90.

Barker, M., D. Filmer, and Rigolini, J. 2014. “Evaluating Food versus Cash Assistance in Rural Cambodia.”
World Bank. Washington, DC.

Barrett, C. 2002. “Food Security and Food Assistance Programs.” In Gardner B. and G. Rausser (eds.)
Handbook of Agricultural Economics. Elsevier. Amsterdam.

Basu, K. 1996. “Relief Programs: When It May Be Better to Give Food Instead of Cash.” World Development
24(1): 91–96.

Blackorby, C., and Donaldson, D. 1988. “Cash versus kind, self-selection, and efficient transfers.” American
Economic Review 78(4): 691–700.

Blattman, C. and Niehaus, P. 2014. “Show Them the Money: Why Giving Cash Helps Alleviate Poverty.”
Foreign Affairs 93(3): 117–26.

Blattman, C., Jamison, J. and Sheridan, M. 2015. “Reducing Crime and Violence: Experimental Evidence on
Adult Noncognitive Investments in Liberia” NBER, Working Paper 21204. Cambridge.




                                            Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts              49
     Blattman, C., Fiala, N. and Martinez, S. 2014. “Generating Skilled Self-Employment in Developing Coun-
     tries: Experimental Evidence from Uganda.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2): 697–752.

     Breunig, R., Dasgupta, I., Gundersen, C., and P. Breuning. 2001. “Explaining the Food Stamp Cash-Out
     Puzzle.” USDA, Food Assistance and Nutrition Research Report 12. Washington, DC.

     Cabot Venton, C., Bailey, S. and Pongracz, S. 2015. “Value for Money of Cash Transfers in Emergencies.”
     London.

     Coate S. 1989. “Cash versus Direct Food Relief.” Journal of Development Economics 30(2): 199–224.

     Creti, P. 2011. “The Voucher Programme in the Gaza Strip: Mid-Term Review,” WFP and Oxfam. Jerusalem
     and Oxford.

     Cunha, J. 2014. “Testing Paternalism: Cash versus In-kind Transfers.” American Economic Journal: Applied
     Economics 6(2): 195–230.

     Currie, J., and Gahvari, F. 2008. “Transfers in Cash and In-Kind: Theory Meets the Data.” Journal of Eco-
     nomic Literature 46(2): 333–83.

     De Mel, S., McKenzie, D. and Woodruff, C. 2008. “Returns to Capital in Microenterprises: Evidence from a
     Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4): 1329–72.

     —. 2012. “One-Time Transfers of Cash or Capital Have Long-Lasting Effects on Microenterprises in
     Sri Lanka.” Science 335(962): 962–966.

     Devarajan, S. 2013. “Let Them Eat Cash.” Future Development, blog post available at: https://blogs.world-
     bank.org/futuredevelopment/let-them-eat-cash.

     Devereux, S. 2008. “Innovations in the Design and Delivery of Social Transfers: Lessons Learned from
     Malawi.” IDS and Concern Worldwide. Brighton and Dublin.

     DFID. 2013. “Humanitarian Guidance Note: Cash Transfer Programming.” London.

     Dreze, J., and A. Sen. 1989. Hunger and Public Action. Clarendon Press. Oxford.

     ECHO. 2013. The Use of Cash and Vouchers in Humanitarian Crises. DG ECHO Funding Guidelines. Brussels.

     Ellis, F. and Manda, E. 2012. “Seasonal Food Crises and Policy Responses: A Narrative Account of Three
     Food Security Crises in Malawi.” Food Policy 40(7): 1407–17.

     Evans, D. and Popova, A. 2014. “Cash Transfers and Temptation Goods. A Review of Global Evidence.”
     World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper 6886. Washington, DC.

     Evans, D., Hausladen, S., Kosec, K., and Reese, N. 2014. Community based Conditional Cash Transfers in
     Tanzania: Results from a Randomized Trial. Washington, DC.

     Fafchamps, M., McKenzie, D., Quinn, S. and Woodruff, C. 2014. “Microenterprise Growth and the Flypa-
     per Effect: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Ghana.” Journal of Development Economics 106:
     211–26.

     Faminow, M. 1995. “Issues in Valuing Food Aid: The Cash or In-Kind controversy.” Food Policy 20(1): 3–10.

     FAO. 2015. “The State of Food and Agriculture 2015—Social Protection and Agriculture: Breaking the Cycle
     of Rural Poverty.” Rome.




50   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
Fiala, N. 2013. “Stimulating Microenterprise Growth: Results from a Loans, Grants and Training Experiment
in Uganda.” Working Paper. Berlin.

Fiszbein, A., and Schady, N. 2009. Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future Poverty. World
Bank. Washington, DC.

Fraker, T. 1990. “The Effects of Food Stamps on Food Consumption: a Review of the Literature.” USDA.
Washington, DC.

Fraker, T., Martini, A., and Ohls, J. 1995. “The Effect of Food Stamp Cashout on Food Expenditures: An
Assessment of the Findings from Four Demonstrations.” Journal of Human Resources 30(4): 633–49.

Garfinkel, I. 1973. “Is In-Kind Redistribution Efficient?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 87(2): 320–30.

Gelli, A. and Suwa, Y. 2014. “Investing in Innovation: Trade-offs in the Costs and Cost-efficiency of School
Feeding Using Community based Kitchens in Bangladesh.” Food and Nutrition Bulletin 35(3): 327–37.

Gentilini, U. 2015. “Entering the City: Emerging Evidence and Practices from Safety Nets in Urban Areas,”
World Bank, Social Protection and Labor Discussion Paper Series 1504. Washington, DC.

—. 2016. “Revisiting the ‘Cash Versus Food’ Debate: New Evidence for an Old Puzzle?” World Bank
Research Observer 31(1): 135–67.

Gilligan, D. and Roy, S. 2013. “Resources, Stimulation, and Cognition: How Transfer Programs and Pre-
school Shape Cognitive Development in Uganda.” Paper presented at the Agricultural & Applied Economics
Association’s 2013 AAEA & CAES Joint Annual Meeting (August 4–6). Washington, DC.

Gorter, A., Grainger, C., Okal, J., and Bellows, B. 2012. “Systematic Review of Structural and Implemen-
tation Issues of Voucher Programs: Analysis of 40 Voucher programs, In-Depth Analysis of 20 Programs.”
Population Council. Nairobi.

GSC (Global Shelter Cluster). 2015. “Global Shelter Cluster Position Paper: Cash and Markets in the Shelter
Sector.” Geneva.

Harvey, P. and Bailey, S. 2011. “Cash Transfer Programming in Emergencies.” ODI, Good Practice Review
11. London.

Harvey, P. and Savage, K. 2006. “No Small Change. Oxfam GB Malawi and Zambia Emergency Cash Trans-
fer Projects: a Synthesis of Key Learning.” ODI. London.

Hidrobo, M., Hoddinott, J., Peterman, A., Margolies, A., and Moeira, V. 2014a. “Cash, Food, or Vouchers? Evi-
dence from a Randomized Experiment in Northern Ecuador.” Journal of Development Economics 107: 144–156.

Hidrobo, M., Hoddinott, J., Kumar, N., and Olivier, M. 2014b. “Social Protection and Food Security.” Back-
ground paper prepared for FAO’s SOFA report. Washington, DC.

Hoddinott, J. 2013. “Cash, Food, or Vouchers? Evidence from a Four-Country Experimental Study.” Presen-
tation at IFPRI-WFP event (October 23). Washington, DC.

Hoddinott, J., Sandstrom, S., and Upton, J. 2014. “The Impact of Cash and Food Transfers: Evidence from
a Randomized Intervention in Niger.” IFPRI, Discussion Paper 1341. Washington, DC.

Jensen, R. 2010. “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 125(2): 515–48.

Juillard, H. and Opu, M.I. 2014. “Scoping Study: Emergency Cash Transfer Programming in the Wash and
Shelter Sectors.” CaLP. Oxford.




                                            Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts            51
     Khera, R. 2013. “Revival of the Public Distribution System: Evidence and Explanations.” Economic and
     Political Weekly XLVI(44 & 45): 36–50.

     Langendorf, C., Roederer, T., de Pee, S., Brown, D., Doyon, S. and Mamaty, A. 2014. “Preventing Acute Malnu-
     trition among Young Children in Crises: A Prospective Intervention Study in Niger.” PLOS Medicine 11(9): 2–15.

     Lentz, E., Barrett C., Gómez M., and D. Maxwell. 2013. “On The Choice and Impacts of Innovative Interna-
     tional Food Assistance Instruments.” World Development 49(C): 1–8.

     Leroy, J., Gadsden, P., Rodriguez-Ramirez, S., and Gonzales de Cossio, T. 2010. “Cash and In-kind Trans-
     fers in Poor Rural Communities and Mexico Increase Household Fruit, Vegetable and Micronutrient Con-
     sumption but also Lead to Excess Energy Consumption.” Journal of Nutrition 140(3): 612–617.

     Levine, S. and Bailey, S. 2015. “Cash, Vouchers or In-Kind? Guidance on Evaluating How Transfers Are
     Made in Emergency Programming.” ODI. London.

     MacAuslan, I. and Riemenschneider, N. 2011. “Richer but Resented: What Do Cash Transfers Do To Social
     Relations?” IDS Bulletin 42(6): 60–66.

     Mankiw, G. 2011. Principles of Microeconomics, 7th edition. Cengage Learning. Stamford.

     Margolies, A. and Hoddinott, J. 2014. “Costing Alternative Transfer Modalities.” IFPRI. Washington, DC.

     —. 2015. “Costing Alternative Transfer Modalities.” Journal of Development Effectiveness 7(1): 1–16.

     Maunder, N., Dillon, N., Smith, G., and Truelove, S. 2015 “Evaluation of the Use of Different Transfer Modal-
     ities in ECHO Humanitarian Aid Actions 2011–2014.” Volumes 1 and 2. Brussels.

     Meyer, C., Bellows, N., Campbell, M. and Potts, M. 2011. “The Impact of Vouchers on the Use and Quality of
     Health Goods and Services in Developing Countries: A Systematic Review.” EPPI Centre. London.

     Michelson, H., Lentz, E., Mulwa, M., Morey, M., Cramer, L., McGlinchy, M., Barrett, C. 2012 “Cash, Food,
     or Vouchers? An Application of the Market Information and Food Insecurity Response Analysis Framework
     (MIFIRA) in Urban and Rural Kenya.” Food Security 4(3): 455–69.

     ODI. 2015. Doing Cash Differently: How Cash Transfers Can Transform Humanitarian Aid. London.

     Omamo, S.W., Gentilini, U., and Sandstrom, S., eds. 2010. Revolution: From Food Aid to Food Assistance.
     Innovations in Overcoming Hunger. WFP. Rome.

     Ozler, B. 2015. “Should We Just Give People Cash?.” World Bank, Policy Research Talk (presentation, Sep-
     tember 29). Washington, DC.

     Pega, F., Liu, S.Y., Walter, S., and Lhachimi S.K. 2015. “Unconditional Cash Transfers for Assistance in
     Humanitarian Disasters: Effect on the Use of Health Services and Health Outcomes in Low and Middle-In-
     come Countries.” Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 9.

     Ravallion, M. 2016. “The Economics of Poverty: History, Measurement and Policy.” Oxford University Press.
     New York.

     Reinhart, U. 2013. “On the Economics of Benefits In-Kind.” Princeton University. Princeton.

     Rogers, B. L., and J. Coates. 2002. “Food-Based Safety Nets and Related Programs.” World Bank, Social
     Protection Discussion Paper 223. Washington, DC.




52   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
Ryckembusch, D., Frega, R., Da Silva, M. B., Sanogo, I., Gentilini, U., Grede, N. and Brown, L. 2013.
“Enhancing Nutrition: A New Tool for Ex-Ante Comparison of Commodity-Based Vouchers and Food Trans-
fers.” World Development 49(C): 58–67.

Sabates-Wheeler, R. and Devereux, S. 2012. “Cash Transfers and High Food Prices: Explaining Outcomes
on Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Net Programme.” Food Policy 35(4): 274–85.

Sandefur, J., Birdsall, N. and Moyo, M. 2015. “The Political Paradox of Cash Transfers.” GCD, Views from
the Center. Washington, DC.

Schwab, B. 2013. “In the Form of Bread? A Randomized Comparison of Cash and Food Transfers in Yemen.”
Paper presented at the Agricultural & Applied Economics Association’s 2013 AAEA & CAES Joint Annual
Meeting (August 4–6, Washington, DC).

Senauer, B., and N. Young. 1986. “The Impact of Food Stamps on Food Expenditures: Rejection of the
Traditional Model.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 68(1): 37–43.

Sharma, M. 2006. “An Assessment of the Effects of the Cash Transfer Pilot Project on Household Consump-
tion Patterns in Tsunami-Affected Areas of Sri Lanka.” IFPRI. Washington, DC.

Skoufias, E., Unar, M., and Gonzalez-Cossio, T. 2008. “The Impacts of Cash and In-Kind Transfers on
Consumption and Labor Supply: Experimental Evidence from Rural Mexico.” World Bank, Policy Research
Working Paper 4778. Washington, DC.

Southworth, H. 1945. “The Economics of Public Measures to Subsidize Food Consumption.” Journal of
Farm Economics 27(1):38–66.

Sumberg, J. and Sabates-Wheeler, R. 2011. “Linking agricultural development to school feeding in sub-Sa-
haran Africa: Theoretical perspectives.” Food Policy 36 (3): 341–349.

Tobin, J. 1970. “On Limiting the Domain of Inequality.” Journal of Law and Economics 13(2): 263–77.

UNHCR. 2012. “An Introduction to Cash-based Interventions in UNHCR Operations.” Geneva.

—. 2015. “Cash-based Interventions for Health Programmes in Refugee Settings: A Review.” Geneva.

Upton, J. 2014. “Resolving the Puzzle of the Conditional Superiority of In-kind versus Cash Food Assistance:
Evidence from Niger.” Paper prepared for presentation at the Agricultural & Applied Economics Association’s
Annual Meeting (Minneapolis, July 27–29).

Webb, P., Boyd, E. de Pee, S., Lenters, L., Bloem, M., and Schultink, W. 2014. “Nutrition in Emergencies: Do
We Know What Works?” Food Policy 49(1): 33–40.

WFP. 2013. The State of School Feeding Worldwide. Rome.

—. 2015a. Cash and Vouchers Manual: Second Edition. Rome.

—. 2015b. “WFP Logistics in 2014: Excellence in Service Provision.” Rome.

WHO. 2008. “Conditional Cash Transfers: What’s it in for Health? ” Technical Brief for Policy-Makers 1. Geneva.

—. 2010. “Health Systems Financing: The Path to Universal Coverage—World Health Report 2010.”
Geneva.

World Bank. 2014. The State of Social Safety Nets 2014. Washington, DC.

—. 2015. The State of Social Safety Nets 2015. Washington, DC.




                                            Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts              53
Annex 1: Features of comparative impact evaluations of food security modalities

                                                                                                                               SIZE AS % OF ORE-PROGRAM
            PROGRAM                    COUNTRY           PROGRAM TYPE*              MODALITY           CASH SIZE (US$)                   HH EXP.
    PAL                            Mexico               CT, UT                   Cash,                13                     11.5
                                                                                 Food1


    Zinder project                 Niger                PW, UT                   Cash,                50                     11.5
                                                                                 Food2

    Acute malnutrition inter-      Niger                UT                       Cash, Food,          59                     n.a.
    vention                                                                      Cash + Food11

    PSNP                           Ethiopia             PW, UT                   Cash,                16.2                   n.a.
                                                                                 Food3

    Early childhood develop-       Uganda               CT                       Cash,                10.2                   12.7
    ment program                                                                 Food4

    Colombian refugees             Ecuador              CT                       Cash,                40                     10
    project                                                                      Food,5
                                                                                 Vouchers

    IDPs project                   Democratic Repub-    UT                       Cash,                18.5                   18.96
                                   lic of Congo                                  Vouchers6
    Unconditional safety net       Yemen                UT                       Cash,                49                     n.a.
                                                                                 Food7

    Scholarship pilot program      Cambodia             CT                       Cash,                5                      2.5
                                                                                 Food8

    Cash transfer pilot pro-       Sri Lanka            UT                       Cash,                9.8                    26.3
    gram                                                                         Food9

    IGVGD, RMP                     Bangladesh           UT, PW                   Cash, Food10         19.7                   30 (cash)
                                                                                                                             15.5 (food)

    Cash and Food for Live-        Malawi                                        Cash, Food,          n.a.                   n.a.
    lihoods                                                                      Cash + Food 12
    Pilot

1
  Seven basic items — enriched corn flour, rice, beans, dried pasta soup, biscuits, fortified milk powder, and vegetable oil—and two to four supplementary
items (including canned sardines, canned tuna fish, dried lentils, chocolate, breakfast cereal, or corn starch.

2
  3.5 kg of grain (primarily maize in the first transfer period and sorghum in the second), 0.72 kg of pulses (cowpeas, red beans, or lentils), 0.14 kg of vegetable
oil, and 0.035 kg of salt.

3
    3 kgs of cereals, plus pulses and oils.

4
  Food basket of approximately 1,200 calories, includes corn soy blend (“CSB” – highly fortified with iron among other nutrients), vitamin-A fortified oil, and
sugar.

5
  The food basket was valued according to regional market prices at US$40 and included rice (24 kilograms), vegetable oil (4 liters), lentils (8kilograms), and
canned sardines (8 cans of 0.425 kilograms) (voucher: The list of approved foods consists of cereals, tubers, fruits, vegetables, legumes, meats, fish, milk
products, and eggs).




54                             Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
     TRANSFER FRE-                                                DELIVERY MECHA-              SAMPLE SIZE          EVALUATION
        QUENCY              HH SIZE          EXPOSURE                   NISM                 (HHS AT ENDLINE)         METHOD                  REFERENCE
    Monthly (cash),        4.2           1 year                Biometric debit cards        (a) 5,028              DD                 (a) Cunha (2014)
    bi-monthly (food)                                                                       (b) 5,851              DD                 (b) Skoufias et al. (2008)
                                                                                            (c) 5,823              DD                 (c) Leroy et al. (2010)
    Bi-weekly              7             6 months              Mobile ATMs, smart           2,209                  SD                 Hoddinott et al. (2014)
                                                               cards

    Monthly                Na            5 months              n.a.                         5,395                  Prospective        Langendorf et al. (2014)
                                                                                                                   cohort

    Monthly                5             6 months per year     n.a.                         960                    SD                 Sabates-Wheeler and
                                                                                                                                      Devereux (2010)

    6–8 week cycle         6.2           12 months             Mobile money cards           2,461                  ANCOVA             Gilligan and Roy (2013)


    Monthly                3.8           6 months              ATM card                     2,122                  ANCOVA             Hidrobo et al. (2014)



    Bi-monthly             5.5           7 months              Bank accounts                252                    Fixed effects      Aker (2015)

    Bi-monthly             7.9           6 months              ID card via Postal Sav-      1,581                  SD, ANCOVA,        Schwab (2013)
                                                               ings Corporation                                    DD, DDD

    Monthly                6             10 months             On-site manual distri-       4,091                  DD                 Barker et al. (2014)
                                                               bution

    Bi-weekly (cash),      3.8           3 months              Samurdhi Bank                1,357 s                DD                 Sharma (2006)
    bi-monthly (food)

    Bi-monthly (cash),     4.6           2–4 years             Public banks                 1,200                  PSM                Ahmed et al. (2010)
    monthly (food)

    Monthly                              8 months              MSB ATMs                     3,542–4,006            RCT                Audsley et al. (2010)




6
    Three food fairs, where participants could get palm oil, sugar, cassava flour, beans, rice, vegetable oil, dried fish, salt, potatoes and peanuts.

7
    For an average household size of seven persons is 50 kg of wheat flour and 5.0 liters of vegetable oil.

8
    10 kg of rice per month.

9
    1.4 kg Rice, 1.4 kg Wheat flour, 0.42 kg Pulses, 0.14 kg Oil, 0.14kg Sugar, 0.14 kg Corn soy blend.

10
     Up to 20 kilograms (kg) of wheat or 16 kg of rice per month.

11
     food included lipid-based nutrients and fortified, super-cereals (50kg), pulses (7.5kg), oil (2.5kg).

12
     Cereals (50kg), pulses (5kg). CT= conditional transfer, UT = unconditional transfer, PW = public works.




                                                          Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                                  55
Annex 2: Absolute differences in impacts in food security (percentage points)




56                Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
                                                                                                               Appendix B 


                                         Terms of reference



Background
Upon request of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) Principals at its meeting on December 11,
2015, the World Bank will coordinate a process of reviewing key issues and options for significantly greater
use of cash transfers (including digital cash and vouchers) in the humanitarian space. The request was
made against the backdrop of the DFID-supported report, “Doing Cash Differently: How Cash Transfers Can
Transform Humanitarian Aid” (ODI, 2015).

The work will be conducted under the auspices of an inter-agency Strategic Cash Task Group (SCTG),
including with membership at the organizations’ principals level or senior officials identified by them.

Under the guidance of the Office of the President, the Social Protection and Labor Global Practice was
tasked, in consultation and partnership with other Global Practices and staff, to spearhead such work
within the World Bank. This ToR sets out the activities, deliverables, timeline, qualifications and arrange-
ments for a senior consultancy to support the endeavor.


Activities
    ■■ Map out key building blocks, instruments and decisions points of the humanitarian system nec-
       essary to significantly scale up and effectively coordinate the use of cash. Building blocks may
       encompass, for example, needs assessments, planning and implementation of interventions,
       monitoring and evaluation, and coordination mechanisms.

    ■■ Obtain information from designated officials from participating agencies, including through ques-
       tionnaires, interviews, tele/video-conferences, and face-to-face meetings.

    ■■ Identify existing or emerging agency-level and country-level arrangements and innovations that
       advance and improve the humanitarian system’s performance in some or all building blocks of
       the process.

    ■■ Participate in meetings/VCs with the World Bank team and SCTG.




                                                                                                                 57
     Deliverables
         ■■ Note on strategic options for consideration to significantly enhance cash programming in human-
            itarian settings.


     Timeline
         ■■   February 8, 2016, draft questionnaire produced
         ■■   February 8–18, interviews/remote consultation with individual SCTG members
         ■■   February 22, draft strategic note submitted
         ■■   March 10, meeting with SCTG to review draft strategic note
         ■■   March 21, webex call with SCTG team
         ■■   March 25, submission of final strategic note.




58   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
                                                                                                              Appendix C 


                                    Minutes of IASC–
                                  World Bank meeting


Reviewing options for significantly scaling up the use of cash transfers in the humanitarian space, on Feb-
ruary 2, 2016.


Attendees
Colin Bruce (Chair, World Bank)                        Kelly Clements (UNHCR)
Daniel Gustafson (FAO)                                 Amir Abdulla (WFP)
Mohamed Abdiker (IOM)                                  Rick Brennan (WHO)
Jodi Nelson (IRC)                                      Andre Griekspoor (WHO)
George Fenton (WVI)                                    Geeta Rao Gupta (UNICEF)
Toby Porter (HelpAge)                                  Jehan Arulpagasam (World Bank)
Kyung-wha Kang (UN OCHA)                               Andrew James Roberts (World Bank)
Astrid van Genderen (UN OCHA)                          Ugo Gentilini (World Bank)
George Okoth-Obbo (UNHCR)                              Matthew Hobson (World Bank)


Context
Upon request of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) Principals at its meeting on December 11,
2015, the World Bank agreed to coordinate a process of reviewing key issues and options for significantly
scaling up the use of cash transfers (including digital cash and vouchers) in the humanitarian space. IASC
Principals members met on February 2, 2016 in order to review an initial Scope of Work prepared by a World
Bank technical team. The meeting was intended to reach consensus on the scope of work, the expectations
of the technical team, the timelines and the deliverables.


Summary
Context-setting. The proposed activities are very timely and come at a time of vast interest, including as
enshrined in recent papers (ODI paper and the joint “non-paper” by FAO, WFP, UNHCR). While not all agen-
cies have endorsed these papers, they play an important role in the discussion to date.

Approach to the work. It was agreed that the work should be conducted in a collaborative manner, to
maximize comparative expertise and ownership of the final outputs. Also, the proposed output would be




                                                                                                                59
     of strategic nature that facilitate country-level operations and empower Country Teams, and do not stifle
     programs and innovations unfolding at field level.

     Role of strategic coordination is key. There are a significant number of cash coordination mechanisms
     in the field (27 at the most recent count) but they are fragmented and operate with ad hoc and different
     procedures; a system-wide, strategic message on how to significantly scale up the use of cash transfers in
     the humanitarian space is required. The team should specifically recognize the role of governments in cash
     preparedness and cash delivery systems, as well as links to existing safety nets.

     Original purpose of the work, including level of ambition. While the issue of coordination is key, it was
     underscored that the original purpose of the task was to ensure that enhanced programming would be
     achieved within an ambitious framework that attempts to bolster the use of cash when and where possible.

     Cash as a modality, not as a theme. There was wide agreement that cash should be considered as a
     modality to respond to a sector’s needs, not as a sector in its own right

     Barriers or impediments for wider use of cash. Barriers should be explored across the cycle of oper-
     ations and implementation. Identifying barriers to increasing the use of cash, and what the scope is for
     increasing cash generally, needs to be central to the deliverables.

     Evidence and evidence gaps. While evidence exists regarding the impacts and use of cash in develop-
     ment contexts, there remains a need to ensure that the evidence available is applicable to the humanitarian
     context. In addition, there is a need to understand where evidence is thin in certain sectors. Evidence on
     key factors to consider for appropriate transfer selection will be identified.

     Timeline. It was agreed that, while the paper was originally intended as an input to the next IASC meeting
     in June 2016, it would be beneficial to have this paper ready for the World Humanitarian Summit (WHS) in
     May 2016. The final deliverable should be submitted to the SCTG by March 31, 2016. Some flexibility in the
     proposed timeline was also granted.

     Draw on, but do not repeat previous work in this space. Agencies recognized the important work com-
     pleted by others in the lead-up to the WHS. The intention is to complement that work.


     Next steps
         ■■   Principals will assign technical focal points, or “Engine Room”
         ■■   World Bank will produce and send minutes of the meeting
         ■■   OCHA will provide the World Bank list of country-level Cash Working Groups
         ■■   The World Bank team will start consultations with both engine room and country-level teams




60   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
                                                                                                   Appendix D 


                                      Staff and agencies
                                               consulted


Global-level interviews                       Country-level interviews
Andre Griekspoor, WHO                         Agnes Maria Agnes Palacio, OCHA, Philippines
Ciara O’Malley, HelpAge                       Rowena Dacsig, OCHA, Philippines
David Cales, FAO                              Daniel Gilman, OCHA regional office, Bangkok
Natalia Winder Rossi, FAO                     Samantha Orr, OCHA regional office, Bangkok
Dina Esposito, USAID/Food for Peace           Alexandra Lazau-Ratz, OCHA regional office,
Danielle Mutone-Smith, USAID/Food for Peace      Bangkok
George Fenton, World Vision                   Farman Ali Khilji, OCHA, Pakistan
Keith Chibafa, World Vision                   Gabriel N. Fernandez, Ministry of Gender, Children
Alesh Brown, World Vision                        and Social Protection, Liberia
Jeremy Konyndyk, USAID/OFDA                   Gemma Sanmartin, OCHA, Somalia
Laura Meissner, USAID/OFDA                    Masae Shimomura, WFP, Myanmar
Joseph Ashmore, IOM                           Soilenge, WFP, Myanmar
Kenn Crossley, WFP                            Norwin Schafferer, OCHA, Myanmar
Tahir Nour, WFP                               Peter Rees-Gildea, RC Office, Nepal
Silvana Giuffrida, WFP                        Samuel Clendon, WFP, Afghanistan
Loretta Hieber Girardet, OCHA                 Charlotte Ashley, OCHA, Afghanistan
Juliet Lang, OCHA                             Sinem Kara, OCHA, Iraq
Sophie Tholstrup, OCHA                        Lisa, Mercy Corp, Iraq
Massimo Larosa, ECHO                          Jasmine, UNHCR, Iraq
Radha Rajkotia, IRC                           Yannick Martin, OCHA, Lebanon
Greg Mathews, IRC
Sarah Bailey, ODI
Sibi Lawson-Marriott, UNICEF
Tim Waites, DFID
Waheed Lor Mehdiabadi, UNHCR
Annika Sandlund, UNHCR
Paul Spiegel, UNHCR




                                                                                                      61
Appendix E 


Compilation of interview
responses


                         BOTTLENECK                                                       AREA OF IMPROVEMENT
                                                   OVERVIEW OF GENERAL EXPERIENCE
§§Cash has the same challenges as any multi-sector pro-            §§Many of these issues are broader than cash and link to SG’s recent
  gramming—and holds a mirror up to the larger issues.               agenda which is important to build upon:
§§Fragmentation is one of the biggest issues overall that runs      ––reinforce, do not replace, national and local systems
  throughout all of the building blocks and processes.              ––anticipate, do not wait, for crises
§§Some of the major bottlenecks identified are political            ––transcend the humanitarian-development divide by working toward
  including attitudes, government policy and political agen-          collective outcomes, based on comparative advantage and over
  das, and agency positioning. Many agencies flagged pro-             multi-year time frames.
  grammatic barriers (when to use cash or not, under which
  conditions, at what value, what is the result intended, etc.).   §§The choice of when to use cash depends on the context and requires
  An additional major bottleneck identified was capacity and         proper assessment and analysis which must be broader than the norm
  systems related.                                                   to take into account more factors.
§§Donors are calling for more transparency, better metrics,        §§Need to ensure we measure cash properly including a metric for
  and a serious commitment to scale up cash. There is vari-          accounting for cash across all programming.
  ability amongst the donors on the speed of the scale up          §§Recognize the political nature of agencies jockeying for position and
  and the extent to which cash is a first response versus as         developing their own capacities to implement cash; stronger coordi-
  opposed to one of the tools equally at play.                       nation needed to move beyond agency positioning to building common
§§Those donors advocating for a “why not cash?” approach             systems with each within their area of comparative advantage.
  are looking to shift the debate from having to prove that        §§Focus on changing the mindsets which underpin the existing in-kind
  cash is necessary, to proving why in-kind is necessary.            modality as you make structural changes. They must go together. This
§§Many agencies including donors do not have a marker to             requires a shift in attitude, corporate culture, and ways of working.
  measure cash internally.                                         §§Develop clear principles on how to use cash that can be agreed by all.
§§There is a common attitude across many agencies at the           §§Recognize that cash raises concerns y within many IASC agencies
  senior management that cash is very risky. This stems from         because it could affect market share, the way agencies operate,
  a reported general lack of awareness of cash, and that the         and many individuals whose careers are invested in the old ways of
  current systems, operational experience, and institutional         working. A plan is required to address these head on so that all have
  incentives are all aligned to in-kind modalities.                  incentives to work in the new ways that cash implies.
§§There is very little information to date on cash outside of      §§Change will be complex and requires a clear change management
  the food and livelihood sector such as health (“we are late        strategy.
  to the game and trying to catch up” Health sector agency).
§§The incentives to continue with the current status quo
  in-kind response are powerful and deeply ingrained in each
  agency and in the system as a whole. Agencies also tend to
  use methods they are experienced in and have systems for.




62
                         BOTTLENECK                                                         AREA OF IMPROVEMENT
                                            OVERVIEW OF MULTIPURPOSE CASH EXPERIENCE
§§The basic definitions and terms around cash are not clear.        §§IASC leadership is needed to set common principles and to facilitate
  We do not have a common definition of MPCT (multi-pur-              the development of clear definitions including the role of vouchers and
  pose cash transfers) or a host of other terms around the            conditionality (there are strong opinions around vouchers and condi-
  use of cash. For instance, two of the major cash donors             tionality). Clearly define the parameters around vouchers and condi-
  have strong divergent opinions on whether cash includes             tionality, and the definition of key terms such as MPCT.
  vouchers or not.                                                  §§In the move toward the use of unconditional cash, it is not about just
§§A risk is that people perceive all health needs are covered         giving cash and walking away but must be a clear link to other levels
  under multi-purpose cash which could mean less money for            of complementary services. In protracted situations, cash should be
  other programming, especially on the systems side.                  evaluated as a way of stimulating job creation and increasing liveli-
§§In Somalia, they have established a minimum expenditure             hood opportunities.
  basket which is what they are using to set transfer levels.       §§Building the “infrastructure” for effective use of cash is critical. A
  This is meant to have enough to invest in livelihoods other-        transfer to access health services is of limited value to better health
  wise it leads to dependency. However, it means that even            outcomes if the service is not available, is of poor quality, and if there
  in emergencies one has to look beyond the min expenditure           are other demand-side barriers (such as socio-cultural ones) that
  basket to make linkages to development financing. Using             undermine/prevent equitable access (there is an additional issue of
  MPCT does not solve the issue of lack of services.                  cash transfers potentially leading to de facto user fees that could
                                                                      undermine efforts to develop prepaid health insurance schemes).
                                                                      “Cash programming is only one element in the wider paradigm shift
                                                                      required and is an entry point to increase quality and coverage of
                                                                      services and away from traditional humanitarian programming and
                                                                      into long term. Financing is part of a set of principles to reach that end
                                                                      point. Cash is only one part.” UN agency.
                                                   NEEDS ASSESSMENT AND ANALYSIS
Main Findings
A common and comprehensive understanding of need is fundamental before determining the modality of response. More collective work
is needed to build better overall assessments that can account for multiple sectors and markets in one overall assessment that is not too
complex. The goal is to meet all needs—the goal is not to use cash. Be evidence based.
§§Needs assessments are often fragmented and sector based           §§Advocate for one joined up assessment process that covers all sectors
  which leads to unnecessary duplication between sectors—             and modalities. This requires a much greater investment in prepared-
  and tend to be biased toward in-kind responses. Within              ness and much stronger links to existing systems (such as social pro-
  assessments, there is not enough attention paid within              tection registries). This also requires strong direction and leadership to
  existing assessments to market dynamics, nor to broad               shift the sector led approach to assessments.
  vulnerability criteria.                                           §§Encourage agencies to work together to develop common assessment
§§There is a difference between consumables and commod-               tools that capture the requirements for cash programming and can
  ities which adds a layer of complexity. Consumables such            guide post-distribution monitoring to see the impact and the gaps.
  as food are less complicated to assess than more complex            More collective work is needed to build better overall assessments
  markets such as shelter and health. Nutrition is a particular       that can account for multiple sectors and markets in one overall
  challenge as it is a basic need but there is no specific mar-       assessment that is not too complex. Many agencies are working on
  ket associated with it.                                             this separately but need to be brought together.
§§When cash is used to access services (such as health and          §§Data needs to be complementary and should wherever possible link to
  education), the quality of the service must be considered           existing data sets, such as social registries, or help build links to the
  including the investments needed to ensure adequate qual-           development of such data sets on the recovery side. A particular gap
  ity and prevent other types of barriers such as social-cul-         is in post-distribution monitoring.
  tural ones. There is a worry that funding MPCTs could             §§Cash analysis is not just about market assessments. Cash feasibility
  displace some of the needed development investments.                studies are also required as well as an thorough understanding of
§§There is a lack of complementary multi-sector assessment            the government regulatory framework, cross-border dynamics, the
  tools that can incorporate household level analysis with the        landscape of available financial service providers, and the nuances of
  market assessment and associated analysis needed for                different markets.
  cash transfers; and to do this at speed. As part of this, there
  is a need to incorporate more broad based vulnerability cri-
  teria into assessments.




                                                Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                           63
                        BOTTLENECK                                                       AREA OF IMPROVEMENT
§§Some donors are concerned about the risk of a conflict of     §§Ensure assessments are neutral. Consider de-linking the assessment
  interest for those agencies who both assess and implement.      and implementation functions so that agencies that assess do not
  As part of a general push to involve the private sector more,   also respond leading to a possible conflict of interest). In Iraq, they
  the idea of contracting this function to a third party has      are working to contract out assessments to a third party. Look to see
  been raised with a focus on the private sector.                 where the private sector can play a larger role in assessment and
§§There is a concern about how to meet both humanitarian          analysis.
 standards and regulations such as data privacy.                 §§Several agencies suggested an approach be adopted where different
§§There appears to be a higher standard for assessing and          agencies lead in different areas of a joined up multi-sector assess-
  using cash than in-kind responses. In-kind transfers will        ment based on their comparative advantage. For example, one agency
  also have impacts on markets but are not held to the same        for M&E, one for registration, one for market assessments, etc..
  standard. There is a perception that cash is more fungible     §§In the Philippines, the cluster systems worked with the government
  so needs a higher threshold of evidence.                         to develop assessment tools for a common approach. The lesson is
§§The low levels of capacity and understanding of enumera-         that these need to be developed in advance with a phasing in methods
  tors and other staff working with cash is a major gap and        for the first 72 hours (largely based on observation) and beyond that.
  links to the need for more investment in preparedness.           Remember to consult with beneficiaries, and monitor closely to con-
                                                                   tinuously adjust as you go.
                                                                 §§There was a strong message to be cautious of a modality first
                                                                   approach—to not predetermine the response. Instead, focus on
                                                                   understanding needs and flexibly responding with the best combina-
                                                                   tion of modalities based on the context and objectives.
                                                                 §§Innovate and push boundaries with strong leadership but do not “fail
                                                                   to scale” with poor assessments, poor preparedness, or siloed imple-
                                                                   mentation. The risk is that the overall approach can be discredited.
                                                                   Balance strategic level urgency with pragmatic operational steps. As
                                                                   one donor noted, “walk before you run.”
                                                                 §§Be aware that there are many needs that cash alone cannot meet.
                                                                 §§Meeting needs in different sectors often requires more than a cash
                                                                   transfer, especially those related to service delivery. For example, for
                                                                   health, in a shift to multi-purpose cash, it is better that the amount for
                                                                   health does not go to the beneficiary but into a prepayment scheme.
                                                                   To do this you estimate the min package of health services required
                                                                   and pool that into a common health insurance fund. Conditionalities
                                                                   may also be required in areas such as behavior modification to reach
                                                                   health outcomes.
                                                                 §§Focus on expenditure data; “follow the money” and understand what
                                                                   households spend their cash transfers on. “What we really need is
                                                                   expenditure data and where they put their money is where we see
                                                                   their immediate needs. Very important starting point for more targeted
                                                                   and streamlined approach overall.” Iraq
                                                                 §§A sensible process moving forward could be:
                                                                 §§Assess all markets together and develop common criteria to inform
                                                                   the response
                                                                 §§Identify the basic needs for survival that are beyond any one sector;
                                                                   aim for a compilation of all basic needs into one transfer
                                                                 §§Determine if markets can meet those basic needs
                                                                 §§Asses other needs such as protection, gender, infrastructure, access
                                                                   to quality services, etc.




64                   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
                        BOTTLENECK                                                       AREA OF IMPROVEMENT
                                                          STRATEGIC PLANNING
Main Findings
The current humanitarian planning process is sector based which is a barrier to planning for cross-cutting responses such as cash.
There is a need to shift from planning by sector to planning based on overall objectives and outcomes. Within the cluster system, there is
a lack of clarity where decision making rests for prioritization and allocation of scarce resources—an issue which MPCT shines a direct
light on.
§§Planning time frames are too often dictated by funding         §§The cash debate is a potential opportunity for the IASC principles to
  parameters which tend to be less flexible than required to       address gaps in the current cluster system around resource prioritiza-
  adjust for cash, and are sector based. For example, the          tion in the humanitarian context.
  Humanitarian Response Plan is done at the end of the year      §§This would require greater engagement with donors and exploring a
  but many donors set their priorities months ahead, and this      wider range of financing options such as pooled funds and insurance
  may not sync with government planning frameworks.                funds and other risk financing instruments.
§§The trade-off between benefit levels and coverage are          §§There is a need to make more explicit linkages between short term
  strongly brought to light with cash transfers. These trade-      humanitarian plans and longer term development planning; they too
  offs need to be more explicitly discussed, especially in         often exist in separate worlds. Bridging the gap between humanitarian
  cases where there is little convergence of sector inputs on      and development efforts requires clear inter-sectoral architecture.
  the same affected households.                                    This requires us to be bold and to be ahead of the curve (to lead rather
§§Other trade-offs to discuss include the increased efficien-      than be pushed into reform).
  cies of cash versus the cost of changing systems to assess,    §§In Iraq, the HRP had a separate chapter dealing with MPCTs while
  implement and monitor cash transfers.                            each sector chapter dealt with sector based cash. The CWG then pro-
§§The divide between humanitarian and development remains          vides an overall forum almost like a cluster for technical support but
  a big barrier to wider sector based planning. Humanitarians      also for pooled funding applications. They feel this “double identity”
  are often accused of operating as if they are dealing with a     allows them to transcend the sectoral divide.
  blank slate in terms of existing systems.                      §§There are pros and cons of having the technical support and coordi-
§§The question of where the decision on which modality to          nation role together. The pros are that there is one place to build con-
  use is taken is unclear. In practice, these decisions are        sensus and common approaches as “much is about building buy-in”
  taken at the sector level and not at a higher cross sector       Country Interview. Keeping the two functions separate has pros as
  level.                                                           well as it ensures independence and neutrality, and reduces the bur-
§§It is unclear where to situate put cash in an HRP/HRD. In        den on one institution.
  some cases it is presented as a separate chapter but then      §§Plan in a more holistic manner based on holistic multi-sector joined up
  there is the challenge of how to shoe-horn it back into the      assessments.
  sectors where implementation takes place.                      §§Shift to multi year planning in protracted crises more closely aligned
                                                                   to longer-term planning and objectives of social protection programs.
                                                                   Overall planning must shift to outcome based planning as opposed to
                                                                   sector based planning.
                                                                 §§Need to engage much more with governments and their planning
                                                                   systems (again through preparedness). This includes planning to scale
                                                                   up existing programs as a first response using existing mechanism
                                                                   (staring with government systems such as SP).
                                                                 §§Clarify where in the architecture the decision on modalities will be
                                                                   taken (in the short term) and what the best future architecture should
                                                                   be in the medium term.
                                                                 §§To change mindsets champions need to be developed. It must be
                                                                   driven by very high level buy-in at the executive level. There is a need
                                                                   for a high-level strategic team that can cross all sectors (as required
                                                                   for any multi-sector approach).




                                               Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                        65
                        BOTTLENECK                                                      AREA OF IMPROVEMENT
                                                      RESOURCE MOBILIZATION
Main Findings
Resource mobilization is still very sector driven and often donor driven, despite the rhetoric. Funding modalities much match the
expected outcomes, and not work against them. Cash is still under-funded compared to in-kind transfers. Accountability remains a con-
cern with pooled funding and new coordination mechanisms, as does attribution if donors expect reporting on a sector basis. There is a
push for new funding instruments from the donor side including pooled funds, and new risk financing instruments such as insurance.
§§Funding is currently not strongly linked to outcomes, which   §§There is a need to advocate for flexible funding that can adapt to meet
  is a concern at the donor level.                                shifting needs across sectors. This includes the flexibility to adjust the
§§Cash is under-resourced compared to in-kind.                    levels and modality of response based on post-distribution monitoring
                                                                  (which is another area that requires strengthening).
§§In practice, many donors promote a siloed approach despite
  the rhetoric around multi-sector processes. The com-          §§Donors should be positively challenged to better coordinate funding
  mitment to cash varies significantly amongst donors and         amongst themselves in order to align funding mechanisms and incen-
  between HQ and the field.                                       tives in the direction of multi-sector approaches, and MPCTs in partic-
                                                                  ular. Donors need to commit to greater flexibility, harmonization, and
§§The perception is that the process is still very donor driven   to work to address attribution issues in MPCT. Donors need to work
  as donors set conditions and terms according to their pri-      toward common impact and outcomes.
  orities.
                                                                §§One suggested funding benchmark is to re-balance funding to 50/50
§§Current funding modalities increase competition amongst         cash and in-kind as a starting point.
  agencies as that is how the incentives are aligned.
                                                                §§There is a need to decide where the decision on modality choice is
§§Too much programming is driven by donor agendas. Condi-         taken instead of each donor proposals driving it.
  tional versus unconditional decisions are often donor driven.
                                                                §§Explore new financing mechanisms such as insurance and pre-posi-
§§In-kind response is still easier to resource than cash.         tioned contingency funds. However, pay attention to ensure that “con-
§§WFP is opposed to a global pooled fund as this separates        trol” over these decisions do not rest with any one agency.
  accountability from those who decide and those who have       §§In the health sector, the latter is the new strategic direction that
  to deliver.                                                     moves away from user fees. There is concern that cash payments to
§§Currently results frameworks are designed around sectors;       access health services may inadvertently support a user fee based
  we need to learn from SP efforts such as the PSNP in Ethi-      system. The recommendation in this case would be to have that
  opia                                                            portion of the payment directed to a prepayment pooled insurance
                                                                  scheme, and/or the use of vouchers for certain health services (such
§§The prioritization of humanitarian resources is expected
                                                                  as maternal health).
  by donors but does not happen in practice (one of the
  consistent donor concerns is that the HRD is not prioritized §§Don’t earmark cash by sector but instead according to need.
  amongst the sectors). OCHA officially has the mandate for    §§Increase investments in preparedness as a critical issue for imple-
  coordination but not for resource allocation. In practice,     menting cash based responses in emergencies.
  OCHA does not have the power to make the necessary deci-
  sion around the allocation and prioritization of resources,
  nor does the HC/RC have this explicit mandate.




66                   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
                        BOTTLENECK                                                       AREA OF IMPROVEMENT
                                                  IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING
Main Findings
§§As with all interventions, cash must be people centered and grounded in the reality of complex beneficiary needs, many of which
  exceed a transfer to meet basic needs. Cash does not replace the wider programmatic support needed to ensure issues such as
  access to essential basic services. It is not a panacea that can replace more complex development needs.
§§A major bottleneck is the uneven levels of ownership at the strategic leadership level, and the attitude and cultural barriers up and
  down the IASC organizations. In-kind responses are deeply ingrained in the operations and culture of agencies, and the incentive
  structures line up to support an “in-kind first” response.
§§The use of cash must be systematically considered along with in-kind responses. This is an awareness and capacity issue in the first
  instance. It requires staff members in the field that are well informed, comfortable with the modality, and equipped with the right tools.
§§Flexibility is required in cash based responses in order to continually monitor and adjust the response to evolving needs.
§§It is very difficult to coordinate implementation if the       §§Strong leadership is needed to encourage a shift from old sector
  assessment and planning processes are not jointly done.          based in-kind responses. This requires shifting incentives within orga-
  This is further complicated by the competitive nature of         nizations and for donors to re-align their funding incentive structures
  agencies who are looking to increase their market share in       to “reward” collective multi-sector efforts.
  the cash space, which in turn is partially a response to the   §§Put people’s needs at the center—not agency priorities. Be driven by
  way interventions are funded and partially a response to         need first, not by the modality.
  incentives within the current cluster system.
                                                                 §§A positive challenge to donors could be communicated by the IASC
§§In-kind mindsets remain a bottleneck at all levels with          principals to suggest that donors develop unified positions on issues
  in-kind often the first choice.                                  such as M&E requirements, and pooled funding.
§§There are still many operational details that have not been    §§Encourage a flexible approach to implementation to allow for con-
  worked out for cash. For example, is there adequate liquid-      ditionalities if the situation warrants (e.g. behavior modification or
  ity or financial service providers available?                    attending a clinic for prenatal care) while keeping the principles of
§§Cash can carry a high overhead, especially for vouchers          choice for beneficiaries (and the other core benefits of cash).
  (and more so for physical vouchers). Overall efficiency gains §§Invest more in ensuring that any instances of dependency or market
  are not automatic.                                              distortion are being captured, and invest more in general risk mitiga-
§§The capacity to implement cash is a major bottleneck—           tion.
  systems are aligned toward in-kind and can be self-perpet- §§Accountability must be addressed at all levels to ensure it rests at the
  uating. Cash will be systematically considered on par with      right levels, and that we are accountable as directly as possible to the
  other responses only when staff members in the field are        beneficiaries.
  informed, able, comfortable, and provided with the right
  tools.                                                        §§Monitoring must “follow the cash” and include analysis of what people
                                                                  have spent their cash transfers on. For MPCT, clarify what results
§§Questions of accountability are not unique to cash, but cash    are expected, what tools will be used (e.g. a composite index?) and
  brings up additional concerns about defining accountability     whether donors accept this; this links to the attribution issue.
  very clearly, especially in an environment of multiple fund-
  ing sources and multiple implementers including govern-       §§Ensure all sectors and agencies are held to the same standards to
  ment, the UN, NGOs and the private sector.                      show impact; this includes the private sector.
§§M&E is also conducted in silos. Results reporting including    §§In Lebanon, progress has been made in harmonizing six different
  post-distribution must go beyond amount transferred to           transfer cards for refugees into a one card platform with different wal-
  look at the impact of the cash and what people spent it          lets as required. Discussions are still under way around conditionality
  on. Attribution remains a big issue with MPCT if the donor       which remains a final barrier to the one card system.
  requests sector specific reporting on a multipurpose trans-    §§Cash is not a replacement for strengthening service delivery, building
  fer. Much of this will come down to what donors are happy        systems and capacity, or investing in core development actions.
  with and if they can accept outcome level reporting. A uni-
  fied donor position on this would be very useful.
§§Attribution remains a major challenge to MPCT. The major-
  ity of donor funding and the systems for reporting on that
  funding are aligned around sectors. Attributing sector out-
  comes within a broad MPCT remains a challenge.




                                               Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                          67
                         BOTTLENECK                                                           AREA OF IMPROVEMENT
                                                       PEER REVIEW AND EVALUATION
Main Findings
Cash based evaluations are still relatively rare, and meaningful peer review processes rarer still. The overall evidence base for cash is
weak, especially in terms of the use of cash outside of the food security and livelihoods and displacement sectors.
§§Donors are increasingly asking for impact evaluations, and         §§IASC members should advocate for more joined up evaluations, espe-
  higher standards for reporting on results.                           cially in the case of multi purpose cash interventions.
§§However, many view this as under funded in relation to the         §§Peer review mechanisms should be encouraged with the aim of shar-
  expectations. The view is that donors under-estimate the             ing lessons learned and developing common operating standards.
  cost of rigorous impact evaluation and reporting on results        §§There is a need further evidence in areas such as nutrition, and the
  in general.                                                          whole area of service delivery to ensure that cash alone is not seen as
§§Few peer mechanisms are in place and competition                     the answer when multiple levels of support are required (e.g. a cash
  between agencies means that there are few institutional              transfer for health will not work if the clinic is not operating).
  incentives to evaluate together.                                   §§Expand evidence base to look at the quality of services provided when
                                                                       cash transfers are given to increase access.
                                                                     §§Ensure that operational experience is the main guide for improving
                                                                       and expanding the use of cash—ensure it is not driven by ideology.
                                                                     §§Need to explore new ways of reporting on overall results—can we
                                                                       have a “results basket” for example?
                                                                     §§The overall push in multipurpose cash should be for one lump sum
                                                                       with different wallets for the different modalities and transfers. Each
                                                                       wallet may have extra standards or training required which needs to
                                                                       be clearly specified up front, and not assumed to be taken care of
                                                                       within the cash transfer itself.
                                                                     §§It is important to schedule a lessons learned exercise after each major
                                                                       disaster.
                                                                 COORDINATION
Main Findings
§§There is consensus in the view that cash is not well coordinated at the strategic as opposed to the technical level. Specifically, cash
  requires coordination at the cross-sectoral level that transcends the sectors while still enabling sectors to act.
§§The IASC principals should consider the role of the HC/RC in cash specifically but in multi-sector coordination in general. The cluster
  system would be strengthened through providing greater clarity and guidance on what that role should be in terms of cash coordina-
  tion across the clusters.
§§There is a political dynamic to the use of cash that needs to recognized, both in terms of the importance to individual agencies, but also
  to the coordination and development of the system as a whole (including how the humanitarian to development divide is addressed). It is
  important for the cash be a modality that can be used by all, and that the agenda (and funding) is not “owned” by any one agency.
§§The cluster architecture is not fit for purpose in terms of the §§There is consensus in the view that cash is not well coordinated at the
  multi-sector approaches which MPCT highlights; it is very         strategic as opposed to the technical level. Specifically, cash requires coor-
  difficult to look at cross-cutting or multi sector issues within  dination at the cross-sectoral level that transcends the sectors. Suggestions
  the current cluster system.                                       include elevating the CWG to its own sector, elevating cash to the inter-sec-
§§Each of the 20 Cash Working Groups (CWGs) have grown              tor coordination platform, or linking cash to one of the existing cross-cutting
  organically from in-country needs, but there is no consis-        clusters such as logistics. One of the key tensions is how to balance the
  tency in how they relate to the overall cluster system.           need for each cluster use cash as a modality but to have overall coordination
                                                                    at a higher level? “Hard to conceive of a solution in the current architecture.”
§§Many CWGs are strictly technical level, or originated from
  the need to address technical issues. This often means the §§Strengthen the inter-agency cluster coordination mechanism and equip
  CWGs have relatively junior staff attending which can be a        it to be able to coordinate multi-sector approaches (staring with cash)
  barrier for taking on more of the coordination function, or to    and explicitly mandate it to link with the development architecture. In
  address more strategic issues.                                    Nepal, a new group was formed to oversee intercluster coordination
                                                                    called the “Information Coordination Platform.” It was an entirely inde-
                                                                    pendent group which was seen as a positive way to share information.
                                                                    In Lebanon, the CWG has merged with the Basic Assistance Working
                                                                    Group so that NFIs and in-kind approaches are addressed together.




68                    Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
                        BOTTLENECK                                                         AREA OF IMPROVEMENT
§§There is a concern that coordination of cash will also mean      §§Whichever coordination structure is selected, it is important that the
  control including control of resources, be it within a sector      concern be addressed of coordination equating control of resources.
  or at the higher strategic levels.                                 This stems from the practice where in some clusters the lead can
§§The big challenge is to see cash as a modality within each         control which proposals are submitted to donors. Some agencies
  sector, while still having the oversight of a multi-sectoral       argue that this type of coordination gives control without accountabil-
  approach.                                                          ity. No one agency should own the cash agenda or have proprietary
                                                                     access to cash funding through its coordination role.
§§Coordination is very dependent on the quality of the lead-
  ership in-country, and cash is no different. However, when       §§Don’t de-link accountability from coordination; clearly define this at
  the senior leadership does not fully understand cash or            each level.
  sees it through old biases, it makes coordination especially     §§Ensure that there is not just one winner in terms of agencies in cash. It
  challenging.                                                       is a modality that everyone needs to use and have ownership of.
§§In some countries, the cluster system can view develop-          §§There is a view that any changes to the architecture in the short term
  ment actors as competition, especially when it threatens           should be transitional while we learn more about cash and work
  to take over humanitarian functions (such as prefinanced           through the larger systemic issues.
  response funds).                                                 §§How to decide who should coordinate? Some agencies prefer that the
§§The mechanics of working together takes a great deal of            coordinator has some technical expertise as well, but need to avoid
  time, especially when you go to scale with cash. In Leba-          agency interests coming to the fore in the coordination role.
  non it took three months to agree on what disbursement           §§The “ultimate answer” suggested by some is that the government
  systems to use. Combining beneficiary lists is also very           coordinates and the cluster system supports and works to subsume
  time-consuming.                                                    itself under those structures. Currently, there are few incentives for
§§Some view the current global debate as unnecessarily               pushing in this direction.
  divisive—more work needs to be made to bring all stake-          §§Be clear on coordination for what? Is it a matter of just ensuring tech-
  holders together that connects policy statements to the            nical coherence, or is it a matter of deciding on and prioritizing overall
  reality of implementing. Some argue that we have jumped            needs? This should be explicitly addressed.
  too quickly to architecture issues while others say not fast
  enough.                                                          §§Don’t rush into this—Let changes be driven more organically from
                                                                     current experience rather than imposing a radical new structure (HCR,
§§It is not clear which sectors are covered under a multi-sec-       WFP, WHO and UNICEF view). First figure out the core principles and
  tor grant. For instance, the health cluster does not currently     who is accountable.
  engage in significant MPCTs beyond supporting access and
  basic survival requirements.                                     §§Cash should not add extra burdens to an already cumbersome pro-
                                                                     cess, nor should it be a parallel process.
§§In Somalia, the issue of how to maintain a CWG during
  non-emergency periods has become an issue. After one of         §§Government has the key role in terms of coordination but as often
  the first major cash interventions in the 2011 famine, the        challenged to play this role. Make much stronger linkages to govern-
  cash consortium began dying out in 2013 as the technical          ment systems such as social protection. Ensure government is in the
  role dwindled as knowledge was transferred. It was eventu-        lead—supplement and do not replace government leadership.
  ally absorbed into the regional CaLP group with ECHO and        §§Government also plays an important part in regulating the financial
  IRC now trying to re-activate it at country and regional level.   service providers with the right regulatory environment. In the Phil-
                                                                    ippines and in Haiti, Government was able to wave “know your cus-
                                                                    tomer” regulations because of the crisis.
                                                                   §§In Kurdistan, Government stepped in to insist on common approaches
                                                                     in the same area and that the government was the owner of the ben-
                                                                     eficiary data.
                                                                   §§Elevate the current technical level CWG to the strategic level at the
                                                                     RC/HC level, while maintaining a strong technical forum somewhere
                                                                     within the architecture. “The discussion must be elevated to a higher
                                                                     level where decisions can be made with donors and governments on
                                                                     the choices between cash and in-kind responses” UN agency.
                                                                   §§Elevate cash to be on the same footing as other modalities.




                                               Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                           69
                        BOTTLENECK                                                        AREA OF IMPROVEMENT
                                                                  §§Work needs to be done on collecting the best practice of the 20+
                                                                    CWGs as the first step to producing guidance on how to engage in
                                                                    crosscutting issues and cash. One option is to let form follow function
                                                                    and to then be informed by the operational agency experiences at the
                                                                    country level.
                                                                  §§Strike a balance between providing enough clear structural guidance
                                                                    on where cash is coordinated at the strategic level, with allowing flexi-
                                                                    bility to adapt to country specific situations at the technical level.
                                                                  §§Need to develop common principles and guidelines for coordinating
                                                                    cash
                                                                  §§Invest in building collaborative coordination skills at the strategic level
                                                                    and insure independence.
                                                                  §§Approach the issues of coordination a transition. For example:
                                                                  §§Short term: leave cash in each sector but strengthen and give decision
                                                                    making authority to the inter-sector coordination unit under the HC
                                                                  §§Medium term: find a structural solution based on a more systematic
                                                                    gathering of country experience and propose changes within wider
                                                                    re-structuring between humanitarian and development structures.
                                                                  §§More work needs to be done to determine the added value of each
                                                                    agency and to possibly assign responsibility for specific areas (e.g.
                                                                    registration).
                                                                  §§Encourage more innovation and technology with greater collaboration
                                                                    across the silos and between agencies.
                                                       SYSTEMS STRENGTHENING
Main Findings
§§There is a disconnect between humanitarian actions and long term development initiatives. Humanitarians often arrive and begin
  implementing with their own systems without understanding what systems are already in place.
§§There is a need to layer finances, budgets and instruments across the development/humanitarian divide.
§§Aim to deliver cash through national systems as much as possible. Look to piggy back on existing systems as the first response (and
  combine this with a strong preparedness investment)
§§Preparedness is critical in terms of cash programming in particular in order to ensure all of the efficiencies of cash are realized.
§§The overall humanitarian system is not structured to ade-       §§Linking humanitarian efforts to development is key and must be a
  quately deal with cash as a flexible multi-sector instrument.     strong lens for all actions. Need to embed this in all discussions with
  As suggested by one actor in Nepal “the existing systems          the link to the use of existing systems.
  worked against cash at every level.”                           §§Wider structural issues are not an immediate fix: separate between
§§There is a donor view that the key issue for IASC in the         short and medium term action required to address the various issues.
  medium to long term is how to re-structure the humanitar-        Many commented on the need to act decisively, but to also recognize
  ian system to make stronger linkages to the development          the structural and attitude barriers that are in place. The suggestion is
  efforts and to capitalize on existing systems. Despite efforts   that the process moving forward can’t be simply top down and must
  and statements on this issue, the view is that business          be sensitive to the need to bring everyone on board in a collaborative
  as usual will not work any longer and strong moves are           manner. It will be a challenge to both act decisively and sensitively.
  required.                                                      §§Need to layer finances, budgets and instruments across the devel-
§§The shift in roles for using cash, for managing pooled           opment/humanitarian divide. Work in Ethiopia on the “continuum of
  money, and for working toward quality assurance of ser-          response” is a positive step forward in this regard.
  vices implies a big shift in the way humanitarian actors
  engage and operate. In most cases this has not been explic-
  itly discussed at the strategic level and is addressed only at
  the technical level.




70                   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
                         BOTTLENECK                                                        AREA OF IMPROVEMENT
§§Social protection is an obvious starting point for humanitar-     §§In Pakistan, the government is ahead of the other agencies in terms of
  ians, especially in terms of building on existing registries,       using cash and has developed a cash based response model for emer-
  targeting systems, and delivery infrastructure. However, it         gencies with the UN. Consequently, the CWG was designed to work
  is very difficult to do this from scratch, especially in a fast     closely with the Government to further build the model and ensure
  onset emergency.                                                    strong links to social protection. The private sector also played a key
                                                                      role in the displacement and were able to impose strict financial con-
                                                                      trols with less leakages which they could leverage, especially through
                                                                      electronic transfers.
                                                                    §§Some donors suggest that cash debate signals a broader shift in how
                                                                      humanitarian aid will be delivered in future. There will be less direct
                                                                      implementation for international agencies with a shift to bearing
                                                                      witness, facilitating, and strengthening systems and capacity (of
                                                                      governments, the private sector, and other key local stakeholders).
                                                                      The implication is that the sooner the international agencies make this
                                                                      shift, the more relevant they will be moving forward.
                                                                    §§Need to engage much more with social protection systems in advance
                                                                      on a broad range of issues including targeting, registration, and mon-
                                                                      itoring so that in the event of a shock, the SP system can surge as a
                                                                      first response, and that the systems are fit for purpose as a base for
                                                                      further humanitarian action that may be needed.
                                                                    §§There are positive examples of humanitarian actors building on exist-
                                                                      ing systems. In post-earthquake Nepal, UNICEF topped up the govern-
                                                                      ment’s child benefit scheme, while in the Philippines, WFP used the
                                                                      government social protection registry and system to initially respond.
                                                                      In Lebanon, work is underway to align the humanitarian cash program
                                                                      with the government social protection program.
                                                                    §§In Liberia, the government National Social Protection Coordinator
                                                                      played a key role in the cluster system coordination. He has been
                                                                      proactive in using the Ebola crisis to help build a common social reg-
                                                                      istry and MIS system to address the needs of both emergencies and
                                                                      development.
                                                                    §§This requires bringing together stakeholders before an emergency to
                                                                      discuss a number of issues. Can existing systems be strengthened to
                                                                      flex and respond? Can current systems be used? Are some systems
                                                                      too political or inefficient to use? How can we maximize public private
                                                                      partnerships? What technology will need to be strengthened and sys-
                                                                      tematized?
                                                                    §§Capacity needs to address cash are huge both within agencies and
                                                                      within national systems. Capacity needs are large across all of the
                                                                      processes/building blocks.




                                                Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                            71
                         BOTTLENECK                                                           AREA OF IMPROVEMENT
                                                                   PREPAREDNESS
§§Cash will only be effective and deliver on its efficiencies if      §§Preparedness is a critical necessary complement to cash program-
  the ground work is done before the emergency hits.                    ming and must be grounded in existing systems and their ability to flex
§§There are insufficient incentives and funding for prepared-           and surge.
  ness. It is not seen as a priority and it’s not funded in a         §§Need a much better understanding in advance of what development
  meaningful way by either the donors or the UN. Much more              donors such as the Need to shift the concept of “pre-positioning” to
  work needs to be done to incorporate cash into all pre-               include needs assessments skills and tools (with market analysis),
  paredness activities.                                                 mapping of service providers, agreements and regulations addressed in
                                                                        advance, etc.
                                                                      §§World Bank are doing to support major systems such as social protec-
                                                                        tion and to make these linkages in advance.
                                                                      §§Aim to have one “Continuum of Response” that sequences all available
                                                                        instruments across time starting with flexing existing systems (for exam-
                                                                        ple, how much can existing health services flex as a first response?).
                                                                      §§Focus on setting the ground in advance including establishing a strong
                                                                        role for government and the private sector.
                                                                      §§Strongly encourage donors to fund preparedness and make it an IASC
                                                                        priority.
                                                                      §§Initially focus on developing Standard Operating Procedures (SoPs) to
                                                                        also help build the working relationship between the agencies (based
                                                                        on the experience of 4 UN agencies doing the same under DFID
                                                                        funding. WFP, OCHA, UNHCR and UNICEF are working to strengthen
                                                                        humanitarian preparedness in high risk countries using cash based
                                                                        transfers. This has been very useful to help develop common
                                                                        approaches such as joint feasibility studies, training, and an overall
                                                                        methodology for a model going forward.
                                                                      §§The Philippines is a good example of the CWG working to develop
                                                                        standard agreements between financial service providers and the aid
                                                                        community.
                                                   LESSONS LEARNED AND INNOVATIONS
§§Cash shines a light on what does not work in the overall humanitarian architecture. This includes the ability to plan and assess jointly
  and to operate in an inter-sectoral manner. Cash may help us become more efficient with better responses through streamlined sys-
  tems. Should we fit cash into a system that must change, or should it be part of a new system?
§§The role of the private sector is key moving forward. If IASC systems can’t deliver, then the private sector will more and more be the
  first choice. Work needs to be done to develop a single entry point to the private sector so that there are clear points of engagement.
§§This evolution needs to be seen within an overall humanitarian system that is more accountable, more joined up, with better links to
  development, where thinking outside of the box is valued. This is far beyond the issue of cash.
§§“UN agencies can overcome any barrier inherent in this debate as long as we ensure that we have a transparent process, strong rela-
  tionships, and a high degree of trust.” UN agency.
§§Need to find ways of encouraging innovation without competition—those developing a common platform should be encouraged to
  allow all to join and should link to the government or private sector systems as much as possible.
§§Need to push experience in other forms of risk financing such as insurance, and contingency funds/budgets such as in the PSNP in Ethiopia.
§§More work needed on understanding remittances.
§§A lesson from Liberia is to make WWW more rules based in terms of asking donors and implementers to then adhere to common stan-
  dards and rules; and to encourage donors to make funding contingent upon following the agreed standards.
§§In Iraq, the MPCT strategy is an innovation in the HRP as it grew out of the needs on the ground. The process of collaboration started
  with the rapid response mechanism from UNHCR and WFP. Together they worked with cash actors to solidify and then built on this by
  deciding to go further with joint targeting to identify the most vulnerable. The strategy evolved organically out of the local context and
  now 2016 it includes returnees and protracted displaced. The collaboration now Includes defining a common minimum survival expen-
  diture basket with a weighted average for the transfer value.




72                    Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
                                                                                                             Appendix F


                                         Workshop outputs



A one day workshop was held with the IASC “Engine Room” on 21 March 2016 in Washington, DC to dis-
cuss this draft Strategic Concept Note. The Engine Room consists of the technical level representatives of
the IASC principal agencies.

The attendees were:

Joseph Ashmore, IOM                                    Matt Hobson, World Bank
Jehan Arulpragasam, World Bank                         Juliet Lang, UN OCHA
David Calef, FAO                                       Sibi Lawson-Marriott, UNICEF
Keith Chibafa, World Vision                            Waheed Lor Mehdiabadi, UNHCR
Kenn Crossley, WFP                                     Benard Muinde, IASC Secretariat
Andre Griekspoor, WHO                                  Radha Rajkotia, IRC
Ugo Gentilini, World Bank                              Annika Sandlund, UNHCR
Loretta Hieber-Girardet, UN OCHA                       Stephen Anderson, Consultant




                                                                                                               73
      FACTS CAPTURED?                         AGREE WITH FINDINGS?                           IMPLICATIONS APPROPRIATE?
                                                   CONCEPTS AND DEFINITIONS
§§On key terminology an inter-    §§Findings agreed.                                    §§An accelerated and collaborative research
  agency process has taken        §§The issues/experiences are well captured with         agenda is required that can both look across
  place and concluded under the     differing views on the level of boldness in the       the sectors, and also note the differences
  ERC Grant à This should be        recommendations [the broad consensus appears          between sectors (e.g. between the provision
  included in the report            to be to make the recommendations bolder,             of goods and services which
                                    although some were pushing to maintain a bal-       §§Recommendation to IASC principals to
                                    anced approach in light of the general strong         endorse the terminology as defined in the
                                    push for cash]                                        work done under ERC Grant. A second group
                                                                                          recommended building on the CaLP/DFID
                                                                                          work done on recommendations.
                                                                                        §§Cash & protection is an area that requires
                                                                                          more attention with clear linkages to the
                                                                                          group working on protection.
                                                    EQUITY IN CONSIDERATION
                                  Agreement on the facts with some comments:            §§Proposed action is agreed assuming
                                  §§Differences between sectors should be better          is it needs based and grounded in the
                                    captured, especially in reference to sectors that     context.
                                    deliver goods readily available on the market,      §§The language could be bolder while short
                                    and those dealing with access to services which
                                                                                          of a “cash is preferred” statement.
                                    is much more complex.
                                  §§Not all services are or should be market driven.
                                    Quality analysis is needed regardless of cash/
                                    in-kind modality.
                                  §§The emphasis on efficiency and effectiveness
                                    may vary depending on the stage of the crisis
                                    (e.g. fast onset vs protracted crisis)
                                  §§Equity in access should be emphasized.
                                  §§Agreement on recommendation: consider cash
                                    equally.




74                  Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
      FACTS CAPTURED?                AGREE WITH FINDINGS?                           IMPLICATIONS APPROPRIATE?
                                              NEEDS ASSESSMENTS
Facts are agreed        Findings are agreed                                   Implications:
                        §§However, the needs assessment process in            §§Government has the responsibility as long
                          general requires us to dive deeper. We should         as they adhere to humanitarian principles.
                          not just reaffirm existing approaches where that      Don’t want assessments to be contingent
                          haven’t worked.                                       on government. [A discussion agreed that
                        §§Recommend having one risk/poverty and vulner-         the default position is to establish clusters
                          ability analysis to inform planning. This should      regardless of what state government leader-
                          recognize that sectors have individual needs but      ship is in]
                          there should still be one overall analysis as the   §§Busan has made it clear that even in fragile
                          base.                                                 states, government ownership and account-
                        §§Needs assessments currently look at needs, but        ability is key
                          not the modalities needed to meet those needs       §§Switch sequence of recommendations—
                          (the how).. Assessments are already to some           emphasize the inclusion of markets as the
                          degree multi-sector but this can go further and       primary next step with the larger systems
                          be strengthened.                                      issue related to the wider reform agenda
                        §§Needs assessments need to shift to include the      §§There is a need for a broader “frame” of
                          wider context that can inform the response and        information needs that different agencies and
                          the choice of modality                                sectors can feed into. This includes a greater
                        §§Services cannot be replaced simply by a cash          emphasis on response analysis that can con-
                          transfer and form a much more complicated part        tinue to inform implementation
                          of the assessment process. Assessments need         §§There is a need for one central compilation
                          to capture this complexity.                           of assessment results, and this may require
                        §§The shift from needs to include context in            a high level body within the IASC; but if so
                          assessments is welcome                                where does it sit? There is a model already
                                                                                (ACAPS) but it does not have the mandate to
                        §§System analysis should also be included (to           be the needs assessment agency as it is not
                          understand the state of service delivery in           high enough within the system.
                          health, education, etc.). This should include
                          capacities and vulnerabilities.                     §§Response Analysis is key and is a missing
                                                                                element in the structure. One suggestion is to
                                                                                reform the CWGs as response analysis units
                                                                                that serve to provide the analysis, in addition
                                                                                to the needs assessment process, to decide
                                                                                on which modality to chose.
                                                                              §§Prioritization is the bigger issue that is not
                                                                                being addressed
                                                                              §§UNDAF experience: trying to prioritize but
                                                                                failing
                                                                              §§The wider question is whether it is really
                                                                                always the UN’s fault? There is a need for
                                                                                balanced accountability with clear demarca-
                                                                                tion of shared responsibility including donors
                                                                                and governments.
                                                                              §§In addition to needs assessment, a process
                                                                                of response analysis is required to look more
                                                                                systematically at the how.




                                  Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                           75
     FACTS CAPTURED?                      AGREE WITH FINDINGS?                      IMPLICATIONS APPROPRIATE?
The need for an Independent   Issue of Independence and potential conflict of
needs assessment is not       interest:
agreed.                       §§Can the needs assessment process be within
                                IASC?
                                Can it be a common needs assessment pro-
                                cess?
                              §§Can it be an independent internal mechanism?
                                If so, how would it work? This requires clear
                                checks and balances within a shared assess-
                                ment process (a joint needs assessment).
                              §§But how to ensure checks and balances?
                               ––Start with a joint assessment process
                               ––Need to develop other mechanisms to ensure
                                 no conflict of interest
                               ––Ensure assessments are open, transparent
                                 and easily shared
                               ––Recognize that it is a political discussion that
                                 involves donors as well. All the transparency
                                 in the world does not matter if there is no
                                 response
                               ––Change language that emphasizes the how
                                 (market and systems included)
                               ––Issue of parity—emphasize throughout
                              Bigger problem is the prioritization (and costing)
                              issue.




76               Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
      FACTS CAPTURED?                            AGREE WITH FINDINGS?                            IMPLICATIONS APPROPRIATE?
                                               COMMON PROGRAMMING APPROACHES
§§Definition of “Platform” should   §§Agree on need to have common approaches.              Implications:
  be unpacked in relation to a        Within the current structure, this would require      §§Principles for how we approach implementa-
  “Joint Programming” frame-          country-specific approaches; Entities can be UN,        tion is a central implication
  work                                govern; NGOs.
                                                                                            §§Focus on economies of scale. For example,
§§Fragmentation throughout the      §§Joint programming approaches are required               if UNHCR is the first on the ground, they can
  program cycle including deliv-      rather than having just a narrow cash focus.            negotiate arrangements such as with finan-
  ery is one of the key issues to     Highlight this over the delivery mechanism.             cial institutions for all. Common agreements
  be stressed                       §§There is often too much emphasis on transfer            should start with the first agency in.
§§Compatibility of info collected     mechanisms when the emphasis should be more
  and how this informs targeting      on the common approaches.
  is a fundamental starting point   §§Efficiency is not just related to the type of costs
  as there is currently an “data-     and should be more broadly defined
  base interoperability” where
  there is no common database       §§There tends to be an over-simplification in the
  or registry.                        discussion on transfer arrangements, particularly
                                      when there are complex issues when dealing
§§Not clear on next steps/recom-      with services.
  mendations
                                    §§Common approaches can carry the risk of stifling
§§Data protection laws and            innovation so efforts to protect innovation are
  principles standards/protocols      required.
  are all key issues to address
  moving forward. This should       §§Use of standards are the bedrock of common
  include an understanding of         platforms. Need to learn from the development
  where the decision points are       side and social protection with common data-
  (for the IASC principals as         bases.
  well).                            §§Empower the HCT, the HC and Govt to make
§§Fact check the Lebanon exam-        decisions that lead to a common platform. This
  ple on some details                 requires:
                                     ––a clear decision point
                                     ––a common understanding of vulnerability and
                                       context
                                    §§There is a myth of efficiencies that common
                                      must mean more efficient. It still requires effort
                                      and has implicit costs. At the end of the day,
                                      donors still need to fund.
                                    §§Would be helpful to draw on a broader pool of
                                      examples and not just from MICs




                                              Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                          77
 FACTS CAPTURED?                   AGREE WITH FINDINGS?                             IMPLICATIONS APPROPRIATE?
                                            NATIONAL SYSTEMS
                      National systems:                                       Build on National systems?
                      §§Building systems requires an investment in order      §§Yes, in some contexts, but be careful about
                        to link development and humanitarian efforts.           impartiality in many contexts.
                        The link to cash should be stressed in this con-      What can IASC do for these wider issues?
                        text
                                                                              §§Articulate a threshold for investment in exist-
                      §§The financing to do this in humanitarian contexts       ing systems that can be added to humani-
                        is a major barrier.                                     tarian funding. Donor buy-in for acceptable
                      §§Can IASC advocate for a systems strengthening           levels of loss vs investment in local systems
                        premium to be added to humanitarian funding             is key to moving forward on this agenda; a
                        (e.g. 10% extra?)                                       shared responsibility.
                      §§Different sources of funding may be required but      §§A clear understanding of risk is important
                        it could open up the bridge to mix humanitarian         before engaging in systems strengthening.
                        and development funding more explicitly.              §§Clarity is required around the temporary
                      §§Requires a clarity of objectives to ensure that         nature of humanitarian-led systems and
                        humanitarian principles come first, but that            the limits to systems strengthening which
                        the linkages are important to development and           requires more sustained engagement. This
                        broader systems. Impartiality is still a key tenant     includes both rapid onset, and complex pro-
                        to uphold.                                              tracted crisis; it is important to differentiate.
                      §§Development partners should engage from the           §§Important to remember that current UNDAF
                        beginning.                                              guidelines do state that governments will
                                                                                take responsibility to fund protracted emer-
                                                                                gencies out of their own budgets.
                                               PREPAREDNESS
                      §§Not bold enough:                                      §§Capacity to implement quality cash transfer
                        ––Cash/markets need to be systematically inte-          needs to be strengthened. (Capacity build-
                          grated into ERP, MPA & APA. (minimum and              ing.)
                          advanced preparedness action) within the            §§Include a reference to Government-run social
                          overall IASC Process. This is low hanging fruit.      protection systems that need to become
                        ––Linking development + Humanitarian begins             shock-responsive using cash review. IASC’s
                          in preparedness and must be included (for             existing guidance on preparedness to include
                          instance with risk financing)                         cash.

                        ––Early investment = lower cost                       §§Review IASC’s existing guidance on pre-
                                                                                paredness to incorporate cash
                        ––Risk management process—not unique to
                          cash                                                §§As a general rule, start with low hanging
                                                                                operational fruit and build momentum from
                        ––Joint triggers are need to lead to joined-up          there.
                          action




78         Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
      FACTS CAPTURED?                             AGREE WITH FINDINGS?                            IMPLICATIONS APPROPRIATE?
                                                                 EVIDENCE
§§While over 200 evaluations may have been conducted, they are very difficult to compare
§§Be cautious and aware of these limitations
Standardization
§§Cost should be seen more broadly and should include the opportunity cost and the political cost.
§§Value should also be seen more broadly. For example, delivery through national systems has its own value and benefit that must be
  recognized and not lost in terms of measurement and valuation.
What can cash be used for?
§§Be positive where we do know there is evidence
Conditionality:
§§It is not enough to have access to services if the services are not functioning or of inadequate quality. There are also non-financial bar-
  riers to services that need to be considered.
§§MPCT should be defined in terms of objectives and should include both conditional and unconditional options
§§2 weeks ago UNICEF issued a statement that the agency is against conditions based on evidence
§§Introduce the concepts of MPCT and conditionality earlier in the paper (reference this in the definition section).
Caution
§§Cash is new and the overall sample is limited
§§Initial costs will be higher with cash and volume matters (things will get cheaper over time and as it goes to scale)
Transfer value
§§Adequate vs inadequate is a factor that must continue to be studied and monitored to ensure beneficiaries receive was is due to them.
§§Seasonality and changing market value plays a role and can affect the net benefit to beneficiaries.
Thresholds?
§§Can we develop thresholds for the use of cash (“Go or no go”)?
§§Can we help determine where and when scale matters in terms of cost-effectiveness and efficiency?




                                               Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                          79
         FACTS CAPTURED?                         AGREE WITH FINDINGS?                          IMPLICATIONS APPROPRIATE?
                                                              COORDINATION
Sensitive issues:                   Facts:                                                §§Need more explicit recommendations on
§§Who manages cash (as pass         §§Agreed                                                coordination that are both strategic and
  through). This function carries                                                           technical
                                    §§TOR to include CASH
  at least a 7% admin fee so                                                              §§Cash to be integrated in all sectors/clusters
  there will be one agency that     §§No change to clusters                                 make modality discussion mandatory
  gains.                            §§Should fit into current coordination effort (ICCG   §§In the short term, strengthen intercluster
§§How do we ensure sectors            + CWG?)                                               coordination and have a clear split between
  receive adequate $ for the sup-   Issue:                                                  the what (needs) and the how (technical
  ply-side?                                                                                 coordination)
                                    §§Don’t have a separate cash silo through separate
§§Who makes decisions re pri-         cash coordination structures                        §§Need to separate the coordination function
  orities?                                                                                  form the control over cash being introduced
                                    Avoid:
§§Should coordinating fall to the                                                           in the country
                                    §§Separating responsibility for managing resources
  agency with expertise OR the                                                            §§Propose a combined response analysis and
  one which has the coordination    §§Having a structure that is parallel to other sec-     coordination group
  mandate OR none of the above        tors
                                                                                          Integrate cash throughout each sector
  such as the World Bank?           Intercluster system
                                                                                          §§And have intercluster coordination over top
Suggestions:                        §§Curtail HC/HCT role as this is really not working
                                                                                         §§Not CWG reporting to HC but reporting to
§§The HC training must ensure       §§This is part of the wider need to change the         intercluster coordination.
  there is an understanding of        system in a way that looks at all resources (cash,
  cash from multiple sectors;                                                            §§Development partners should be encouraged
                                      in-kind, etc.)
                                                                                           to be in CWGs and any common platform
§§Development actors need to be     §§Where will the CWGs report?                          groups.
  at the humanitarian table and
  vice versa.                         ––Report to HC?

Issue:                               ––Report to HCT?

§§Need to separate coordination      ––Report to intercluster?
  from control over cash being      Fear à
  introduced in a country.          §§Cash can’t change the Humanitarian coordina-
Strategic:                            tion system
§§Who decides what modality         §§CWGs à control resources
  should be used? = HCT?            §§ àControl operations
§§Include in TOR?                   §§Important to address this directly
                                    Inter-agency cluster
                                    §§Doesn’t control resources of clusters
                                    §§Has authority to guide firmly but is not in prac-
                                      tice.
                                    Evolution of CWG
                                    §§Gender could provide an example where the evo-
                                      lution led to having a gender person embedded
                                      in each cluster
                                    Where does joint planning etc. happen?
                                    §§Intercluster is where it must happen
                                    §§With technical support to this
                                    §§Make CWG part of the structure




80                   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
      FACTS CAPTURED?                             AGREE WITH FINDINGS?                            IMPLICATIONS APPROPRIATE?
                                                         MULTI-ACTOR AGENDA
                                     Political economy                                      §§Need to align incentives for coordination
                                     §§Need to be ground our actions in a thorough            between development and humanitarian
                                       understanding of these political realities (e.g.       agencies too. There needs to be active
                                       USAID have limits on the use of cash based on          efforts to create a connection at the broad
                                       the Farm bill)                                         level, but also by brining actors within each
                                                                                              sector and cluster together
                                     §§Are there limitations to the depth of the engage-
                                       ment? For example, there may be limits to the
                                       use of the private sector in difficult circum-
                                       stances.
Parking Lot Issues
§§Security & Accountability; these are two issues that should run clearly through the whole cash agenda
§§Implications for NGOs; these should be spelled out moving forward, especially given the strong role they have played to date
§§Conditionalities vs Unrestricted; more work and discussion is required with the need to keep space open for the wide and complex set
  of circumstances we deal with
§§Government leadership; this is an area requiring greater effort moving forward
Summary Issues (what are the main message for the IASC Principles?)
§§A balanced, realistic + cohesive approach to transfer modality is required
§§Role of government and the links to SP must be strengthened and prioritized
§§Whatever the final structures, there should still be enough space for innovation (need a “license to innovate” built into the process)
§§Be careful not to rush to define systems that are not necessarily based on reality. There is a need to test and experiment with the
  structures before (“enjoy dating before marriage”).
§§One size does not fit all as there is complexity that must be recognized
§§Joint + comprehensive understanding of need is a critical component combined with response analysis including the capacity to
  respond
§§Coordination should be seen in the short and long term with flexibility to respond and the ability to “look across the horizon”




                                               Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts                             81
Appendix G


Documents consulted



             ALNAP. 2015. The State of the Humanitarian System, 2015 Edition, ALNAP Study, London: ALNAP/ODI.

             Avenir Analytics. 2014. “Final Report and Recommendation,” Research to identify the Optimal Operational
             Set-up for Multi-Actor provision of Unconditional cash Grants to Syrian Refugees in Lebanon, Avenir Ana-
             lytics, Larnaca, Cyprus.

             CaLP (Cash Learning Partnership). 2015. “Cash Coordination in Lebanon,” United Nations and Inter-Agency
             Coordination of Lebanon, May 2015.

             —. 2016a. “Cash Working Groups: A Preliminary Mapping,” Global Cash Working Group, Geneva,
             February 4.

             —. 2016b. “CaLP Tools: Learn, Share, Discuss,” CaLP website, accessed January 2016.

             —. 2016c. “Regional Updates—Asia,” CaLP website, accessed January 2016.

             —. 2016d. “Terms of Reference, Cash Working Group Iraq,” Inter Cluster Coordination Group (ICCG),
             January 2016.

             —. 2016e. “Terms of Reference, Cash Transfer Technical Working Group in Kenya.”

             —. 2016f. “Termes De Reference Du Cash Working Group (CWG) Mali.”

             —. 2016g. “Update on Liberia Coordination of Cash Working Group.”

             CaLP, Humanitarian Futures Programme, and King’s College London. 2014. Is Cash Transfer Programming
             ‘Fit for the Future’?, Final Report, Geneva: CaLP.

             CBRWG (Cash Based Response Working Group). “Terms of Reference Cash Based Response Working
             Group,” Food Security and Rural Development Sector Committee of Somalia.

             —. 2014. “Terms of Reference, Coordinator of the Cash Based Response-Technical Working Group
             (CBR-TWG),” August.

             —. 2015a. “Northern Syria CBR Distribution Timeline,” April.




82
—. 2015b. “Terms of Reference Cash Based Response Technical Working Group for Northern Syria,”
Cash Based Response Technical Working Group, April.

CVWG (Cash and Voucher Technical Working Group) for Yemen. 2015. “Terms of Reference Cash and
Voucher Technical Working Group (CVTWG) Yemen,” Food Security and Agriculture Cluster, October.

CVWG (Cash and Voucher Working Group). “Afghanistan Terms of Reference,” Humanitarian Response, UN
OCHA.

DFID (Department for International Development). “Communication One Pager, CO Letter and Update,”
DFID, London, UK.

Early Recovery Cluster. 2014. “Draft Terms of Reference Technical Working Group on Cash Transfers,”
November.

ECHO (Directorate General Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection- European Commission). 2015a. “Evalua-
tion of the Use of Different Transfer Modalities in ECHO Humanitarian Aid Actions 2011–2014,” Draft Final
Report September, 2015, Volume 1—Main Report, ECHO, Brussels.

—. 2015b. “Evaluation of the Use of Different Transfer Modalities in ECHO Humanitarian Aid Actions
2011–2014,” Draft Final Report September, 2015, Volume 2—Annexes, ECHO, Brussels.

Fernandez, Gabriel. 2015a. Implementing Cash Transfers: Mitigating the Ebola Epidemic on Vulnerable
Households and Groups, August.

—. 2015b. Scaling Up Social Cash Transfers in Response to the EVD Outbreak in Liberia, Ministry of
Gender, Children and Social Protection, November.

Gentilini, U. 2016. “Sorting Through the Hype: Exploring the Interface Between Humanitarian Assistance
and Safety Nets.” Social Protection and Labor Policy Note19, World Bank.

Global Humanitarian Assistance. 2015. Global Humanitarian Assistance Report 2015, Bristol, UK: Global;
Humanitarian Assistance, A Development Initiative.

Global Shelter Cluster. 2015. “Global Shelter Cluster Position Paper: Cash and Markets in the Shelter Sec-
tor,” Shelter and Cash Working Group, February.

Government of the Philippines. 2015. “Cash Working Group Philippines, Terms of Reference,” Department
of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), March.

Groupe Sécurité Alimentaire. “Termes de Reference du Groupe de Travail Cash & Voucher Tchad.”

—. 2015. “Termes De Reference Du Groupe De Travail Transfert D’especes Et Bons D’achat (GTEB)-
Burkina Faso,” Programme Alimentaire Mondial (PAM) et Action Contre la Faim (ACF).

Groupe URD (Urgence–Réhabilitation–Développement) and CaLP (Cash Learning Partnership). 2012. Com-
parative Study of Emergency Cash Coordination Mechanisms. Plaisians, France: Groupe URD.

Harvey, Paul, and Sarah Bailey. 2015. Humanitarian Cash Transfers—Consultation Summary, Overseas
Development Institute (ODI).




                                          Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts           83
     IASC/ECHA Secretariat. 2011. “Final Summary Record and Action Points,” Inter-Agency Standing Commit-
     tee Ad Hoc Principals Meeting on Yemen and Horn of Africa, 15 September 2011, PR/1110/3859, issued
     October 4.

     IASC (Inter-Agency Standing Committee). 2011a. “Ad Hoc Principals Meeting on Yemen and Horn of Africa:
     Final Summary Record and Action Points,” IASC, Geneva, September.

     —. 2011b. “Humanitarian Cash and Voucher-based Programming in the horn of Africa.” For the IASC
     Principals.

     —. 2015. Reference Module for Cluster Coordination at Country Level. IASC Sub-Working Group on the
     Cluster Approach and the Global Cluster Coordinators’ Group, revised July 2015, IASC, Geneva.

     Juillard, Helene, and Mailnul Islam Opu. 2014. Scoping Study: Emergency Cash Transfer Programming in the
     WaSH and Shelter Sectors, Geneva: The Cash Learning Partnership.

     Kayffmann, Domitille, and Olivia Collins. 2012. Comparative Study of Emergency Cash Coordination Mech-
     anisms, CaLP and Groupe URD, Plaisians, France: Groupe URD.

     FSC (Food Security Cluster). 2015a. “Liberia FSC: Matrix 4Ws for Activities,” United Nations and the Minis-
     try of Agriculture of Liberia, November.

     —. 2015b. “Liberia FSC Newsletter,” FSC, Liberia, December.

     Myanmar Cash Transfer Working Group. 2013. “Terms of Reference, Myanmar Cash Transfer Working
     Group,” The Myanmar Cash Transfer Working Group, November 2013.

     ODI (Overseas Development Institute). 2015. Doing Cash Differently: How Cash transfers Can Transform
     Humanitarian Aid, Report of the High Level panel on Humanitarian Cash Transfers, London: ODI, Center for
     Global Development.

     Smith, Gabrielle. 2015. Cash Coordination in the Philippines: A Review of Lessons Learned during the
     response to Super Typhoon Haiyan, Geneva: The Cash Learning Partnership.

     South Sudan CTMWG (South Sudan Cash Transfers and Markets Working Group). 2014. “Terms of Ref-
     erence South Sudan Cash Transfers and Markets Working Group (CTMWG),” South Sudan Food Security
     Cluster, September.

     UN (United Nations). 2015. Humanitarian Financing: Keeping up with Rising Needs in a World of Crises,
     High-Level Panel on Humanitarian Financing Report, October.

     —. 2016a. Too Important to Fail—Addressing the Humanitarian Financial Gap, High-Level Panel on
     Humanitarian Financing Report to the Secretary-General, New York: UN.

     —. 2016b. One Humanity: Shared Responsibility, Report of the United Nations Secretary-General for
     the World Humanitarian Summit, UN General Assembly, January.

     UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees). 2015a. Cash-Based Interventions for Health
     Programmes in Refugee Settings: A Review, Geneva: UNHCR.

     —. 2015b. Operational Guidelines for Cash-Based Interventions in Displacement Settings, Geneva:
     UNHCR.




84   Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts
UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees) and WFP (World Food Programme). 2015. Evalu-
ation of the OneCard Pilot in Lebanon, Improving Cash-Based Interventions Multipurpose Cash Grants and
Protection, Enhanced Response Capacity Project 2014–2015, Geneva: UNHCR and WFP.

UNHCR, Oxfam, DRC, Save the Children, CaLP, OCHA, and WFP. 2015a. “An Operational Toolkit for Mul-
tipurpose Cash Grants,” Draft Document, Improving Cash-Based Interventions Multipurpose Cash Grants
and Protection, Enhanced Response Capacity Project 2014–2015, UNHCR, Geneva.

UNHCR, Oxfam, DRC, Save the Children, CaLP, OCHA, and WFP. 2015b. “Guide for Protection in Cash-
Based Interventions,” Draft Document, Improving Cash-Based Interventions Multipurpose Cash Grants and
Protection, Enhanced Response Capacity Project 2014–2015, UNHCR, Geneva.

Urban Expert Group. 2015. “Urban Recommendations,” Draft, World Humanitarian Summit, October 2015.

Verme, Paolo, Gigliarano, Chiara, Wieser, Christina, Hedlund, Kerren, Petzoldt, Marc, and Santacroce,
Marco. 2016. The Welfare of Syrian Refugees: Evidence from Jordan and Lebanon. Geneva and Washington,
DC: UNHCR and World Bank.

WFP, UNHCR, UNICEF, and WHO. 2015. “Cash Coordination: A Note on Cash Coordination by WFP, UNHCR,
UNICEF and WHO as a contribution to the discussion on 11 December by the IASC Principals,” December
2015.

World Humanitarian Summit. 2015. “Global Urban Crisis Charter, Adapting Global Crisis Response to an
Urban World, A Proposed Policy Commitment,” Draft, October 2015.




                                         Strategic Note:  Cash Transfers in Humanitarian Contexts        85
