               Extractive Industries and Development Series #31
                                                     May 2016


Integrating Social Accountability
   Approaches into Extractive
       Industries Projects:




                    A Guidance Note



                    Katherine Heller
                    Warren van Wicklin III
                    Saki Kumagai
                    with Michael Jarvis
                    Sanjay Agarwal
                    Theodore Dreger
                             May 2016




 Integrating Social
   Accountability
  Approaches into
Extractive Industries
      Projects




           A Guidance Note
Table                  of         Contents


Acknowledgments	v

List of Acronyms	                                                                                      vi

Introduction	1

What Is Social Accountability, and How Does It Relate
to the Extractive Industries?	                                                                          2

Why Social Accountability Matters to Extractive Industry Operations	                                    6

Steps in Integrating Social Accountability into Project Design
and Implementation	                                                                                     8
      Step 1:	 Identifying and Prioritizing Social Accountability
                Concerns and Opportunities	                                                            9
      Step 2:	 Understanding Context and the Enabling Environment	                                    10
      Step 3:	 Select Social Accountability Tools and Methods	                                        12
      Step 4:	 Decide on Implementation Modalities	                                                   12
      Step 5:	 Monitoring and Evaluation	                                                             14

Sustaining and Scaling Up Social Accountability Activities	                                           17

Incorporating Gender into Social Accountability Activities	                                           18

The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative	                                                    20

Integrating Social Accountability Activities along the Extractive
Industry Value Chain	                                                                                 25
      Link 1:	 Award of Contracts and Licenses	                                                       26
      Link 2:	 Regulation and Monitoring of Operations	                                               33
      Link 3:	 Collection of Taxes and Royalties	                                                     38
      Link 4:	 Revenue Management and Allocation	                                                     41
      Link 5:	 Implementation of Sustainable Development
               Policies and Projects	                                                                 49




	   I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	iii
      Conclusion	57

      References	58

      Annex 1. Checklist for Designing and Implementing Social
               Accountability Activities	                             62

      Annex 2: Sample Indicators for Social Accountability	           64

      Annex 3. Sources of Information on Social Accountability
               in Extractive Industries	                              66
          World Bank Resources	                                       66
          External Resources	                                         66




iv	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Acknowledgments


This paper was developed as a collaboration between the World Bank’s Oil, Gas, and
Mining team of the Energy and Extractives Global Practice (GEEDR), the former
World Bank Institute, and the World Bank Governance Practice. The team was led
by Katherine Heller (GEEX2, Task Team Leader), with Warren van Wicklin III, Saki
Kumagai, Michael Jarvis, Sanjay Agarwal, and Ted Dreger.

The team would like to thank Paulo de Sa (Sector Manager, Oil, Gas, and Mining
team), as well as Kristina Svensson, Ousmane Deme, Helene Grandvoinnet, Carey
Hairston Kluttz, Jen Scott, Karla Diaz Clarke, and Fernando Ruiz Mier, as well as
Isabel Munilla from Oxfam American, and Caroline Rusten, for their invaluable
contributions.




	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	v
      List        of    Acronyms


      ACIDH	        Action against Impunity for Human Rights
      ALAC	         Asociación Los Andes de Cajamarca
      ANSA-EAP	     Affiliated Network on Social Accountability—East Asia
                    and Pacific Region
      ASM	          artisanal and small miners
      AusAID	       Australian Agency for International Development
      BTC	Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan
      CBO	          community-based organization
      CDA	          community development agreement
      CDF	          community development fund
      CMU	          Country Management Unit
      COICA 	       Coordinadora Indígena de la Cuenca Amazónica
      CSA	          country social analysis
      CSO	          civil society organization
      CTPD	         Center for Trade, Policy and Development
      DACDF	        Diamond Area Community Development Fund
      DRC	          Democratic Republic of the Congo
      ECZ	          Environmental Council of Zambia
      EI	           extractive industry
      EIA 	         environmental impact assessment
      EITI	         Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
      ESIA	         environmental and social impact assessment
      GIS	          geographic information system
      IAG	          international advisory group
      IAP	          international advisory panel
      IFC	          International Finance Corporation
      IMF	          International Monetary Fund
      IPF	          investment project financing


vi	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
IT	                     information technology
J4P	                    Justice for the Poor
M&E	                    monitoring and evaluation
MDTF	                   multi-donor trust fund
MIM	                    independent monitoring mechanism
NGO	                    nongovernmental organizations
NRGI	                   National Resource Governance Institute (formerly RWI)
OGP	                    Open Government Partnership
OPSPQ	                  Operational Policy and Quality Department
ORAF	                   operational risk assessment framework
ORCADE	                 Organisation pour le Renforcement des Capacités
                        de Développement (French)
PDO	                    project development objective
PDR	                    People’s Democratic Republic
PEA	                    political and economic analysis
PLNG	                   Peru Liquefied Natural Gas
POM	                    Platform of Civil Society Organizations Working
                        in the Mining Sector
PSIA	                   poverty and social impact analysis
PWYP	                   Publish What You Pay
RAJIT	                  le Réseau Africain de Journalistes pour l’Intégrité
                        et la Transparence (French)
RTI	                    right to information
RWI	                    Revenue Watch Institute
SA	                     social accountability
SESA	                   strategic environmental and social assessment
SORT	                   Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool
TAP	                    transparency, accountability, and participation
TTL	                    task team leader
USAID	                  United States Agency for International Development
WBG	                    World Bank Group
WBI	                    World Bank Institute




	      I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	vii
Introduction


This note provides guidance on how to use social accountability (SA) approaches in
oil, gas, and mining projects, with particular emphasis on World Bank projects in
the extractive industry (EI) sectors. It highlights some consequences of poor trans-
parency and accountability in EI sectors and identifies opportunities for addressing
these issues. It demonstrates how the use of SA approaches and tools can improve the
implementation and outcomes of EI projects. Although the note is written primar-
ily for a World Bank/International Finance Corporation (IFC) audience and project
cycle, it is hoped that it will be a resource for government, industry, and civil society
partners as well.1

Social accountability has gained increasing importance in the World Bank’s work
over the past two decades. Development partners—including governments, industry,
and citizens—recognize the critical role of citizen voice and participation in improv-
ing governance. In turn, this can reduce project risk and create more sustainable
development outcomes. Particularly in countries with developed or potential mineral
wealth, transparency, accountability, and citizen participation are key factors in how
those resources contribute to growth and poverty reduction. The increasing use of
information technology (IT) has accelerated and broadened the range of stakehold-
ers, especially civil society organizations (CSOs), which are adopting SA approaches
to improve transparency, accountability, and participation in EI sectors.

Section 2 provides definitions of social accountability and citizen engagement, and
the relationship between the two. It lists some common tools and approaches to SA.
Section 3 explains how SA can both improve the implementation and outcomes of EI
projects as well as reduce problems and negative outcomes. Section 4 outlines step-
by-step guidance on the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and
sustaining of SA activities. It also provides suggestions on how to incorporate gender
into SA activities. Section 5 describes how the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI) can serve as a platform for SA approaches. Section 6 discusses the
opportunities and challenges for SA for all five links of the EI value chain, identifies
entry points for SA, and provides suggestions and examples of how SA approaches
and tools can be used to address specific challenges in EI projects. The annexes list
additional sources of information on using SA approaches in EI projects, including a
checklist and suggested SA indicators.




1
     enerally, the note is most applicable to investment lending projects in the oil, gas, and mining sector, but different elements of the note
    G
    are relevant to different types of projects. At least parts of the note are applicable to a wide range of projects and stakeholders, not just
    World Bank task teams.




	           I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	1
     What Is Social
     Accountability, and How
     Does It Relate to the
     Extractive Industries?


     Social accountability substantially overlaps with citizen engagement. This note first
     defines citizen engagement and then social accountability.

          •	 Citizen engagement is defined by the World Bank (2014a) as the two-way inter-
             action between citizens and governments or the private sector within the scope
             of World Bank Group interventions—policy dialogue, programs, projects, and
             advisory services and analytics—that gives citizens a stake in decision mak-
             ing with the objective of improving the intermediate and final development
             outcomes of the intervention.2 The spectrum of citizen engagement includes
             consultation, collaboration, and empowerment. Four aspects of civil society
             engagement, moving from the weakest to the strongest level of participation,
             are as follows:
              a.	 Inform—providing citizens with objective information to assist them in
                  understanding the problem, alternatives, opportunities, and solutions
              b.	 Consult—obtaining citizen feedback on analysis, alternatives, and decisions
              c.	 Collaborate—partnering with citizens in parts or all of decision making
              d.	 Empower—final decision making is in the hands of citizens
              Although many forms of outreach and transparency are important elements of
              citizen engagement, it’s worth noting that access to information, for example,
              typically implies a one-way interaction only. Information-sharing and awareness-
              raising activities alone, therefore, do not meet the World Bank’s definition of
              citizen engagement. Closing the feedback loop (i.e., a two-way interaction pro-
              viding a tangible response to citizen feedback) is required to effectively use their
              input to facilitate improved development outcomes, to meet citizens’ expecta-
              tions for change triggered by their engagement, and to justify the cost of engag-
              ing with them.

      his definition is from the World Bank’s Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming Citizen Engagement in World Bank Group Operations:
     T
     2

     Engaging with Citizens for Improved Results (2014a, p. 8). This is the main document outlining the World Bank’s approach to citizen
     engagement. Citizens are all the people in a country or society, and the term citizens does not refer to their legal status.




2	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
        •	 Beneficiary feedback is a subset of citizen engagement that is applicable to World
           Bank investment project financing. It refers to citizen engagement with those
           citizens who are clearly identifiable (direct) project beneficiaries during invest-
           ment project financing (IPF) preparation, implementation, and evaluation.
           Securing beneficiary feedback is a critical component of citizen engagement
           and a key aspect of ensuring that projects understand, respect, and respond to
           the needs and views of the people they impact.

A number of mechanisms exist for engaging with citizens. They broadly include
(a) consultation and feedback mechanisms, such as focus groups and satisfaction
surveys; (b) collaborative mechanisms, such as participatory planning and budgeting;
and (c) citizen-led mechanisms, such as community management or user manage-
ment committees. In addition, third-party monitoring mechanisms include social
audits, citizen report cards, community scorecards, and public expenditure tracking
surveys.

Social accountability refers to the broad range of actions and mechanisms beyond
voting that citizens can use to hold the state accountable, as well as actions on the part
of government, civil society, media, and other societal actors that promote or facili-
tate these efforts.3 Social accountability approaches are based on three key principles:
transparency, accountability, and participation (the TAP principles).

        •	 Transparency refers to the availability and accessibility of information to the
           general public, along with clarity about government rules, regulations, and
           decisions. Information must be understandable and communicated to the gen-
           eral public so that it can be acted upon. This is the foundation upon which
           the other two TAP principles, accountability and participation, are built.
           Transparency, therefore, is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for social
           accountability.

        •	 Accountability can be defined as the obligations of individual or institutional
           power-holders, at national and local levels, to take responsibility and account
           for their actions. Two main components of accountability are answerability and
           power to sanction.

        •	 Participation is the critical link between transparency and accountability.
           Whereas transparency refers to information being made available and acces-
           sible, accountability refers to the fact that people can practically and legiti-
           mately be held responsible for that information; neither the information nor
           that accountability are meaningful unless citizens can participate and effec-
           tively use this information to hold governments, service providers, companies,
           and CSOs representing citizen interests accountable.

Participation can take many forms and ranges from simple consultations to giving
citizens the authority to influence budgetary or service-delivery decisions. Participa-
tion should be rigorous, high quality, and gender sensitive and have a demonstrable

3
    
    See Malena and McNeil (2010).




	          I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	3
     impact on outcomes. Some SA interventions focus only on transparency, that is,
     working to make information available and accessible. Others focus on ensuring that
     there are forums and mechanisms to facilitate demands for accountability. But with-
     out encouragement and protection for participation, the effectiveness of transparency
     and accountability to lead to changes in governance will be limited. All three prin-
     ciples are critical to improve governance and development outcomes. Table 1 lists
     several examples of typical activities for achieving each of the three SA principles.4
     Box 1 describes the Social Accountability E-Guide, which provides several pages of
     information on many SA tools, how to integrate them into projects, and much more.


     Table 1: Tools Supporting Each of the Key Pillars of Social
     Accountability (TAP)

              Transparency                                 Accountability                                   Participation

         Information                                 Monitoring                                     Participatory Decision
         Dissemination and                           •	 Third-party monitoring                      Making
         Demystification                             •	 Participatory monitoring                    •	 Participatory policy
         •	 Public disclosure of                     •	 Community scorecard                            making
            information                              •	 Independent oversight                       •	 Participatory planning
         •	 Information-sharing                      •	 Public expenditure                          •	 Participatory budgeting
            and awareness-raising                       tracking                                    •	 Consultations with
            campaigns                                •	 Input tracking                                 feedback
         •	 Access-to-information                                                                   •	 Citizen/user
            laws                                     Complaint Handling                                membership in decision-
         •	 Open-data activities                     •	 Grievance redress                              making bodies
                                                        mechanism                                   •	 Community
                                                                                                       management




          Box 1: Online Tool to Assist Task Teams: Social Accountability E-Guide

          This is an online resource that aims at increasing knowledge and under-
          standing of key SA approaches and tools and helps task teams make
          informed decisions in selecting appropriate SA mechanisms to strengthen
          the results of their project and programs. It provides step-by-step guid-
          ance to task teams, from the scoping and identification of entry points,
          to sequencing, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation of SA
          activities. It also provides case examples. It is publicly available at https://
          saeguide.worldbank.org/.




      or a glossary of these SA tools and approaches, see World Bank (2011d, pp. 20–21). For a more detailed description, see the Social
     F
     4

     Accountability E-Guide (described in Box 1) at https://saeguide.worldbank.org/.




4	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Although there is no formal World Bank definition of the relationship between social
accountability and citizen engagement, for the purposes of this note, SA is primarily
activities whose objectives are to hold the state accountable. The set of SA tools in
Table 1 is almost identical to the list of citizen engagement mechanisms previously
described: both use the same tools. However, because the World Bank definition
of citizen engagement does not include information-sharing and awareness-raising
activities, the transparency set of SA activities is not considered citizen engagement
by the World Bank. Therefore, SA is more accurately seen as overlapping with citizen
engagement, but not entirely a subset of citizen engagement. Furthermore, in the
EI context, another important distinction is that many SA activities are aimed at
the private-sector companies that undertake most EI exploration and production
activities. This often requires a tripartite approach between governments, the private
sector, and citizens.




	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	5
     Why Social Accountability
     Matters to Extractive
     Industry Operations


     Social accountability in the EI sectors entails providing citizens the opportunity to be
     engaged at the various stages of the EI value chain. This includes establishing trans-
     parent contracting processes that allow for the public to monitor and challenge the
     contracts, the payment of royalties and taxes, revenue allocation, and management
     processes, as well as participating in monitoring of environmental and social impacts
     and helping to make EI project development impacts more sustainable.

     Social accountability relates not only to how government services are administered
     and delivered, but also to how revenue generated from natural resources by extrac-
     tive industries are contributing to national, regional, and local development. Social
     accountability empowers and facilitates citizens to ask such questions as “How much
     government revenue is generated by the oil, gas, and mining sectors?” and “What is
     it being spent on?” Although governance mechanisms in the extractive industries,
     such as the EITI, work to make information available, SA goes beyond this to create
     meaningful opportunities for people to use information to hold government and
     service providers accountable.

     Furthermore, governments are not the only main actors. Although governments reg-
     ulate the industry, the private companies conducting EI operations also have social
     or legal contracts, bound by local laws or their own codes of conduct. Civil society’s
     ability to hold companies responsible for these obligations and to ensure that govern-
     ment is doing its part to require adherence is vital to independent accountability and
     good governance.

     Although SA can provide many benefits, the costs, risks, and difficulty of SA should
     not be underestimated. The time and human and financial resources required for
     SA activities can be significant. The costs tend to be up front, whereas the benefits
     usually take much longer to materialize. Despite the upfront costs, SA can be cost-
     effective over the long run because it helps the project achieve sustainable develop-
     ment outcomes.

     SA has risks. Because it is political, it can create tensions between citizens and officials.
     SA can increase expectations that cannot be met. It can have unintended impacts if



6	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
it unfairly gives greater voice to stakeholders better able to participate than to those
who represent the interests of the majority. Elite capture, nepotism, patronage, and
other abuses have plagued SA where more powerful and better connected stakehold-
ers use it to promote their private interests.

SA may have limited impact if governments or companies are not interested in—or
actively opposed to—increased transparency, accountability, and participation. There
is a risk that projects will apply SA superficially, without sufficient due diligence and
rigor for ensuring accountability. There is a need to go beyond “checking the box”
toward a longer-term focus on bottom-up citizen participation and engagement as
an intrinsic, not just an instrumental, development goal. People need incentives to
participate, and if they think the impact of their participation is not worth the effort,
they are unlikely to participate.

Even when SA is not risky, costly, or poor quality, there are limits to what it can
achieve or where it can be effective. It may not be as effective when governments lack
the capacity or financial means to sustain improvements, even if they are responsive.
Observers may conclude that SA does not work, and this may undermine its prin-
ciples even when the problem is ineffective application.

Even when SA is effective, its approach may not be sustained, especially if supported
by external funding. The three- to five-year project approach is not well suited for
SA, which can require longer gestation periods for visible results. Institutionalizing
and sustaining SA may turn out to be difficult and complex. Despite these costs and
risks, SA can be important in EI operations.




	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	7
     Steps in Integrating
     Social Accountability
     into Project Design
     and Implementation



     This section explores the key considerations for design and implementation of SA
     approaches in World Bank projects, including EI projects. There are five key steps for
     integrating SA into project design and implementation:

          Step 1: Identify and prioritize social accountability concerns and opportunities.

          Step 2: Assess the political, legal, and social context for social accountability.

          Step 3: Select social accountability activities according to the context.

          Step 4: Decide on implementation modalities for social accountability activities.

          Step 5: Monitor and evaluate social accountability activities.

     The World Bank has developed several resources that summarize key actions for each
     of these steps. Each of the five steps is presented in much more detail in the World
     Bank Social Accountability E-Guide. Annex 1 contains a checklist summarizing the
     key actions under each of these five steps. More information can also be found in
     World Bank’s How-To Note “How, When, and Why to Use Demand-Side Gover-
     nance Approaches in Projects,” which provides steps for integrating SA into World
     Bank projects.5

     To support integration of these activities into the World Bank project cycle, Table 2
     overlays these steps onto the World Bank project cycle to provide an overview of the
     key tasks for integrating SA at each stage of project design and implementation.


     For a detailed discussion of these steps, see World Bank (2011d, pp. 5–18), and World Bank (2013, pp. 7–19).
     
     5




8	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Table 2: Integrating Social Accountability into the Project Cycle

    Project stage                                             Tasks

    Project Concept        •	 Diagnose the context for social accountability.
    Note                   •	 Explore the relevance of social accountability approaches to
                              address governance issues and risks.
                           •	 Develop government, company, and other stakeholder buy-in.

    Design and             •	 Design project and select social accountability strategy and
    Preparation               methods.
                           •	 Identify and engage the key stakeholders who will lead social
                              accountability initiatives.
                           •	 Analyze proposed social accountability activities: risks, impacts,
                              costs, and benefits.

    Quality                •	 Prepare social accountability initiatives, including the project’s
    Enhancement               disclosure strategy.
    Review                 •	 Estimate costs and resources needed to prepare and supervise
                              social accountability measures.

    Appraisal              •	 Appoint focal points for managing social accountability
                              activities.
                           •	 Integrate social accountability mechanisms into the operations
                              manual, results framework, etc.
                           •	 Initiate planning and mobilization for rollout of social
                              accountability activities.

    Implementation         •	 Ensure that implementation of social accountability activities
    Support                   follows the design.
                           •	 Ensure that findings from SA activities are being followed up
                              and inform project management.
                           •	 Record social accountability-related indicators in
                              Implementation Status and Results Report.

    Evaluation             •	 Assess the impact of social accountability initiatives.
                           •	 Report on specific intermediate and outcome SA indicators in
                              the assessment.




Step 1: Identifying and Prioritizing Social Accountability Concerns
and Opportunities

The first step in any SA approach is to identify governance opportunities and con-
cerns, then prioritize potential issues and activities. It is important to be strategic
and problem-driven in identifying the measures that will be supported. To identify
opportunities for potential social accountability activities, task team leaders (TTLs)
should (i) map key project activities and objectives, and (ii) identify governance
concerns and opportunities associated with the project. This can identify potential
accountability entry points. Although SA is more about improving project out-
comes than about avoiding or mitigating risks, identifying entry points through the




	      I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	9
      Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT) or other risk assessment methods
      can be useful.6

      Step 2: Understanding Context and the Enabling Environment
      The sociopolitical context influences both the potential for SA activities to effect
      change and the type of SA approach that may be most effective, depending on the
      capacity, trust, and strength of the legal and regulatory framework. Key factors in
      assessing the social, political, and legal contexts for SA include the following:

           •	 Incentives: What incentives do government, industry, and civil society have to
              use SA approaches?

           •	 Accountability mechanisms: What are the mechanisms by which civil society
              can hold government accountable? Do these already exist, or will these need
              to be developed?

           •	 Level of institutional capacity: To what extent do institutions exist through
              which civil society can demand accountability? Are they sufficiently specialized
              and decentralized?

           •	 Inclusiveness: How are women, ethnic minorities, the poor, and other vulner-
              able or marginalized groups able to influence decisions?

           •	 Access to information: Does an access-to-information (ATI) law exist? To
              what extent are citizens able to access information on government and compa-
              nies’ operations?

           •	 Media and journalist capacity: How effective is the media in interpreting,
              analyzing, and disseminating information?

           •	 Relationship between state, civil society, and industry: The history of this
              relationship can be a major constraint to, or foundation for, SA activities.

      One important indicator of the context for SA in the EI sector is its status on compli-
      ance with the EITI Standard. That provides valuable information on who is engaged
      on EI issues, the state of relationships between various stakeholders, key issues, and
      so on. For other issues—such as consultation, compensation, land rights, and other
      community concerns—other tools are necessary. The World Bank offers various tools
      that can be used to understand the context for transparency and accountability while
      planning a project. These include:

           •	 Poverty and social impact analysis (PSIA)

           •	 Environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA)


       or how to identify entry points for SA using the operational risk assessment framework (ORAF), see World Bank (2012d). Although the
      F
      6

      ORAF has been replaced by the SORT within the World Bank, most of the social accountability approaches to risk management are still
      relevant.




10	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
     •	 Strategic environmental and social assessments (SESA)

     •	 Country social analysis (CSA) or political and economic analysis (PEA)

These analyses should be conducted prior to project implementation, but also at rel-
evant moments in each country’s political context, for example, in the consideration
of a new mining law or regulation.7 Upfront analysis of these contextual issues will
help improve project design. Box 2 describes two examples of strategic assessments
that recommended SA activities to address governance issues in EI sectors.



    Box 2: Examples of Strategic Assessments of the Extractive
    Industries Recommending Social Accountability Activities

    Angola—Oil, Broad-Based Growth, and Equity (January 2007):
    Addressing governance and transparency issues was one of the four main
    reform areas of this country social analysis. Its recommendations included:
    (i) engage civil society in revenue management and a transparency pro-
    cess; (ii) organize workshops to include civil society; (iii) establish an inde-
    pendent public information center; (iv) develop a time-bound, funded
    action plan for implementation of transparency agenda; (v) achieve formal
    endorsement of the EITI and agreement on an action plan for its imple-
    mentation; (vi) develop a more accessible, user-friendly website for oil data;
    and (vii) develop a clearer strategy to manage the country’s growing oil and
    diamond wealth based on sound governance and transparency principles.

    Sierra Leone Mining Sector Reform: A Strategic Environmental and
    Social Assessment (SESA) (June 2007): This SESA was undertaken to
    assist the government in developing its minerals policy. Stakeholder and
    political economy analysis of mining-sector reform led to stakeholder
    prioritization workshops. These generated recommendations, including:
    (i) establish a monitoring framework that provides clear roles for participa-
    tion by local governments, civil society, and nongovernmental organizations
    (NGOs); (ii) require ESIAs to be presented in a manner that is understand-
    able to local community representatives, mediators, and the judiciary and
    that clearly identifies the legal obligations and commitments of mining
    companies; (iii) develop an easily accessible system of dispute resolution in
    the mining sector; (iv) include in the mining law a framework for consul-
    tation and negotiations on local development for mining operations; and
    (v) establish mechanisms to enhance women’s access to mineral resources
    and their involvement in discussions and negotiations with mining compa-
    nies, including the promotion of greater participation in local government.




When such changes in law and regulations are supported by the World Bank’s operation and likely to have significant poverty and social
7

consequences, analysis of poverty and social implications are required by OP 8.60.




	      I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	11
      Step 3: Select Social Accountability Tools and Methods
      The third step in integrating SA approaches into projects is selecting the tools and
      methods. Figure 1 (on page 25) categorizes some of the most prominent SA tools in
      terms of their principal objective: enhancing transparency, accountability, or partici-
      pation. Other major considerations in the selection process include (a) the extent to
      which a given initiative is dependent on government cooperation, (b) the complexity
      or difficulty of implementing the SA activity, (c) stakeholder capacity and experience
      with the tool or method, and (d) cost and time considerations. Table 3 (on page 13)
      shows four categories of citizens’ concerns and how SA approaches and tools can help
      address these concerns.

      Based on the considerations in Table 3, the next steps are to: (a) identify a SA strat-
      egy or approach that might be a good fit for the context and governance challenge,
      (b) conduct a brief diagnostic, (c) review some of the main characteristics of the SA
      approach being considered to see how they fit with the diagnostic, (d) select the
      best SA approach and who will implement it through a consultative process, and
      (e) develop a first-cut strategy. Selecting the strategy is not a one-time task, but an
      ongoing, iterative process with learning and adaptation along the way. Key stages of
      designing and implementing SA activities include the following:

         •	 Begin preparation and early risk assessment.

         •	 Validate initial design.

         •	 Pilot field methods, monitor and adjust methods.

         •	 Expand after pilot testing.

         •	 Implement and document SA initiative.

         •	 Validate findings with stakeholders.

      Step 4: Decide on Implementation Modalities
      The fourth step is to decide the details for implementing selected SA activities.
      Although it may be evident in most projects where they need to be introduced, in
      some cases, project teams may need to rely on SA specialists to identify synergies with
      existing project components for optimal cost-effectiveness and impact. Specialists
      are especially useful in understanding the implications of the context for the choice
      and integration of tools and conceptualizing the big picture, such as selecting and
      sequencing tools, linking them to project activities, and planning for institutional-
      izing and scaling up SA.

      Selecting partners: Social accountability activities are dependent on selecting capable
      partners for implementation. Citizens often lack the skills to undertake many of the
      challenging tasks in EI; they need training, organizing, and support. Possible partners
      for the implementation of SA tools include CSOs (international, national, or local
      organizations and coalitions), private firms (especially consulting firms), universities,



12	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Table 3: Sample Social Accountability Tools to Address Different
Citizen Concerns

                                                         How Social
                                                       Accountability
             Citizen Concern                              Can Help                           Sample Tools

    •	 Lack of information about EI                •	 Increase transparency            •	 Public disclosure of
       projects and impacts                           and access to                       information
    •	 Lack of information about EI                   information                      •	 Public displays of
       contracts, license procedures,              •	 Make information                    information
       collection of royalties and taxes,             more understandable to           •	 Information campaigns
       and revenues and how they are                  people                           •	 Budget literacy
       allocated                                                                          campaigns
    •	 Lack of information about local
       procurement, local sourcing
       opportunities, or hiring by
       extractives operators

    •	 Complaints about EI operations,             •	 Provide people assistance        •	 Grievance redress
       especially their negative impacts              in seeking redress                  mechanism
                                                                                       •	 Public hearings
                                                                                       •	 Citizens’ juries

    •	 Weak monitoring of EI operations            •	 Establish independent,           •	 Third-party monitoring
    •	 Limited oversight of how EI                    civil society, or                •	 Participatory monitoring
       revenues are collected and allocated           community monitoring             •	 Community scorecard

    •	 Weak legal framework for                    •	 Integrate citizen                •	 Consultation with civil
       collection of taxes and royalties              concerns into EI                    society and communities
    •	 Weak regulation of EI operations               regulations and policies         •	 Citizen participation in
                                                   •	 Develop legal                       decision-making bodies
                                                      frameworks to regulate
                                                      EI operations

    •	 EI regulations do not sufficiently          •	 Organize people to               •	 Citizen participation in
       protect impacted communities and               protect their interests             decision-making bodies
       their interests                                through committees,              •	 Participatory planning
    •	 People are not sufficiently                    CSOs, and community-             •	 Participatory budgeting
       involved in decisions on EI                    based organizations
       revenue allocation, community                  (CBOs)
       development agreements, etc.                •	 Invite citizen
    •	 Skepticism that benefits of EI                 and community
       operations are adequately shared               participation in EI
       with impacted communities                      decision making and
    •	 Lack of EI company accountability              policy setting
       to citizens and communities



and other research institutions. Partners need to have experience in working with
communities and groups that often are marginalized, such as women. The skills
required for specific activities are likely to be a primary criteria in selecting partners.
The selection of capable partners is critical not only for the effective implementation
of the project, but also for the credibility of fairness toward the project itself. The
partner institutions that hold government and service providers accountable should
also be held accountable to beneficiaries they are representing.



	       I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	13
      Generating Buy-In: Social accountability activities are often seen by governments as
      an unwelcome degree of oversight, or as limiting their discretion. Greater transpar-
      ency and accountability regarding how licenses and contracts are awarded, royalties
      and taxes are calculated, and EI revenues are allocated and managed can often be per-
      ceived as an unwelcome intrusion. Therefore, it can be useful to address government
      concerns and highlight how SA tools make certain aspects of government responsi-
      bility easier and less contentious and can result in improved outcomes. For example,
      transparency about EI licenses, contracts, regulations, royalties, taxes, and revenue
      allocation can provide public officials the opportunity to demonstrate responsive-
      ness and improved outcomes. In this way, SA can improve government–citizen rela-
      tionships. SA tools that are used to monitor environmental impacts, the delivery of
      benefits to local communities, adherence to regulations, and so on can appeal to
      higher-level officials. Communities can provide more detailed and accurate informa-
      tion, and can create a shared sense of ownership and responsibility. The caveat is that
      responsibility is often transferred to local communities without resources and sup-
      port commensurate to the tasks communities are expected to carry out.

      Capacity: Social accountability activities usually require some initial investment for
      training and technical support. It is important to find means to support such activi-
      ties in the future without external funding. For example, although an initial par-
      ticipatory monitoring activity may require training, the objective would be to create
      a mechanism that is appealing and easy enough to manage that communities can
      maintain SA without external funding.

      Step 5: Monitoring and Evaluation
      Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of SA interventions is essential for understanding
      and evaluating their impacts, and adjusting the design of programs for maximum
      benefit. Project design can better integrate M&E by defining a theory of change
      to understand the logic of the SA intervention, setting up systems to capture infor-
      mation during implementation, establishing an M&E unit to coordinate all M&E
      activities, and agreeing on the M&E plan and indicators with all the relevant stake-
      holders. This can be supported by including an M&E specialist from the beginning
      of the project. Typical key questions include:

         •	 Are people acting on information made available?

         •	 Which information do they use, and how do they use it?

         •	 What channels are they using to make their voices heard?

         •	 Is the company/government responding to citizen concerns?

      It is necessary to establish the main objectives of the SA activity to identify the types
      of change required to achieve project objectives. This may be conducted as part of a
      needs assessment or a political economy or contextual analysis. Such objectives can
      include project development objectives (PDOs) that explicitly support transparency
      (e.g., publication of revenues) and monitoring mechanisms that go beyond transpar-
      ency to capture improved participation in decision making around mining, or that


14	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
include SA-related indicators as part of M&E systems. Two examples from EI proj-
ects are described in Box 3.


    Box 3: Examples of Extractive Industry Project PDOs That Incorporate
    Social Accountability

    •	 Ghana Gas and Oil Capacity Building Project: To improve public
       management and regulatory capacity while enhancing transparency. Four
       sets of activities focused on increasing transparency and accountability in
       the oil and gas sector were instituted: (a) strengthening the capacity of
       public agencies involved governance in the oil and gas sector, for commu-
       nication, outreach, and dissemination of information; (b) strengthening
       sector governance by establishing an independent information resource
       center on oil and gas; (c) building the capacity of the secretariat support-
       ing the EITI in the oil and gas sector; and (d) strengthening informa-
       tion and accountability mechanisms at the local level and anticorruption
       functions at the national level.
    •	 Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) Growth with Governance
       in the Mineral Sector Technical Assistance Project: To strengthen
       institutional capacity to manage the sector in an efficient, accountable,
       and transparent manner. The project will support activities intended to:
       (i) develop, improve, and support transparency and monitoring mecha-
       nisms regarding trade, sector management, and revenues (e.g., the ongo-
       ing EITI process); (ii) promote awareness regarding the fiscal regime and
       tax collection mechanisms; and (iii) set up a broad multiple-stakeholder
       accountability and dialogue platform for mining.


Increasingly, projects are explicitly including SA approaches in their project out-
comes and indicators, in turn encouraging task teams to ensure that SA activities
are part of project implementation. Indicators are concrete, specific descriptions of
what TTLs will measure. Overall, indicators should be specific, measurable, achiev-
able, relevant, time-bound (SMART). Both quantitative and qualitative indicators
are important to capture the critical behavioral changes. Three examples from EI
projects are described in Box 4. Annex 2 contains examples of process and outcome
indicators for information dissemination, grievance redress, consultation, empower-
ment, beneficiary feedback, and M&E activities—the main types of SA activities.8

When designing a SA component or activity, TTLs can use logical frameworks (log-
frames) to articulate the logic of the intervention and the expected results from a
particular intervention. Logframes typically include five elements: inputs, processes,
outputs, outcomes, and impacts. They are established via four key steps: (i) identify
the expected change and outcomes, (ii) develop indicators, (iii) identify data sources
and collection methods, and (iv) analyze data.


The social accountability e-guide (https://saeguide.worldbank.org/) contains numerous examples and advice on SA indicators under Step 5,
8

monitoring and evaluation.




	      I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	15
          Box 4: Examples of Project Outcome and Intermediate Outcome
          Indicators That Incorporate Social Accountability

          •	 Ghana Gas and Oil Capacity Building Project: Outcome indicator:
             Oil and gas contracts made available to the public. Intermediate out-
             come indicators: (i) regular communication from public sector to public
             officials and citizens on oil and gas issues, and (ii) number of users per
             month of the Independent Information Resource Centre.
          •	 Tanzania Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project:
             Outcome indicator: Percentage of citizens in participating communities
             who consider that their views have been taken into account in the local
             economic development strategic planning process. Intermediate outcome
             indicators: (i) Legal and regulatory framework for the mining sector that
             is modern and transparent is disseminated, (ii) specific environmental and
             social policies and guidelines (mine closure, mercury) are developed, and
             (iii) percentage of public satisfaction with the mining sector is measured
             (by a survey).
          •	 DRC Growth with Governance in the Mineral Sector Technical Assis-
             tance Project: Outcome indicator: Status of transparency and account-
             ability mechanisms. Intermediate outcome indicators: (i) production of
             EITI reconciliation reports for increased transparency of mining sector,
             and (ii) monitoring of social and environmental impacts of industrial
             mining activities involving the participation of local communities.




      Social accountability indicators have become more important since the World Bank
      launched its citizen engagement initiative in 2014. The World Bank’s Operational
      Policy and Quality Department (OPSPQ) has developed guidance on investment
      project financing preparation, including the results framework and M&E.9 This
      guidance encourages citizen engagement in project preparation where relevant. The
      World Bank has set a goal to include beneficiary feedback in all projects where ben-
      eficiaries are clearly identified by FY18—defined as citizen engagement in all IPFs.
      Practically all SA activities and indicators, except for most transparency and informa-
      tion dissemination activities, qualify as citizen engagement according to the OPSPQ
      definition. Task teams should work with borrowers to:

          •	 include at least one citizen engagement indicator in the results framework of
             the PAD; and

          •	 begin reporting on at least one citizen engagement indicator (or demonstrate
             that credible progress has been made toward reporting on the indicator) in ISRs
             and aide memoires as soon as practicable and relevant after project effectiveness.

      
      World Bank (2014b, 2014c).
      9




16	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Sustaining and Scaling up Social Accountability Activities
Sustaining and scaling up of SA efforts are complex and difficult. These activities
generally should be designed to institutionalize relationships between government,
industry, and citizens over the long term, rather than just the project. Too many
initiatives are one-off exercises, especially at the project level, and have little lasting
impact. Even while designing the SA initiative, it is important to develop a strategy
for institutionalizing it over the longer term.

SA requires time to implement and be accepted. Institutionalization requires long-
term funding and commitment to SA and the availability of quality facilitators.
Therefore it is important to focus on technical assistance and to provide training
during early SA activities to develop the cadre of practitioners and facilitators that
can carry the work forward. This means investing more up front, especially because
SA tends to have a long gestation period. The objective is to achieve a critical mass so
that SA moves from pilots toward mainstreaming.

Task teams should consider the challenges to sustaining SA and scaling it up. Offi-
cials may fear that grievances or negative feedback will be poorly perceived by their
management. Task teams may try to address this concern through engaging regu-
larly with high-level officials throughout the project cycle, promoting policy dialogue
activities around issues of transparency, accountability, and participation. Consider
incentives and rewards (e.g., performance-based disbursement, best practice awards)
for implementing or responding to SA activities. This can be done in the context of
learning events to share experiences and to motivate stakeholders. Sharing findings
with a broader audience—for example, through a dissemination workshop and a
website to make reports accessible online—can increase SA impact and build support
for sustaining it. Consider the following measures that can facilitate institutionaliza-
tion and sustainability:

    •	 Support networking, experience sharing, and support among SA practitioners.

    •	 Promote close links between government officials, media, CSOs, and
       communities.

    •	 Support ways of increasing the comfort level and recognition of monitoring
       done by NSAs in ministries and the project management units.

    •	 Share results with the public in a way that is meaningful to their everyday reali-
       ties and that engages them in their own spaces.

    •	 Develop tailored capacity-building activities, manuals, and other materials that
       government officials, CSOs, and communities can use beyond the project life
       cycle.

If the SA activities are successful enough and there are sufficient reasons for expand-
ing it, then the team may consider the following questions: Is the existing initiative
appropriate for scaling up? Are any changes necessary for scaling up? That is why
documentation of SA activities is useful, to understand what is working and why, so


	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	17
      any shortcomings can be corrected before scaling up. What works in one location
      might not work in other locations with different stakeholders. The original initiative
      may need adaptation and other adjustments. What additional burdens will scaling
      up place on SA actors? They may need capacity building. New actors may also be
      needed.

      Incorporating Gender into Social Accountability Activities
      Gender considerations are an important dimension of incorporating SA into EI proj-
      ects. Where EI projects work on the assumption that men and women are similarly
      impacted by EI, the implications of EI can isolate and overburden women, with
      repercussions for families and communities. Benefits and risks are often evaluated and
      measured at the community level, with little examination of the different impacts on
      men and women. EI can change the gender dynamics of a community—where men
      have increasing access to formal employment and decision-making spheres, women
      can be marginalized, with little say in how EI resources should be used. In fact, evi-
      dence suggests that a gender bias exists in the distribution of risks and benefits in EI
      projects: benefits accrue to men, whereas the costs, such as family and social disrup-
      tion and environmental degradation, fall most heavily on women. SA approaches and
      activities should take into account the constraints faced by women, such as:

         •	 Lack of women’s awareness about legal rights

         •	 Family-care responsibilities, and time and mobility constraints, that prevent
            women from meaningful engagement in politics and community affairs

         •	 Gender norms that pose obstacles to women’s political participation and col-
            lective action

         •	 Underrepresentation of women in decision making

         •	 Power imbalances that affect who participates and whose voice is heard

      Both the gendered impacts of EI projects and appropriate measures for gender
      responsiveness need to be factored into SA activities and strategies. Table 4 suggests a
      number of measures to improve gender responsiveness of SA in EI projects.




18	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Table 4: Measures to Build Gender-Responsiveness into SA Strategies
and Activities

    Project Activity                                                Measures
    Planning and              •	 Identify gender issues that will be most crucial for the sustainability and
    Analysis                     effectiveness of the EI project. Gender should be an important element of
                                 any upstream macro-social analysis.
                              •	 Integrate gender-specific needs, demands, and considerations into project
                                 preparation through gender-disaggregated surveys, consultations, focus
                                 groups, and social assessments.
    Risk Management           •	 Spell out risks for women and a risk-management strategy.
    Budgets                   •	 Develop gender-responsive budgets that aim to reflect women’s demands
                                 throughout the budget process policy-making stages, with a view to
                                 support increased allocation for gender equality.
                              •	 Support inclusive financial literacy.
    Information               •	 Use gender-sensitive appropriate approaches for information
    Dissemination                dissemination, outreach, and consultation.
                              •	 Use social media for communications and transparency with local
                                 communities.
    Consultation              •	 Ensure that men and women are included in all stakeholder consultations.
                              •	 Offer men and women separate consultations.
                              •	 Identify appropriate roles of women and men and constraints to
                                 participation in consultations.
    Decision Making           •	 Mandate a quota (or percentage) of women among nominated
                                 representatives from the community.
                              •	 Create conditions that enable women to participate in decision-making
                                 committees such as scheduling meetings at times that are convenient for
                                 women.
                              •	 Include women in decision making regarding community projects or
                                 programs.
    Hiring                    •	 Adopt legislation that requires companies to commit to gender-smart
                                 local recruitment.
                              •	 Employ female fieldworkers and give them sufficient discretion to address
                                 the needs of female clients.
                              •	 Ensure gender-fair hiring and workplace policies.
                              •	 Implement local content policies that are gender-smart.
    Monitoring and            •	 Ensure that all gender-specific activities are closely monitored.
    Evaluation                •	 Ensure that gender-disaggregated data are collected.
                              •	 Use gender-sensitive and gender-disaggregated monitoring indicators and
                                 outcomes.
                              •	 Use gender-responsive monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to ensure
                                 that outputs benefit women.
                              •	 Analyze data to demonstrate gender-specific impacts and aspects of EI.
                              •	 Engage women directly in oversight functions.
    Grievance Redress         •	 Establish gender-sensitive project grievance mechanisms (i.e., require
                                 culturally sensitive gender-awareness training for grievance mechanism
                                 staff ).
                              •	 Require the presence of women in project grievance mechanism staff.
                              •	 Provide multiple avenues for grievances, especially confidential and secure
                                 channels.
                              •	 Provide an independent mediator and clear grievance processes.

Sources: Eftimie, Heller, and Strongman (2009b); and Scott, Dakin, Heller, and Eftimie (2013).




	       I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	19
      The Extractive Industries
      Transparency Initiative


      Before proceeding to the main section of this note on the EI value chain, it is worth
      discussing the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) because it is often
      used as a platform for incorporating SA into EI operations. The EITI was launched
      in 2002 as a global initiative in which signatory companies and compliant countries
      publish accounts of funds paid and received in extractive industries, with civil society
      playing the role of third-party monitor. In mid-2015, there were 48 countries imple-
      menting the EITI, of which 31 were EITI-compliant and the other 17 countries
      were candidates for EITI compliance. The seven requirements for achieving the EITI
      Standard are:

         1.	 Effective oversight by the multiple-stakeholder group

         2.	 Production of comprehensive EITI Reports that include full government dis-
             closure of EI revenues and disclosure of all material payments to government
             by oil, gas, and mining companies

         3.	 EITI Reports that are comprehensible, actively promoted, publicly accessible,
             and contribute to public debate

         4.	 EITI Reports that include contextual information about the EI sector

         5.	 Timely publication of EITI Reports

         6.	 A credible assurance process applying international standards

         7.	 Multiple-stakeholder group that takes steps to act on lessons learned and
             review the outcomes and impact of EITI implementation

      The EITI is a global standard that promotes revenue transparency and has a robust
      yet flexible methodology for monitoring and reconciling company payments and
      government revenues at the country level. The “reconciliation” process consists of an
      independent auditor collecting government data on payments from EI companies
      and company data on payments to government. These data should match. Where
      they do not, the discrepancy has to be explained. Where there is no convincing expla-
      nation, civil society should demand answers as to what happened to the relevant
      funds.



20	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
In its early days, the EITI focused on transparency in payments of taxes and royalties.
This is a necessary, but not sufficient, step toward promoting SA. For example, at
the national level, EITI supported publication of payment information but did not
monitor how funds were used. In recent years, however, EITI’s focus has broadened
to include other links of the EI value chain, including information on how EI rev-
enues are used.

The EITI is supported by a multi-donor trust fund (MDTF) managed by the World
Bank. It funds technical assistance for countries that wish to become EITI candidates
and, ultimately, EITI compliant. The World Bank provides technical assistance for
establishing the required institutional structures, gathering and reconciling data, and
publishing EITI reports.

The World Bank implements several programs dedicated to supporting civil society
engagement in the EITI. These programs strengthen civil society’s ability to hold
governments and companies accountable to commitments made under the EITI,
and they aim to increase civil society’s voice, creating a more receptive environment
for civil society participation and improving civil society’s ability to communicate
information disseminated through the EITI.

In recent years, the World Bank’s extractives team has contracted the National
Resource Governance Institute (NRGI, formerly Revenue Watch International,
RWI), in 2010–2011, in 2013–2014, and with a third contract under implementa-
tion. The NRGI program was funded by the EITI MDTF. The 2013–2014 NRGI
program focused on two main objectives: (i) supporting civil society in pursuing
EITI implementation, organizing a broad constituency, participating effectively in
the earliest stages of the process, and initiating EITI processes that are progressive and
likely to deliver accountability gains from the start; and (ii) empowering civil society
to demand an EITI process that is relevant to broader local priorities on EI sector
governance, public accountability, and development.

NRGI worked to strengthen CSO engagement in EITI-implementing countries
where the NRGI has local partners. The NRGI developed learning tools and helped
its local partners to conduct in-depth training for civil society with guidance for
effective participation by domestic civil society groups. The World Bank also pro-
vided a grant to the Publish What You Pay (PWYP) International Secretariat to
support advocacy efforts by its country-based local coalitions. The World Bank has
also provided direct support to civil society in EITI-candidate and EITI-compliant
countries, to support CSOs to define activities to be funded by the MDTF grants
based on national priorities for effective EITI participation. These activities include
information dissemination, capacity building, mobilization, advocacy, networking,
and coordination (see Box 5 for examples from Mongolia and the Kyrgyz Republic).

The 2013–2014 program improved the effectiveness of EITI reporting and processes,
stimulated important policy debates, and advanced cross-stakeholder solutions to
governance challenges. The NRGI developed a guide to the EITI standard. In the
Philippines, a CSO coalition (Bantay Kita) organized the first civil society national
conference on EITI. In Burkina Faso, RAJIT (le Réseau Africain de Journalistes pour



	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	21
        Box 5: Creating Capacity and Demand for Transparency
        and Accountability through Civil Society Capacity Building

        The EITI MDTF recognized that without robust engagement of civil soci-
        ety in the EITI, the process could become externally driven and unsustain-
        able. To increase local understanding of and demand for transparency, the
        EITI MDTF funded a series of programs to support civil society capacity
        for increased engagement in the EITI. The most recent program provides
        support for intra-civil society consultation on key issues limiting civil soci-
        ety engagement in the EITI, such as lack of capacity or understanding,
        weak civil society networks, and so forth. This program has been launched
        in 19 countries and provides over US $1 million directly to civil society
        groups in support of their demands for transparency and accountability.

        In Mongolia, the EITI CSO Direct Support Program funded activities to
        increase CSO engagement in the EITI. The Publish What You Pay (PWYP)
        Coalition was hired to conduct data analysis to create a multiyear data-
        base of payments disaggregated by soum (district) and mine operator. This
        data analysis provides new ways to present data to civil society, to increase
        awareness around the EITI, and to highlight key issues in data-collection
        methodology. The PWYP coalition is now able to present these findings
        to the EITI secretariat. Civil society members have used this opportunity
        to increase the availability of EITI data, as well as to strengthen their own
        advocacy skills. Based on data made available through the PWYP analysis,
        capacity building was conducted at both the local and national levels, intro-
        ducing civil society to the EITI process and data, to empower them to be
        more engaged in the EITI process nationally as well as in debates on revenue
        transparency. In October 2012, an intensive two-week boot camp was held
        for TV journalists to improve their investigative reporting skills on mining.
        Training enhanced local and national TV reporters’ knowledge of conflict
        issues surrounding the mining industry and ability to produce in-depth
        reports. Finally, a comprehensive local CSO training program was devel-
        oped and implemented by the NRGI on EITI in mining communities.

        The Kyrgyz Republic has substantial mineral deposits, but their develop-
        ment suffers from poor governance, lack of transparency, and low investor
        confidence. The Kyrgyz Republic was declared an EITI-compliant country
        in March 2011, and CSOs have been actively involved in EITI since 2004.
        A 2012 capacity-building workshop was designed to enable local CSOs to
        understand the EITI process and its relevance to national and local pub-
        lic budgeting and expenditure processes. The workshop was also designed
        to build knowledge and managerial capacity to initiate, implement, and
        sustain EITI activities, including small projects. A small grants program
        provided support to CSOs representing mining-affected communities in
        all seven provinces of the Kyrgyz Republic, aimed at strengthening CSO



22	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
    contributions to the EITI implementation process at the subnational level.
    The selection panel identified and supported seven small projects that
    ranged from $3,900 to $6,500. These projects trained local residents, local
    authorities, and civil society representatives about EITI and engagement
    in its initiatives, as well as in community decision-making processes. The
    projects set up multiple-stakeholder groups consisting of stakeholders such
    as local community leaders, women and youth, local authorities, CSOs,
    and mining companies. This improved inclusiveness of local interests and
    priorities in decision making, engagement, and planning and implementa-
    tion processes, building better conditions for the improved interaction,
    trust, and cooperation in the community.




l’Intégrité et la Transparence) completed the first research on the impact of tax incen-
tives on EITI-reported revenues undertaken by local stakeholders. In Zambia, the
Center for Trade, Policy and Development (CTPD) and ActionAid facilitated the
first formal civil society engagement with the National Assembly on the EITI. Over
1,200 people have participated in activities under this program. These various activi-
ties have contributed to improved EITI data quality and better use of the EITI data.
Box 4 provides two country examples of the EITI. Box 6 provides a list of some of the
types of SA activities that the EITI has been undertaking to increase its effectiveness.




	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	23
        Box 6: Examples of Social Accountability Activities Undertaken
        as Part of the EITI

        Information and communication activities
        •	 Encourage transparency on payments of taxes and royalties.
        •	 Urge government to report on revenue utilization.
        •	 Make EI data available through an open data initiative.
        •	 Publish rules that determine allocation of EI revenues.
        •	 Identify policy recommendations for improving subnational revenue
           management.
        •	 Support engagement with civil society and other stakeholders for the
           dissemination of the EITI audit report.
        •	 When distributing “easy-to-understand” versions of the EITI audit
           report, organize informational meetings at the community level so such
           reports can be clearly explained to citizens.
        •	 Conduct local CSO training program on EITI in mining communities.

        Capacity building of the EITI Secretariat, multiple-stakeholder groups,
        and civil society
        •	 Build CSO capacity to understand and utilize information from the EITI.
        •	 Increase CSO capacity to engage in the EITI.
        •	 Strengthen CSO advocacy skills.
        •	 Improve media skills for investigative reporting on EI issues.
        •	 Create local civil society networks to empower local EITI monitoring.
        •	 Incorporate SA principles into the training course of EITI staff, CSOs,
           local government officials, and EITI multiple-stakeholder groups.




24	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Integrating Social
Accountability Activities
along the Extractive
Industry Value Chain


This section summarizes possible social accountability entry points and activities in
EI operations using the EI value chain (Figure 1). Suggested SA approaches cor-
respond to challenges World Bank task teams may encounter at various links in the
value chain and steps in the project cycle. The section explores the issues, opportuni-
ties, and challenges for integrating SA under each link. It also provides project and
country examples using those SA approaches.

The EI value chain is a model for visualizing the various components of the EI sec-
tor. It is used here because it provides a useful framework for considering SA entry
points and approaches and has wide familiarity within the World Bank and the EI
sector more generally. Each of the five links along the value chain has significant
implications for the development impact of the extractive industries—from how and
to whom contracts are awarded, to how social environmental regulations are created
and enforced, to who receives taxes and royalties, how these benefits are shared with
citizens, and with what sort of accountability. SA interventions have the potential to
improve how each link contributes to the development benefits of the sector.

Although the EI value chain provides a fairly comprehensive view of the extractives
sector, it does not cover the full extent of issues and activities related to the extrac-
tive process. For example, it does not address overarching EI industry policy ques-
tions or that an EI project will be approved. Nonetheless, many of the entry points
and suggested SA activities described for the five links of the EI value chain are also


Figure 1: Extractive Industry Value Chain
                        TRANSPARENCY, ACCOUNTABILITY, AND PARTICIPATION


                          REGULATION                               REVENUE             IMPLEMENTATION
      AWARD OF            AND                 COLLECTION           MANAGEMENT          OF SUSTAINABLE
      CONTRACT            MONITORING OF       OF TAXES AND         AND                 DEVELOPMENT
      AND LICENSES        OPERATIONS          ROYALTIES            ALLOCATION          POLICIES AND
                                                                                       PROJECTS




	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	25
      relevant at this stage. For example, impacted communities and civil society should be
      educated about policy issues and proposed projects, consulted, and provided chan-
      nels for feedback and grievances. Civil society capacity to engage in discussions on
      EI policy and proposed projects can be strengthened. There should be oversight of
      policy formulation and EI project approval, such as by parliamentary committees,
      to help ensure that EI policies and proposed projects serve the public interest and
      are accountable to the general public. Generally, the TAP principles (transparency,
      accountability, and participation) should be applied using the same kinds of SA
      approaches and tools described in the rest of this section.



                 AWARD OF
                 CONTRACT               	Link 1: Award of Contracts and Licenses
                 AND LICENSES




      The first link in the value chain concerns the award of contracts and licenses. Under
      this link “Governments grant hydrocarbon or mineral explorations, development,
      and production rights in particular areas or blocks by means of concessions, leases,
      licenses, or contracts depending on their legal systems.”10 Activities at this stage are
      critical to laying the foundation for SA in the EI operations because this stage out-
      lines the mutual obligations between each company and the government.

      Transparency around how agreements are reached, as well as of the conditions and
      value of extractive industries contracts and licenses, is critical to preventing or reduc-
      ing conflict. For example, multiple claims on a mineral deposit are quite common.
      It is essential to ensure that the terms and obligations of any contract award are
      widely known and that community members, civil society, and their representatives
      are aware of what revenues, benefits, and impacts should be expected, especially at
      the local level.

      Although common arguments against contract and license disclosure often include
      concerns about a country’s competitiveness in attracting more investment, expert
      sources such as the Guide on Resource Revenue Transparency (2007) of the Interna-
      tional Monetary Fund (IMF) point out that contract terms are often widely known
      within the industry, creating little strategic advantage in not publicizing contracts.
      In countries where contract disclosure does takes place (e.g., Peru), there is little
      evidence that contract transparency has affected the level of investment in countries
      where contracts have been disclosed. Given that the IMF has endorsed contract trans-
      parency since 2007, that in 2012 the IFC made contract transparency a requirement
      for extractives projects it finances, and that the EITI encourages contract transpar-
      ency through the EITI Standard, contract transparency should be simply treated as a
      normal aspect of doing business.


      10
           
           Mayorga Alba (2009, p. 4).




26	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Key issues
Poor civil society understanding of licensing, contracting, procurement, how com-
panies are paid, and company and government obligations related to licenses and
contracts can create perceptions of injustice among stakeholders. This can lead to
tensions between companies, communities, and governments. Increased transpar-
ency, combined with civil society participation in contract monitoring, can reduce
misperceptions and potentially build trust.

Contract transparency can be a contentious issue among governments and private-
sector companies. For reasons of corporate security and competition, many com-
panies are reluctant to make contract information public. To date, many countries
have only limited transparency in EI licensing, procurement, and contracting. This
reflects few precedents and/or incentives for transparency from the industry “sup-
ply” side. It may also reflect limited opportunity and capacity from the civil society
“demand” side. However, contract and licensing transparency is essential for giving
citizens information on local operators and their ability to hold companies account-
able for meeting the terms of contracts. Enhanced civil society capacity and opportu-
nity to monitor licensing, contracting, and procurement may promote transparency
and help to curb corruption and fraud in EI contracts and operations. Box 7 explains
the meaning of disclosure of contracts and licenses.



    Box 7: What Does “Disclosure” of Contracts and Licenses Mean?

    The World Bank Group is emphasizing the importance of disclosing con-
    tract and licensing information, especially in the extractive industries. For
    example, since January 1, 2012, the IFC has made disclosure of contract
    information mandatory for IFC-financed private extractive companies.
    This increases opportunities for awareness, analysis, and monitoring of
    contracts between the government and the private sector. Considering
    the complex technical language of many legal documents, posting of legal
    texts or documents, whether online or on community message boards, is
    not sufficient. Impacted communities may not fully comprehend legal ter-
    minology. Therefore, information must be disclosed in a format that the
    general public can understand. Methods to increase transparency include
    simplification of legal texts, translation of simplified texts into local lan-
    guages, and presentation through accessible means (e.g., through radio
    programs or pictures). Each country needs to determine, based on inter-
    national agreements and best practices, how to address issues such as the
    length of time between contracting and licensing, public disclosure, the
    length of the reporting period, and the types of disclosure platforms that
    will enable governments to most effectively engage with civil society and
    affected communities.




	     I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	27
         Box 8: Entry Points for Accountability in Awarding Contracts
         and Licenses (Link 1)

         •	 Support institutionalization of transparency in contracting and licensing—
            including mechanisms for sharing contracting and licensing processes and
            decisions—such as through transparent bidding systems, e-procurement,
            and publishing contracts and licenses on websites and through other easily
            accessible channels.
         •	 Make transparency of contracts and licenses a requirement for EI opera-
            tors. Reduce any legal basis for exceptions for contract disclosure, and
            develop mechanisms to make contracts accessible and disseminated
            locally.
         •	 Create transparent and accessible cadastral systems.
         •	 Work on transparency in government contracting through right-to-
            information (RTI) laws and open government policies.
         •	 Develop mobile phone apps, online geographic information system
            (GIS) mapping, and other IT tools that give citizens information on
            contracts.
         •	 Promote civil society input in the design of the legal framework to ensure
            that civil society has the knowledge, access, and ability to make use of
            any feedback and grievance redress mechanisms.
         •	 Support monitoring by civil society of how contracts and licenses are
            awarded and the terms implemented.
         •	 Build civil society capacity to demand, understand, and use contract
            information.


      Opportunities for accountability
      Social accountability activities can strengthen legal frameworks for licenses and con-
      tracts, enhance government capacity to enforce them, make information more acces-
      sible on how licenses and contracts are awarded, give citizens a chance to monitor
      how contracts and licenses are awarded, and hold companies accountable for living
      up to the terms of contracts. Box 8 lists some common entry points for promoting
      accountability in the award of contracts and licenses (Link 1).

      World Bank support for transparency in contracts and licenses
      To increase availability and access to information, some projects have established
      resource and information centers to provide communities with information on extrac-
      tive industries. In Ghana, seven petroleum contracts were released to the public in
      2011 (see Box 9). Having information accessible for the monitoring of these contracts
      allows for greater transparency and accountability. Civil society coalitions are respond-
      ing by developing innovative monitoring techniques such as mobile phone apps. In
      Liberia, civil society is increasing its monitoring of the growing oil sector and is devel-
      oping government recommendations for contract transparency and participation.


28	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
    Box 9: Progress in Making Ghana’s EI Contracts Public

    Ghana’s first EITI report recommended that all of Ghana’s mining con-
    tracts, including investment agreements, be made public. Ghanaian CSOs
    made concerted advocacy efforts to make EI contracts public. In May
    2011, several oil company contracts were published on the U.S. Securities
    and Exchange Commission website as part of the company listing pro-
    cess. Soon after, the Ghanaian Minister of Energy ordered the publication
    of those oil contracts, which were then posted on the ministry website.
    Nevertheless, constraints to transparency remain. There is no clear legal
    requirement for petroleum or mining contracts to be published, and the
    Ghana National Petroleum Corporation does not provide any information
    on contracts it enters into on behalf of the state.




The World Bank Institute and the World Bank Africa Region launched a program
in West and Central Africa (Ghana, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone) on contract
monitoring in 2010 that ended in 2014. A separate extractives-focused program was
launched in 2012 in partnership with RWI (now NRGI) that specifically targeted
Francophone African countries (pilots in Burkina Faso, Cameroon, DRC, Guinea,
Niger; training in Central African Republic, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, Mauri-
tania, Republic of Congo, Togo). The program provided training and supported
the creation of action plans to help stakeholders improve monitoring of extractives
contracts.

The Extractives Governance Global Solutions Group/Governance for Extractive
Industries team (part of the Governance Global Practice) is currently working with
civil society, government, and industry on mapping extractives operations and a
range of related contracting, licensing, and socioeconomic data. This enhanced trans-
parency mechanism, which may also be used to enable citizens to begin providing
data themselves, democratizes information on extractives operations by making it
accessible. This empowers dialogue at a local level. This contract monitoring road-
map provides step-by-step guidance, case studies, and resources. Box 10 reports on
contract monitoring in East Asia.

Table 5 lists suggested SA activities to improve transparency, accountability, and
citizen participation in the awarding and monitoring of EI contracts and licenses.
These activities address five main challenges: (i) weak legal frameworks; (ii) weak
government enforcement of legal frameworks; (iii) government lack of interest
in transparency; (iv) lack of transparency in contracts, licenses, and laws; and
(v) limited civil society and government capacity in contracts and licenses. All
these can make it hard for civil society to ensure that mining licenses are issued
responsibly, that mineral rights are respected, and that companies agree to con-
tracts that respect impacted communities and the environment. Table 5 illustrates
how SA approaches can address these challenges. It also contains examples of these
approaches.


	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	29
                 Box 10: Contract Monitoring Using Community Scorecards
                 in East Asia

                 In a partnership between the Affiliated Network on Social Accountability—
                 East Asia and Pacific Region (ANSA-EAP), the World Bank Institute, and
                 the Revenue Watch Institute, CSOs were trained to use community score-
                 cards as a tool for SA in the extractive industries. Training activities brought
                 together community and corporate representatives to review, monitor, and
                 discuss company commitments to social investments such as water, health,
                 and local libraries around mines (Timor Leste); company implementation
                 of commitments to communities on health and safety (Indonesia); and roy-
                 alties, taxes, environmental rehabilitation programs, and information dis-
                 semination and transparency (Philippines). Each civil society group helped
                 facilitate an iterative discussion process that helped bring communities and
                 companies into dialogue and collaborative problem solving. Where central
                 governments lack the resources to do comprehensive top-down monitor-
                 ing, participatory local-level monitoring can provide a powerful monitoring
                 and evaluation tool. For more information on the ANSA/RWI community
                 scorecard activities, see the ANSA-EAP website: www.ansa-eap.net.



Table 5: Possible Social Accountability Activities for Contracts and Licenses

                                              Possible Activities
      Challenges                             (Approaches/Tools)                                                  Examples

 Government                        •	 Adopt internationally recognized                          Ghana: The World Bank made
 not interested in                    transparency standards (e.g., IFC’s                       disclosure of information, based
 transparency                         contract disclosure requirement,                          on transparency principles, one
                                      the Natural Resource Charter, or                          of its lending conditions. For this
                                      IMF’s Guide on Resource Revenue                           reason, the government of Ghana
                                      Transparency).                                            committed itself to transparency
                                   •	 Introduce ATI or RTI laws.                                in EI contracts.
                                      Work with relevant parliamentary
                                      committees to raise awareness about
                                      transparency. Promote legal mandates
                                      for transparency in contracts and
                                      licenses.
                                   •	 Introduce open-data activities (e.g.,
                                      joining the Open Government
                                      Partnership [OGP]11).
                                   •	 Make transparency and disclosure
                                      of information part of World Bank
                                      lending conditions.
          11
                                                                                                                                        continues


         11
               oining the OGP is not just for governments; CSOs are also welcome to join even if their country is not a member. By joining the OGP,
              J
              CSOs can learn from other CSOs, identify priority areas for engaging their government, and move toward constructive engagement with
              their governments. Through the OGP, some countries, such as the United States, are pushing for EITI implementation through open-
              government data.




30	      Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Table 5: Continued

                                       Possible Activities
      Challenges                      (Approaches/Tools)                                   Examples

    Lack of transparency      •	 Promote publication of bidding               Colombia, Liberia, Peru,
    in contracts and             criteria, bid evaluation processes,          Timor-Leste, and the United
    licenses                     factors in winning a license, and            States: The full text of minerals
                                 how they are weighted so the                 contracts and leases on public
                                 public can obtain information on             land are made public.
                                 any concession. Publish all bids.
                              •	 Introduce e-bidding and disclose             Egypt: All contracts are made
                                 information on contracts and                 public (while licenses may be
                                 licenses through the e-bidding               awarded through negotiated deals
                                 platform.                                    or bidding).
                              •	 Disclose lease, concession, license,         Afghanistan: A new minerals
                                 and contract information to the              policy calls for public tenders and
                                 public.                                      publication of bids and contracts.
                              •	 Work with open-government
                                 initiatives on legal, regulatory, and        Nigeria: The constitution
                                 technical transparency initiatives           mandates publication of all oil
                                 to create opportunities for making           and mineral contracts in the
                                 contracts and licenses available.            country’s official gazette.
                              •	 Clearly state which government               Botswana: The mining licensing
                                 agencies have the responsibility             system is fully automated and
                                 to disclose information on legal             transparent.
                                 frameworks used for contracts and
                                 licenses.                                    Ghana: Transparency and
                              •	 Ensure the cadaster system                   disclosure of bills (e.g., the
                                 is transparent and accessible                Petroleum Revenue Management
                                 (including online) for miners and            Act) is a lending condition of the
                                 the public.                                  World Bank.

    Weak legal                •	 Promote government consultation              Ghana: Broad consultation
    framework                    with civil society when drafting             was a lending condition for the
                                 legal frameworks.                            Petroleum Revenue Management
                              •	 Promote the inclusion of                     Act.
                                 responsibilities for the social
                                 and environmental dimensions                 Guinea: The 2011 Mining Code
                                 of EI laws and regulations (e.g.,            was developed through extensive
                                 submission of plans, monitoring,             consultation with public, local,
                                 and reporting).                              and international civil society
                              •	 Assist governments in                        members, international donors,
                                 standardizing procedures and                 and the private sector.
                                 criteria subject to law and                  South Africa: The Mineral
                                 regulations, including disclosure of         and Petroleum Resources and
                                 information, grievance redress, and          Development Act requires mining
                                 social and environmental plans.              companies to submit a Social and
                                 This minimizes room for “subject             Labor Plan as part of any mining
                                 to negotiation” contracts.                   application.
                                                                                                             continues




	      I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	31
Table 5: Continued

                                Possible Activities
      Challenges               (Approaches/Tools)                             Examples

  Weak government        •	 Establish an independent               Afghanistan: An international
  enforcement of legal      oversight institution to monitor       advisory panel (IAP) was
  frameworks                government’s legal enforcement         established at the Aynak mine
                            activities. This can be an existing    and was staffed by international
                            government institution (e.g., an       industry experts who were
                            ombudsman office, anticorruption       contracted by the government
                            agency, or parliament) and/or a        to provide third-party oversight
                            multiple-stakeholder oversight         on the tender process. The
                            framework. (Approaches: third-party    IAP aimed at enhancing
                            monitoring)                            sector governance by ensuring
                         •	 Support pilots to establish            transparency, competition,
                            independent third-party                and fairness in procedures and
                            monitoring. (Tools: community          processing of contracts with
                            monitoring, community scorecards,      mining companies.
                            third-party monitoring)
                         •	 Support creation of complaint-         Indonesia: ANSA-EAP supported
                            handling mechanisms. (Tools:           pilots of community scorecards
                            grievance redress mechanism, public    that facilitated community
                            hearings)                              monitoring of contracts.

  Limited civil          •	 Support civil society capacity         Ghana: The World Bank,
  society capacity          building and information               other donors, and a civil society
  on monitoring             campaigns to inform people of          network organized country-wide
  contracts and             their rights. (Tools: information      roadshows on the petroleum
  licenses                  campaign, such as roadshows/forums)    revenue management bill and
                         •	 Provide training for journalists and   supported creation of a network
                            media practitioners on data and        of oil- and gas-focused CSOs.
                            information analysis.                  The World Bank Country
                         •	 Provide training for civil society,    Management Unit (CMU)
                            members of parliament, and             published the Petroleum Revenue
                            other institutions to monitor EI       Management Bill on the World
                            contracts and licenses.                Bank website to encourage public
                         •	 Support joining WBI’s Contract         debate. Oxfam organized an SMS
                            Watch activities and conferences.      campaign to build awareness
                         •	 Participate in the WBI’s Contract      about the petroleum bill. The
                            Monitoring program.                    bill was revised with stronger
                         •	 Support joining the OGP as a           provisions for transparency and
                            CSO member.                            accountability after thousands
                                                                   of people protested the former,
                                                                   weaker bill.
                                                                   Kenya and Moldova: The
                                                                   World Bank Institute (WBI)—in
                                                                   cooperation with other donors,
                                                                   agencies, and institutions—
                                                                   provided training to journalists
                                                                   on how to identify stories and
                                                                   conduct analysis on information
                                                                   received.




32	       Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
     REGULATION
     AND                 	Link 2: Regulation and Monitoring
     MONITORING OF
     OPERATIONS            of Operations




Link 2 in the EI value chain refers to the regulation of the sector as well as monitoring
of operations to ensure that they meet regulatory standards. For a regulatory frame-
work to have a strong impact, it needs to be complemented by a strong monitoring
and enforcement mechanism. According to the World Bank, “Environmental [and
social] regulations should be in place, as should a competent authority with the capac-
ity to approve and monitor environmental impact assessments and management plans
and enforce compliance. Environmental and social impact mitigation and monitor-
ing [should] involve early consultation and participatory monitoring practices at the
community level. Regular audits should be carried out to assess production and export
volumes, valuation of minerals and hydrocarbons, and the cost of operations.”

Opportunities for social accountability
Creating opportunities for civil society to monitor the implementation of contracts
and operations can be beneficial in a number of ways. It can help decentralize moni-
toring so that accountability, monitoring, and enforcement are not solely dependent
on government or private-sector personnel; it can increase transparency and reduce
corruption at the local level; and it can improve relationships between communities,
government, and companies.

SA mechanisms can provide bottom-up engagement of civil society and impacted
communities to help monitor operations and advocate for adherence to regulations.
This can reduce burdens on government monitors and reduce citizen and community
perceptions of having no voice in how extractive industries operate. Dissemination
of clear, straightforward information to the general public, and particularly to civil
society and impacted communities, is necessary for participatory contract monitor-
ing. Incorporating SA into regulations and monitoring creates feedback mechanisms
through which people can get information about company and government obliga-
tions, have access to operational information to monitor the extent to which com-
panies and governments are adhering to obligations, and then have forums in which
to raise concerns and shed light on monitoring results. Box 11 lists some common
entry points for introducing SA approaches in the regulation and monitoring of EI
operations. Box 12 describes an example of participatory environmental monitoring
in Peru. Box 13 describes the use of an independent group for monitoring both envi-
ronmental and poverty reduction impacts of the Chad–Cameroon Pipeline Project.

    Box 11: Entry Points for Social Accountability in the Regulation
    and Monitoring of Operations (Link 2)

    Regulations on Operations
    •	 Promote consultation and feedback in the design of regulations and in
       monitoring of regulatory compliance.

                                                                                               continues

	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	33
         Box 11: Continued

         •	 Promote regulations that specify legal sanctions if regulations are
            violated.
         •	 Disclose laws and regulations in ways that are easily understood by and
            accessible to the general public.
         •	 Support regulations that require civil society capacity building for com-
            munity monitoring.
         •	 Create opportunities for public discussion on operator compliance with
            environmental and social regulations.
         •	 Provide information on the government entities that are responsible for
            regulations.

         Monitoring of Operations
         •	 Introduce participatory monitoring to allow citizens and civil society to
            be part of monitoring and to complement government monitoring of
            operations, increasing government’s ability to hold companies account-
            able for their impacts.
         •	 Train CSOs to monitor company compliance with regulations.
         •	 Create independent community-based monitoring structures.
         •	 Establish grievance redress mechanisms and provide technical assistance
            for these mechanisms.
         •	 Publicize the findings of monitoring activities.
         •	 Build the capacity of relevant ministries, agencies, and local govern-
            ments on SA mechanisms so they are able to be responsive to citizens
            and can better hold mining companies accountable for their commit-
            ments and impacts.
         •	 Support initiatives that help citizens and civil society understand their
            rights and the relevant legal and regulatory protections for the sector, to
            hold governments accountable for enforcement of the law.




      Table 6 suggests SA activities to improve transparency, accountability, and citizen
      participation in the regulation and monitoring of EI operations. These activities
      relate to four main challenges: (i) weak regulations, leading to limited potential for
      accountability; (ii) limited transparency and awareness of regulations; (iii) weak
      capacity of government agencies to monitor regulatory compliance; and (iv) weak
      civil society capacity to monitor regulatory compliance. Table 6 illustrates how SA
      approaches can address these challenges and provides examples of these approaches.




34	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
    Box 12: Community Environmental Monitoring in the Peru Liquefied
    Natural Gas Project

    The Peru Liquefied Natural Gas (PLNG) project ($4 billion) was launched
    in January 2007. The project involves the construction of a new 34-inch-
    diameter pipeline to transport natural gas along 408 kilometers from the
    Andes to the Pacific coast. The local community monitoring program was
    launched in 2008 and was implemented in 35 communities along the pipe-
    line. The construction company selected a respected, independent local
    NGO, ProNaturaleza, to (i) act as an independent monitor; (ii) to design
    and implement the management and communication structures necessary
    for the monitoring mechanism; (iii) to develop a capacity-building program
    and relevant training materials, field manuals, and monitoring plans for local
    communities; and (iv) to develop an information database. To process moni-
    toring results, a user-friendly database was developed to track actions.

    The design phase comprised several stages: program validation, selection of
    monitors, and training of monitors. Regular meetings were held to ensure
    a clear understanding of the monitoring program and to respond to pro-
    gram expectations. The community selected a total of 84 monitors (includ-
    ing local authorities, governmental offices, and civil society) in a voluntary
    and participatory process. For the training of monitors, 57 workshops in
    48 locations were organized, with approximately 2,000 people in atten-
    dance. Community monitors were in the field for 10 days every month
    with a Program Operator specialist. The participatory model has strength-
    ened the community and monitors’ capacity to understand the monitoring
    processes and to improve community-based environmental management
    practices. The community monitoring process has helped promote proj-
    ect transparency and accountability. A website was created to disclose the
    monitoring results to the general public and to validate it with communi-
    ties. Because monitors have provided the project implementers with timely
    information regarding community concerns, they have gained the trust and
    respect of the larger community and also helped prevent potential conflict.

    Source: World Bank Social Accountability E-Guide. Peru: Community monitoring of
    Peru’s Natural Gas Pipeline Project.



    Box 13: Independent Monitoring in the Chad–Cameroon Petroleum
    Pipeline Project

    At the insistence of the NGOs that had closely followed the progress of the
    Petroleum Development and Pipeline Project, an international advisory
    group (IAG), consisting of six civil society representatives, was proposed,
    funded, and created by the World Bank Group (WBG). The qualifications
    of the IAG’s members were specified in its TOR, which were developed

                                                                                                continues
	     I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	35
             Box 13: Continued

             in consultation with NGOs. The IAG visited Chad and Cameroon at least
             twice a year and reported periodically to the president and Board of Execu-
             tive Directors of the WBG. All IAG reports were made public the same day
             they were submitted to the WBG. To aid in the accuracy of their reports
             and also to demonstrate their openness, the IAG had adopted the prac-
             tice of holding debriefing meetings with the major stakeholders, including
             NGOs, at the end of each mission. The IAG fostered continuous dialogue
             between the project sponsors, the governments, and the NGOs, ensuring
             that project information was regularly disseminated to civil society in a
             transparent way. The IAG’s systematic inclusion of civil society in its moni-
             toring of the project served to verify and dignify the expressed concerns of
             civil society and actively supported the participation of civil society.

             Source: World Bank Social Accountability E-Guide. Chad & Cameroon: Petroleum
             Development & Pipeline Construction: Independent monitoring through the Independent
             Advisory Group (IAG).


Table 6: Possible Social Accountability Activities for Regulation
and Monitoring of Operations

                              Possible Activities
  Challenges                 (Approaches/Tools)                                    Examples

 Weak regulations, •	 Institutionalize consultation of               Industry Wide Audits
 leading to limited    civil society in the creation and
 potential for         amendment of legal frameworks.                South Africa (2010) and the
 accountability     •	 Encourage EI companies to adopt               Philippines (2011): Both audits are
                       internationally accepted standards            government-led initiatives. In South
                       on sector governance (e.g., the IFC’s         Africa, companies that do not comply
                       Stakeholder Engagement: A Good                with their obligations are given 120
                       Practice Handbook for Companies               days to comply. In the Philippines, as
                       Doing Business in Emerging Markets,           a result of the audit and the policy of
                       the Natural Resource Charter’s Natural        “use it or lose it,” about 900 mining
                       Resource Charter, and the IMF’s Guide         applications were rejected and 250
                       to Resource Revenue Transparency).            were approved.
                    •	 Encourage mining companies to adopt
                       Social Accountability 8000 (SA8000),
                       the international standard for
                       amelioration of working conditions.
 Limited             •	 Disclose information on who is               Zambia: The Environmental Council of
 transparency           responsible for what so citizens can         Zambia (ECZ) posts new environmental
 and awareness of       hold central and local government            impact assessments (EIAs) on its website
 regulations            authorities accountable.                     for public comments. By law, the ECZ
                     •	 Disclose monitoring results                  is required to provide copies of EIAs to
                        on inspection and regulatory                 local government units, parliamentarians,
                        enforcement, and the results of the          NGOs, CBOS, and interested and
                        PSIA, SESA, and other assessments,           affected parties so they can post copies
                        in a way the general public can easily       in public areas, near proposed mining
                        access and understand.                       sites, and in newspapers. However, in
                     •	 Introduce open-data activities (e.g., join   practice, copies are rarely distributed by
                        the OGP for governments and CSOs).           the ECZ, and they do not receive public
                     •	 Provide a forum for validating and           comments.
                        providing feedback on monitoring
                        results, and promote discussion at the
                        local level.                                                                continues
36	       Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Table 6: Continued

                                   Possible Activities
     Challenges                   (Approaches/Tools)                                      Examples

                          •	 Enhance transparency by building             Peru: Informing citizens about
                             capacity of journalists, bloggers, and       ATI through various media sources
                             others to make information public            empowered them to demand
                             (e.g., through newspapers, television,       transparency on EI revenues and to
                             community radio, etc.). (Tool:               hold local authorities accountable
                             information campaign)                        to local development commitments
                                                                          through dialogue with the mayor.
                                                                          Turkey: In the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan
                                                                          (BTC) pipeline project, the company
                                                                          published simplified presentations on
                                                                          the ESIA and made them available at
                                                                          the community level.
                                                                          Afghanistan: The World Bank is
                                                                          working with the Ministry of Mines
                                                                          and the EITI to explore opportunities
                                                                          for making EI data available through an
                                                                          open-data initiative.
    Weak capacity         •	 Support the development of capacity          Monitoring by Parliament
    of government            in key management and regulatory
    agencies to              institutions, such as the ministry           South Africa: The Constitution gives
    monitor                  of mines and natural resources,              the Parliament authority for overseeing
    regulatory               for oversight and governance of              the executive branch. Therefore,
    compliance               extractive industries.                       parliamentarians can use this oversight
                          •	 Establish an independent monitoring          authority to monitor the executive
                             institution to conduct monitoring            branch’s management of mining
                             on behalf of the government. The             companies to ensure the enforcement of
                             process of the establishment of this         companies’ obligations. Furthermore,
                             institution should be transparent.           citizens can ask their parliamentary
                          •	 Invite civil society and community           representatives to use this oversight
                             members to participate in, or                mechanism to obtain information on
                             monitor, the inspections along with          mining companies and their activities.
                             the inspection panel, especially             Multiple-Stakeholder Monitoring
                             where government is responsible for
                             monitoring.                                  The Philippines: Multiparty
                          •	 Support community-based impact               Monitoring Teams (MMTs) were
                             assessment, human rights impact              formed to monitor the Deep Water
                             assessment, and gender impact                Gas to Power Project. The MMTs
                             assessment.                                  are comprised of local government
                                                                          representatives, CSO representatives,
                                                                          community leaders, provincial and
                                                                          local environmental officers, and
                                                                          other stakeholders. MMTs monitor
                                                                          environmental and social impacts
                                                                          at the community level during the
                                                                          implementation of projects.
                                                                          Peru: Community Participatory
                                                                          Monitoring mechanisms have been
                                                                          developed for community members,
                                                                          regulatory agencies, and independent
                                                                          agencies to come together and
                                                                          monitor the environmental and social
                                                                          performance of extractive industry
                                                                          companies during the construction
                                                                          phase of mining projects.
                                                                                                              continues
	       I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	37
Table 6: Continued

                                  Possible Activities
  Challenges                     (Approaches/Tools)                           Examples

 Weak civil          •	 Build capacity of civil society to       Ecuador: Local communities are
 society capacity       monitor EI operations at national,       involved in the monitoring of
 to monitor             regional, and local levels.              environmental and social impacts
 regulatory          •	 Promote participatory monitoring         of mining activities (particularly
 compliance             of operations and compliance with        on small-scale mining) through
                        regulations. (Tools: community           the creation of environmental
                        monitoring, community scorecards,        committees.
                        grievance redress mechanism, public
                        hearings)                                Peru: Participatory monitoring in the
                     •	 Create opportunities for civil society   form of a mesa de dialogo (platform
                        to review and comment on social and      for a dialogue) has been formed with
                        environmental impact assessments,        civil society, industry, and other
                        etc.                                     stakeholders (e.g., the Compliance
                     •	 Provide parallel, complementary          Advisor/Ombudsman of IFC).
                        training to civil society and local      Nigeria: In partnership with the
                        government officials to support EITI     Open Knowledge Foundation (an
                        candidacy and transparency and           international CSO located in the UK),
                        accountability throughout the EI         the Stakeholder Democracy Network
                        value chain.                             (a CSO working to enhance social
                                                                 accountability in Nigeria) created
                                                                 interactive mapping that consolidates
                                                                 citizen feedback on oil spills and other
                                                                 reports on environmental and social
                                                                 impacts of the extractive industry.
                                                                 DRC: Mining companies initiate
                                                                 community engagement by disclosing
                                                                 information prior to the start of the
                                                                 project. Adastra Minerals, a mining
                                                                 company, utilized community radio
                                                                 and texting (SMS) to overcome
                                                                 language barriers to engage and
                                                                 consult with the community.



                REGULATION
                COLLECTION
                AND
                OF TAXES AND
                MONITORING
                ROYALTIES
                            OF      	Link 3: Collection of Taxes and Royalties
                OPERATIONS




          Taxes and royalties—and subsequently revenue management and allocation—are
          some of the most important issues that concern communities. They can lead to mis-
          understandings, misinformation, and tensions around extractive industries opera-
          tions. How much companies pay, and how much governments receive, can affect
          how civil society views extractive industries operators—as partners in sustainable
          development, or profiting at the country’s expense.




38	       Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Transparency and accountability in extractive industry taxes and royalties contribute
to perceptions of stability and good governance in the sector, and therefore to invest-
ments. They can increase awareness of companies’ contributions to development,
national stability and a good business environment. For example, ratings agencies
like Standards and Poor’s now include a “Political Score” measuring “transparency
and accountability of institutions, data and processes . . . including [a country’s]
perceived level of corruption.” SA can help with tracking funds, reducing waste
and corruption, improving the use of extractive industry revenues for development,
decreasing tensions between companies and civil society, and improving perceptions
of benefits from extractive industries. Through initiatives like the EITI, revenue
transparency has become a key element of a strong investment climate and donor
support.

Opportunities for accountability
To take EITI beyond a transparency focus and create a sustainable accountabil-
ity relationship between civil society and government, the focus has expanded to
strengthening civil society’s capacity to understand and use EI data. In order for civil
society to be able to identify discrepancies in payments and revenues, tax and royalty
codes and information on collection need to be understandable and easily accessible.
It must be clear who is responsible for paying what to whom and when. The proce-
dures for intergovernmental transfers must also be clear and accessible. Independent
auditing bodies may be created to monitor taxes and royalties. Audit results should be
published. Box 14 lists some common entry points from introducing SA approaches
in the collection of EI taxes and royalties.

Table 7 proposes SA activities to improve transparency, accountability and citizen
participation in the collection of taxes and royalties. These activities concern three
main challenges: (i) weak legal framework for enforcing collection of taxes and roy-
alties, (ii) limited disclosure of information by government agencies on the collec-
tion of taxes and royalties, and (iii) limited capacity of civil society to demand for
information and hold government accountable for the collection of taxes and royal-
ties. Table 7 shows how SA approaches can address these challenges and provides
examples of these approaches.


    Box 14: Entry Points for Social Accountability in the Collection
    of Taxes and Royalties (Link 3)

    •	 Incorporate transparency mechanisms into laws.
    •	 Disclose taxes and royalties collected by the government
    •	 Support CSO participation in the EITI and other transparency initiatives.
    •	 Build civil society capacity to understand and monitor revenue collection.




	     I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	39
Table 7: Possible Social Accountability Activities for the Collection of Taxes
and Royalties

                            Possible Activities
  Challenges               (Approaches/Tools)                                Examples

 Weak               •	 Conduct EI production audits that
 enforcement of        are overseen by parliament and
 tax and royalty       independent oversight bodies to
 collection            ensure accuracy in the collection of
                       revenues.

 Limited            •	 Disseminate information on who          Ghana: The 2011 Petroleum Revenue
 disclosure of         must pay what. (Tool: Information       Management Act mandates that the
 information           campaign)                               government publish information on
 and data by        •	 Support open data activities (e.g.,     receipts from petroleum companies,
 government            encourage government and CSOs           on a quarterly basis, online and in
 agencies on           to join the Open Government             national newspapers.
 the collection        Partnership or utilize BOOST).
 of taxes and       •	 Encourage mining companies to           Uganda, DRC, and some Sub-
 royalties             disclose information of taxes they      Saharan African countries: Following
                       pay and royalties they earn, and        the example of Uganda, which
                       governments to disclose the taxes       adopted BOOST for disclosure of
                       received and royalties paid.            public financial information, the
                    •	 Create forums for civil society to      World Bank has begun to work with
                       ask questions and to learn what         the government of DRC and other
                       mining revenues are received.           Sub-Saharan African countries to
                                                               introduce BOOST for disclosure of
                                                               public financial information.

 Limited            •	 Build CSO capacity to request,          EITI Civil Society Direct Support
 capacity of           analyze and understand EI tax and       Program: The EITI MDTF helped
 civil society to      royalty data.                           build civil society capacity to better
 demand for         •	 Train CSOs on how to access             understand and engage in the EITI
 information           and use project payment data for        process and to hold governments
 and hold              companies covered by payment            and companies accountable for
 government            disclosure rules in the EU, US and      proper reporting and transparency
 accountable for       Canada.                                 around EI revenues. Activities have
 the collection     •	 Build capacity and raise awareness      included training journalists and
 of taxes and          in mining affected communities          media campaigns, creating local civil
 royalties             and civil society on their rights       society networks to empower local
                       regarding tax information               EITI monitoring, and instituting
                       (including ATI and RTI). (Tool:         widespread civil society capacity-
                       Information campaign)                   building campaigns.
                    •	 Join OGP as a CSO member to
                       learn from other CSO members            Peru: A communication strategy
                       and begin to engage government          was developed to raise citizen
                       on extractive industry-related social   awareness of their rights, including
                       accountability activities. Engage       ATI. The communication strategy
                       in South-South and North-South          was implemented through multiple
                       exchanges among CSOs.                   channels, such as radio programs, TV
                                                               shows, and community visits.




40	      Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
     REVENUE
     MANAGEMENT
     AND                 	Link 4: Revenue Management and Allocation
     ALLOCATION




Improved transparency and accountability on revenue management is critical to
reducing corruption, ensuring good governance, and keeping civil society and citi-
zens engaged and receptive to continuing EI operations in their countries and com-
munities. When managed responsibly, revenues from EI operations have tremendous
potential for poverty reduction.

Transparency around EI revenue management and allocation also has a critical social
dimension. Where extraction takes place, there is potential for conflict with commu-
nities that bear the brunt of the social, economic, environmental, and health impacts
of EI operations. When communities feel that EI benefits are not commensurate
with the impacts they face, the results can be conflict and threats to EI operations.

Once money has been transferred from companies to government, the question of
how these funds translate into development gains for the country and affected com-
munities are some of the most critical for the EI sector. The same questions that com-
munities often ask, and that can be key elements of how EI revenues contribute—or
fail to contribute—to sustainable development, can serve as entry points for account-
ability mechanisms. These questions include:

    •	 What happens to the revenues companies pay governments?

    •	 Who has a say in how these funds are allocated?

    •	 How are intergovernmental transfers determined?

    •	 Who ensures that these funds are spent responsibly?

    •	 Are there earmarks on revenue sharing?

    •	 How can these funds be tracked through the national budget system?

Key issues
Countries typically have laws that determine how budget allocations from extractives
revenues should be returned to impacted communities. Many countries require com-
munity development agreements (CDAs) as a mechanism to channel some revenues
back to local communities. However, in many countries, such financial allocations
fail to make it back to the impacted communities. Where local-level allocations are
made, local capacity to manage or absorb large revenue flows, and civil society capac-
ity to demand accountability, may be low.




	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	41
      Supportive legal frameworks are often useful to encourage the creation of funds and
      similar mechanisms for sustainable development, especially in EI-impacted commu-
      nities. Ghana’s Parliament approved the Petroleum Revenue Management Act, which
      created such funds. SA principles of transparency, accountability, and participation
      were embedded in the act (see Box 15). SA is a different way of doing things, so that
      citizens are more engaged in the entire process. Benefits are not just given to com-
      munities; communities are empowered to demand transparency, accountability, and
      participation. That helps make the benefits more sustainable.



         Box 15: Establishment of Funds for Sustainable Development—
         Good Legal Practice from Ghana

         Following unanimous approval by Parliament, Ghana’s president ratified
         the Petroleum Revenue Management Act in April 2011 (Act 815, hereafter
         the Act). This Act represents Ghana’s commitment to SA by making trans-
         parency a fundamental principle and by putting accountability structures
         in place through the establishment of the Public Interest and Account-
         ability Committee. In addition to this legal framework, the Act establishes
         numerous trust funds to better manage the allocation of EI revenues.

         The Act is significant for its establishment of the Petroleum Holding
         Fund, which pools EI revenues, including taxes and royalties, as well as
         the Ghana Stabilization Fund, which aims to lessen “the impact on or
         sustain public expenditure capacity during the periods of unanticipated
         petroleum revenue shortfalls.” The Act also establishes the Ghana Heritage
         Fund, which aims to provide “an endowment to support the development
         for future generations when the petroleum reserves have been depleted.”
         The establishment of this Act provided an opportunity for the government
         of Ghana to build numerous SA elements into the management of these
         funds.

         First, the Act made transparency a fundamental principle. It included
         a provision that confidentiality agreements should not limit access of EI
         information by Parliament or the Public Interest and Accountability Com-
         mittee. Furthermore, any information previously classified as confidential
         may become publicly available upon request three years after the date it
         was classified. The Act also states that Public Interest and Accountability
         Committee reports are to be published on the committee’s website.

         Second, the act promotes accountability by making the Investment Advi-
         sory Committee responsible for the oversight and reporting functions
         on the Ghana Petroleum Funds. This committee monitors and evaluates
         compliance of the government with the Act and provides platforms for
         discussion of development plans and independent assessments on the
         management and use of petroleum revenues.



42	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
         Third, the Act emphasizes participation by mandating that the commit-
         tee consist of 11 members from civil society who are nominated by their
         institutions. The Act states that public meetings shall be held twice a year
         to discuss the reports with the general public. The Act also creates a plat-
         form for constructive engagement between the government, Parliament,
         and civil society for monitoring of government activities in management
         and allocation of EI revenues.


A common challenge is when local governments with little experience and capacity to
manage revenues begin receiving significant revenues from the central government.
This often occurs when there is a combination of decentralization reforms and an
influx of mining revenues. Local governments, often without any experience dealing
with funds of this magnitude, become responsible for the effective and efficient use of
these funds. For World Bank TTLs, the issue is finding a way to support national and
local government efforts to manage such revenue flows. Box 16 illustrates an example
from Madagascar of how this challenge was met.12



         Box 16: Revenue Management and Allocation through
         Decentralization—Good Practice from Madagascar

         Madagascar is rich in various natural resources, including ilmenite, nickel,
         cobalt, coal, uranium, bauxite, diamonds, oil, and gas. The democratic
         transition in the early 1990s provided the context for decentralization.
         Despite the decentralization reforms, implementation stagnated, and
         Madagascar continued to experience large fiscal imbalances between cen-
         tral and subnational governments. Madagascar also lacked capacity to
         implement decentralization reforms and had a weak legal system to sup-
         port it.12

         After the presidential election of December 2001, there was a renewed
         push for decentralization with support from the central government. Both
         poor mining-affected and nonaffected communities with weak local gov-
         ernment institutions started to receive large fiscal transfers. These transfers
         included government revenue from mining-related taxes and royalties.

         Under a pilot initiative on participatory budgeting, supported by the
         World Bank, three main activities supported local authorities in manag-
         ing their budgets: (1) establishment of project monitoring committees for
         elected community members to closely monitor the timelines and qual-
         ity of work undertaken by the local government; (2) disclosure of budget

                                                                                                      continues
12
     Vaillancourt (2008).




	           I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	43
         Box 16: Continued

         information through information boards outside of city hall; and (3) host-
         ing of Accountability Meetings, forums where community members could
         express grievances and the mayor could respond to them. Through this
         participatory budgeting pilot, citizens were able to see budget information
         for the first time and were able to hold the local government accountable.

         The results from Madagascar indicate that revenue management and decision
         making on revenue allocation can be responsive and effectively executed with
         SA tools such as participatory budgeting. Although the initial achievements
         were promising, the 2009 coup d’état made continuation of this activity dif-
         ficult. Madagascar’s initial success encouraged other countries to incorporate
         SA. Tanzania, for example, is exploring a participatory budgeting pilot activ-
         ity on payments from mining companies directly to the local government to
         raise community involvement in decisions regarding EI revenues.


      Once funds to benefit local communities are created, the main SA challenges are to
      inform the public about the funds and their allocations and to monitor the use of
      funds to ensure that local people benefit from EI operations. Because there is a great
      deal of suspicion and misinformation about the use of funds to benefit local com-
      munities, using third parties to monitor the funds and publicize their findings helps
      allay these suspicions (see Box 17 for an example from Peru).

      Poor transparency and accountability of taxation and resource flows can frustrate
      both companies and civil society, with companies wanting to ensure that the public
      is aware of their payments to government, and civil society wanting proof of the
      benefits of extractive operations. There has been increasing emphasis on potential
      benefits that might accrue to the missing link in that equation—the government.

      Increasing transparency and accountability at local and national levels can help
      improve development outcomes of extractives operations and provide a clearer pic-
      ture of how EI revenues are spent. However, conflict with civil society—either by
      those who feel that the risks and vulnerabilities outweigh the benefits or those who
      feel they are getting an inadequate share of the benefits—are not eliminated by trans-
      parency and accountability.

      There are many challenges to accountability for how money enters and flows through
      government. Resource flows can be complex, detailed, and challenging for civil soci-
      ety to understand. Government may have limited incentives and capacity to make
      resource flows public, and there may be limited opportunities for citizen feedback
      and participation. Conversely, civil society capacity to follow complex revenue allo-
      cations is often plagued by poor transparency and dissemination of information on
      revenue flows. Numerous challenges and opportunities exist for supporting transpar-
      ency in revenue management and allocation at both the local and national levels. At
      the national level, capacity for revenue management may be low with high incentives


44	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
    Box 17: Using the Media to Promote a Social Accountability Approach
    to Local EI Revenue Management

    From 2006 to 2011, the mining industry in Peru transferred over $4,774
    million in royalties to municipalities located in key mining regions, in
    compliance with a 2004 mining canon law, but local officials have not
    always put these funds to the best use. In an IFC-supported project in Peru,
    independent monitoring mechanism (MIMs) were created to enable the
    communities to engage the local government on EI revenue issues. Each
    MIM partnered with five to seven local CSOs. The media played a key
    role helping promote transparency and accountability by following what
    happened with municipal investment and disseminating information to
    the public. To engage the media, MIMs produced publications on munici-
    pal governance and the progress of the Participatory Budget Monitoring
    Reports. MIMs also trained journalists on royalties and municipal invest-
    ment and conducted a media contest on municipal investment to moti-
    vate journalists to conduct their own research related to the good use of
    resources. During the life of the MIM Peru project, the media published
    over 13,000 media reports (257 media outlets) at no cost to the project. On
    average, the media published 172 articles (print, radio, or TV) based on
    information sent out by MIMs every month. This amounts to 21 articles
    per month per MIM, suggesting that the project was feeding the news
    practically every day. Most of the media mentions were focused on munici-
    pal investment, municipal management, citizen participation, and MIM
    activities. Responding to media requests and invitations, 22 representatives
    of MIM Boards of Directors participated in 183 media interviews as speak-
    ers for the project, helping put good use of resources in the local agenda.

    Source: Clarke, Karla and Fernando Ruiz Mier. 2011. Communications for the Ones
    Who Never Spoke: Running the MIM Marathon in the Peruvian Highlands.



and low barriers to corruption. Transparency and accountability on national budgets
may be weak. Without efforts to increase transparency, corruption or mismanage-
ment may continue.

Opportunities for social accountability
SA tools such as public reporting of expenditures, public display of information, and
public expenditure tracking can be used to promote transparency of financial trans-
actions between the central government, local government, and private companies.
Tools such as participatory monitoring and participatory budgeting can increase civil
society engagement in revenue allocation. Participatory budgeting, such as by CBOs
or in managing community development funds (CDFs), can be effective in incor-
porating local community voices into local development planning in decentralized
settings. Public dissemination of information on revenue allocation and opportuni-
ties for holding governments accountable can be effectively disseminated through the


	     I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	45
          media. Box 18 lists some common entry points for introducing SA approaches in
          revenue management and allocation.

          Table 8 lists possible SA activities to improve transparency, accountability, and citizen
          participation in revenue management and allocation. These activities relate to four
          main challenges: (i) limited government capacity for public revenue management;


             Box 18: Entry Points for Social Accountability in Revenue
             Management and Allocation (Link 4)

             •	 Promote laws on revenue management that bring benefits to the public
                and embody SA.
             •	 Disclose revenue management information to the public.
             •	 Disclose relevant laws and regulations on revenue management and allo-
                cation to the public.
             •	 Build government capacity to disseminate revenue management
                information.
             •	 Consult or involve civil society on revenue management and allocation.
             •	 Use civil society and independent organizations to monitor revenue
                transfers.


Table 8: Possible Social Accountability Activities for Revenue Management
and Allocation

                            Possible Activities
  Challenges               (Approaches/Tools)                             Examples

 EI revenues do     •	 Government adopts laws and            Ghana: The Petroleum Revenue
 not benefit the       other EI revenue management           Management Act of April 2011 put
 general public        mechanisms that benefit the general   accountability structures in place
                       public.                               through the establishment of the
                    •	 Empower parliament and civil          Public Interest and Accountability
                       society to ensure oversight and       Committee, which monitors and
                       accountability of the government’s    evaluates compliance of the government
                       EI revenue management decisions.      with the Act and provides platforms
                                                             for discussion of development plans
                                                             and independent assessments on the
                                                             management and use of petroleum
                                                             revenues.
                                                             Peru: An MIM built community and
                                                             CSO capacity to demand accountability
                                                             at the local level. Through this
                                                             mechanism, channels were created for
                                                             the local population to communicate
                                                             with municipal authorities to
                                                             discuss mining revenues, municipal
                                                             investments, and general service
                                                             provision by municipal government.
                                                                                           continues

46	       Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Table 8: Continued

                                    Possible Activities
     Challenges                    (Approaches/Tools)                                     Examples

    Limited                •	 Build capacity of public agencies           Ghana: The Public Interest and
    information               to publicize revenue management             Accountability Committee, which
    on revenue                information.                                consists of representatives of civil
    management             •	 Government actively disseminates            society, is responsible for monitoring
                              and demystifies revenue                     and overseeing revenue management.
                              information from EI operations,             This committee was established by the
                              as well as expenditures and the             2011 Petroleum Revenue Management
                              streaming of revenues, to the               Act. The committee’s first annual report
                              local level. (Tools: public reporting       was issued in May 2012.
                              of expenditure, public display of
                              information, information campaign,
                              budget literacy campaigns)

    Weak system of         •	 Build capacity of local governments         Indonesia: In 1998, Indonesia
    decentralization:         in revenue collection and                   implemented decentralization reform,
    lack of clear lines       management.                                 but this was not coordinated with the
    of accountability      •	 Disclose revenue management and             Mining Code. In 2009, Parliament
    between central,          allocation laws and regulations to          finally passed a new mining law
    regional,                 clarify roles and responsibilities of       that clearly corresponded to the
    and local                 each public agency. (Tools: public          decentralized system on collection and
    governments               display of information, information         allocation of mining revenues.
                              campaign)
                           •	 Support participatory decision              Afghanistan: When it came to
                              making on revenue management                transactions for local community
                              and allocation at local and national        development (allocation of mining
                              levels, for example, through                revenues), the Aynak mine did
                              participatory budgeting. (Tools:            not have clear guidelines regarding
                              participatory planning, participatory       institutions responsible for collection
                              budgeting)                                  and disbursement of revenues. To
                                                                          resolve this issue, the Ministry of Mines
                                                                          prepared the Community Consultation
                                                                          Guidelines and Framework to
                                                                          support mining-sector policy and
                                                                          provide clarification of key roles and
                                                                          responsibilities.
                                                                          Mali: Tensions between mining
                                                                          companies and local communities were
                                                                          rising because the government lacked
                                                                          capacity to manage and transfer tax
                                                                          revenues from the mining companies
                                                                          for community development. To resolve
                                                                          this, with support from U.S. Agency for
                                                                          International Development (USAID),
                                                                          the Sanso Morila Mine Alliance was
                                                                          created to strengthen transparency,
                                                                          produce a model development action
                                                                          plan, and build capacity of local
                                                                          governments to manage revenues.
                                                                          CSOs were deeply involved in
                                                                          developing the action plan.

                                                                                                               continues




	        I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	47
Table 8: Continued

                            Possible Activities
  Challenges               (Approaches/Tools)                                 Examples

 Limited capacity   •	 Build CSO capacity on                    Peru: In 2005, the IFC began a
 of civil society      understanding revenue allocation         pilot initiative to promote SA. It
 to monitor and        formulas, monitoring capacity,           was launched to help ensure that
 analyze revenue       and data and information analysis,       payments made to the authorities
 allocation and        including budget analysis and            by a client (a mine) could be used
 management            how to identify bottlenecks and/         in a way that benefited the local
 from national to      or corruption. (Tools: budget literacy   population. The project focused on
 local levels          campaigns)                               providing the information, tools,
                    •	 Establish an independent                 and training to facilitate a more
                       monitoring institution on revenue        open, informed discussion of how
                       management and allocation.               resources are invested. The project
                       (Approach: third-party monitoring)       established operational units made up
                    •	 Support citizen reporting and            of representatives from 30 well-known
                       monitoring mechanisms on revenue         local CSOs to ensure accountability
                       management and allocation to             and effective results.
                       start dialogue with citizens and
                       civil society. (Tools: community         Congo: The PWYP coalition examined
                       monitoring, community oversight,         the country’s health budgets and
                       grievance redress mechanism, public      followed oil revenue money to see
                       hearings)                                whether funds were being disbursed to
                    •	 Encourage CSOs to follow the             the projects and whether projects were
                       financial flow from the extractive       being executed. PWYP Congo revealed
                       industries down to the local             that in many cases, the money was not
                       level, and publish the results in        reaching its intended destination and
                       multiple forums (e.g., newspaper,        that projects were not being properly
                       website, radio shows, etc.) to           executed.
                       reach the general public. (Tools:        Sierra Leone: In May 2012, one of
                       public expenditure tracking survey,      the CSO representatives contributed
                       information campaigns)                   an article to a national newspaper on
                    •	 Encourage the disclosure of              the 2012 Citizens Budget. It analyzed,
                       financial information in an editable     interpreted, and posed questions on
                       format to enable civil society and       the national budget, which included EI
                       citizens to use the data.                revenues.

 Limited            •	 Build capacity of local governments      Madagascar: Participatory budgeting
 uptake by local       to enhance their ability to              was introduced to allow citizens to
 community             effectively engage citizens in           participate in the decision-making
 voices in             inclusive decision making.               process of budget allocation. Budgetary
 determining        •	 Promote participatory budgeting,         information was posted on the
 local budget          participatory decision making, and       information board outside of city hall,
 allocations           community management for citizen         providing citizens access to budget
                       voices to be effectively incorporated    information. Additionally, citizens have
                       into local development decision          regular opportunities to ask the mayor
                       making.                                  questions and for the mayor to respond
                    •	 Conduct awareness raising and            through city-hall types of meetings.
                       community outreach activities for        Similar activities have taken place in
                       citizens to better understand their      the DRC, Cameroon, the Dominican
                       rights, legal frameworks, fiscal         Republic, and Brazil.
                       mechanisms, and development
                       plans. (Tools: information campaign,
                       budget literacy campaigns)




48	       Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
(ii) limited government capacity to collect and publicize information on revenue
management; (iii) weak system of decentralization and nonuniform legal systems and
lack of clear lines of accountability between central, regional, and local governments;
(iv) limited capacity of civil society to monitor and analyze revenue allocation and
management from national to local levels; and (v) limited uptake by local community
voices in determining local budget allocations. Table 8 illustrates how SA approaches
can address these challenges. It also provides examples of these approaches.


    IMPLEMENTATION
    OF SUSTAINABLE
    DEVELOPMENT
                         	Link 5: Implementation of Sustainable
    POLICIES AND           Development Policies and Projects
    PROJECTS




The final link of the EI value chain relates to the social, environmental, and fiscal
policies and investments that translate EI operations into sustainable development
for the communities, countries, and companies involved. On the government side,
this refers to decisions about how EI revenues are invested—for example, public
financial management policies, environmental management and remediation, pub-
lic investment decisions, and community development projects. For companies, this
link may relate to the corporate social responsibility programs they support. The suc-
cess of these policies and projects to contribute to long-term sustainable development
depends on their ability to recognize and respond to the sustainable development
challenges they face, obtain the participation and support of affected communi-
ties, and integrate with existing development plans. SA tools can play a large part in
achieving this. For communities, this refers to having a voice in how funds from EI
projects are used to support sustainable local development.

Challenges for accountability
The challenge is to reach a shared vision for “sustainable development” and oppor-
tunities at the national and local levels for people to participate in the formulation
of these policies and projects. Even defining “impacted communities” can be a chal-
lenge. Many groups will have an incentive to claim impacts, but it is critical to ensure
that those who are genuinely impacted have a say in sustainable development policies
and projects. Communities may not know their rights, especially in terms of local
development funds to which they are entitled, or be skeptical that EI will bring local
benefits such as jobs and development funds. With jobs and other benefits at stake,
there can be tension and even conflict.

Opportunities for accountability
SA can easily be integrated into this link because many activities deal directly with
communities and thereby benefit from community participation. For example, partic-
ipation can be integrated into budgeting processes, environmental management and
remediation, public investment decisions, and especially community development
programs. Participatory monitoring that gives communities access to information



	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	49
         Box 19: Entry Points for Social Accountability in Sustainable
         Development Policies and Projects (Link 5)

         •	 Use open consultations to set priorities for sustainable development.
         •	 Use participatory decision making in designing national and community
            development plans.
         •	 Involve citizens and civil society in the management of community
            development funds.
         •	 Use citizens, civil society, and independent organizations to monitor the
            management of development funds.
         •	 Disclose development policies and reports to the public on the manage-
            ment of development funds.



      and empowers them to monitor how policies and projects are being implemented
      can be particularly effective in activities under this link. Box 19 lists some common
      entry points for introducing SA approaches in sustainable development projects for
      mining-affected communities.

      Examples of social accountability in sustainable development policies
      and projects
      There are many examples of World Bank–assisted projects using SA mechanisms
      to address the challenges of sustainable development policies and plans concerning
      mining-affected communities. For example, many stakeholders—national and local
      governments, civil society, and the private sector—have participated in the establish-
      ment of a CDF in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic (see Box 20). The CDF is



         Box 20: Moving toward the Creation of a Participatory Community
         Development Fund in Laos

         The mining sector in Laos has developed rapidly since 2003. Estimated
         annual mining revenues have increased from US $10 million before 2003
         to an estimated US $1.3 billion in 2011. Both large- and small-scale
         operations bring significant impacts to affected communities, both posi-
         tive (e.g., employment and other economic activities) and negative (e.g.,
         environmental degradation and the loss of livelihoods). In response, the
         government is implementing a participatory development planning pro-
         cess with support from the World Bank and the Australian Agency for
         International Development (AusAID).

         Through the project, several important and innovative steps have ensured
         benefit sharing at the community level. The most important of these, in



50	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
    the context of the CDF, is the creation of a multiple-stakeholder working
    group that includes several ministries, local authorities, and company rep-
    resentatives. Development partners serve as observers. The creation of this
    group allowed the Lao mining sector to respond cohesively to innovative
    activities, including the Gender Assessment of Artisanal and Small-Scale
    Mining in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic (PDR), and evolving
    global standards for CDFs. As a result, the Lao PDR government has
    made gender inclusion in the mining sector a national strategic priority,
    and women’s groups (e.g., unions) now have a platform to voice their con-
    cerns on gender-sensitive and socially inclusive development in the mining
    sector. The government has hosted a conference and a workshop to discuss
    formalizing the CDF procedure for the mining sector and to learn from
    international practices. In 2014, Implementing Rules and Regulations
    were drafted to define the overall objectives, modalities, and principles of
    accountability for two different types of mining CDFs.




attempting to achieve sustainable development through (1) encouraging commu-
nity decision making and implementation of development projects, (2) improving
community–government interaction by managing community development projects
and activities, and (3) creating social capital and improving local livelihoods. Experi-
ence in establishing this CDF is expected to be applied to future CDFs.

SA approaches can also help monitor CDF implementation. In the DRC, CSOs
monitor companies’ compliance with their obligation to fund a social development
fund. They also monitor how the fund is managed and how expenditure decisions are
made (see Box 21). Monitoring is useful to the companies because it assures the com-
panies that the revenues they provide local communities lead to the expected benefits.

Extractive industries provide many other benefits to local communities other than
development funds. They generate economic opportunities. For many projects, one
of the most highly valued benefits is jobs. SA approaches help inform local people
about job opportunities, give them a voice in how jobs are allocated, and enable
them to monitor EI company commitments regarding jobs for local people. Box 22
provides an example from Burkina Faso, where a CSO helped monitor company
compliance with targets for jobs for local people and informed local communities of
job opportunities with the mining company.

Where there are mineral deposits for commercial mining, often there are artisanal
and small miners (ASMs) as well. SA approaches can be useful in providing support
to ASMs, another form of supporting employment of local people. An example from
Uganda not only helped support ASMs, but greatly increased the number of licenses
awarded to them. It also supported the piloting of safer, more environmental friendly,
and more profitable income-generating activities through a small grants program (see
Box 23).


	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	51
        Box 21: Monitoring Social Development Funds in the Democratic
        Republic of the Congo

        In the DRC, the government has published dozens of mining contracts.
        CSOs are using this opportunity to monitor company compliance with
        social investment regulations, and to explore the implications of this
        increased transparency. Action against Impunity for Human Rights
        (ACIDH), working with the Platform of Civil Society Organizations
        Working in the Mining Sector (POM), is monitoring not only payment
        into social development funds at the Tenke Funkurume mine, but also how
        these funds are used. Mining company operators at the copper and cobalt
        mine (including Freeport McMoRan, Lundin Mining, and Gecamines)
        were found to be in compliance of paying 0.3 percent of net proceeds into
        a social development fund to benefit local communities. However, despite
        the fact that the requisite funds were paid, and further tracking of these
        payments revealed that they were spent on projects like schools, bridges,
        and wells, many citizens who were meant to be benefitting actually did not
        know about how the fund was managed and how decisions were made. By
        bringing this to light with the company, POM and ACIDH’s monitor-
        ing enabled the company to identify a gap in information sharing, and to
        undertake to better engage with the community on their obligations and
        activities.

        Source: Heller, Patrick. 2013. Putting Contract Transparency to Work. Open Contract-
        ing blog.




        Box 22: Monitoring Local Content in Burkina Faso

        Local content in the extractive industries refers to the degree to which
        investors use local labor and purchase goods and services from local firms.
        What companies pay for local procurement of goods and services can sig-
        nificantly outweigh what they pay to governments in taxes and fees, thus
        reflecting a critical aspect of how extractives industries contribute to local
        revenues and development. As such, companies, governments, and civil
        society have all paid increasing attention to this issue over the last decade,
        and many countries have adopted new policies and legislation and started
        targeted initiatives to promote local content. To ensure that the maximum
        benefit from these local procurement opportunities are reaching local
        communities, civil societies in many countries have started demanding
        increased transparency regarding procurement decisions by companies
        and the publishing of local procurement plans, and several countries have
        included aspects of local content in their EITI reports. In some countries,
        civil societies have launched initiatives to monitor hiring and procurement
        practices of mining companies.



52	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
    In Burkina Faso, local contracts and national regulations require mining
    companies to hire 75% Burkinabe staff. Local CSOs are taking a proactive
    role in monitoring local hiring to ensure compliance with these regula-
    tions. Organisation pour le Renforcement des Capacités de Développe-
    ment (ORCADE) found that the companies managing the Essakane and
    Kalsaka (including IAM Gold and Cluff Gold) have met this obligation,
    although skilled and managerial positions are still filled predominantly
    by expatriates. Thus, while monitoring and information dissemination
    around these obligations did help improve public awareness around the
    project, the gaps in senior management that ORCADE identified also led
    to recommendations to government for investments in long-term skills
    training. ORCADE’s monitoring project also highlighted gaps within the
    government’s own understanding of mining contracts, and government’s
    own ability to enforce local procurement rules. So the project helped not
    only to shed light on procurement compliance, but to generate dialogue,
    create policy recommendations, and build accountability capacity.

    Source: Heller, Patrick. 2013. Putting Contract Transparency to Work. Open Contract-
    ing blog.




    Box 23: Support to Artisanal Miners in Uganda

    Between 2003 and 2011, the Uganda Sustainable Management of Mineral
    Resources Project trained officials, miners, and communities to strengthen
    governance, transparency, and capacity in the management of mineral
    resources. Its particular emphasis on the improvement of ASMs and commu-
    nity development in mining areas transformed the lives of miners and their
    families by promoting socially and environmentally sound development.
    This helped lead to the creation of a government strategy to support the pre-
    viously ignored ASM sector. An outreach and training program aimed to raise
    ASMs’ awareness of regulatory provisions, mining rights, and environmental
    and technical issues and to encourage the creation of mining associations and
    cooperatives to formalize mining activities. Community members received
    small grants to pilot safer, environmentally friendly, and more lucrative
    small-scale income-generation practices in mining communities. The grants
    scheme laid the foundations for mainstreaming ASMs into national and local
    economic development. Local governments in mining areas began to collect
    revenue from ASM operations, which is expected to provide an incentive for
    mining to be integrated into district and subcounty development plans. Lost
    royalties from informal, unlicensed ASM operations had been estimated at up
    to US $3.6 million in 2011. The project resulted in a dramatic increase in the
    number of licenses issued. Against a baseline of 100 and a target of 300, more
    than 950 ASM licenses were issued from 2005 to 2011.



	     I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	53
          Table 9 suggests possible SA activities to improve transparency, accountability, and
          citizen participation in sustainable development projects for mining-affected com-
          munities. These activities address four main challenges: (i) lack of consensus on what
          “sustainable development,” “impacted,” or “affected” communities means, possibly
          leading to conflict; (ii) lack of understanding of rights at the local level; (iii) com-
          munity skepticism that extractive industries will bring local benefits because of insuf-
          ficient information; and (iv) tensions around jobs in EI operations reserved for local
          people. It also offers suggestions on how to support ASM components. Table 9 dem-
          onstrates how SA approaches can address these challenges. It also provides examples
          of these approaches.



Table 9: Possible Social Accountability Activities for Sustainable
Development Projects

                             Possible Activities
      Challenges            (Approaches/Tools)                                Examples

 Lack of consensus    •	 Use open consultations, with           Latin America (Bolivia, Colombia,
 on what                 efforts to ensure gender equity        Ecuador, Peru, and Venezuela):
 “sustainable            and include all community              Several countries in Latin America
 development”            members, to set priorities for         came together to form a multiple-
 means, leading to       sustainable development.               stakeholder discussion forum, called
 conflict             •	 Use participatory decision             COICA (Coordinadora Indígena de la
                         making with government                 Cuenca Amazónica), where activities
                         (national to local), citizens, civil   related to the oil and gas industry
                         society, EI companies, and other       and sustainable development were
                         stakeholders (e.g., donors) to         discussed. Priority areas were identified
                         reach consensus.                       via consultations with indigenous
                      •	 Conduct community outreach             peoples, including industry activities,
                         and advocacy activities on EI          participatory monitoring of social
                         operations to ensure informed          and environmental impacts of the
                         participatory decision making.         industry, and sustainable development
                      •	 Promote a multiple-stakeholder         at the local level. Through consensus
                         approach (e.g., civil society,         with multiple actors, COICA
                         community members, private             provides a platform to develop mutual
                         sector, and national and local         understanding and trust-based
                         governments) in establishing a         relationships among stakeholders
                         CDF.
                                                                Madagascar: In the community of
                                                                Anosy, Madagascar, CommDev is
                                                                supporting a project to bring together
                                                                government, communities, civil
                                                                society, and private companies for the
                                                                creation of a community development
                                                                organization, thereby enabling local
                                                                stakeholders to determine what
                                                                sustainable development means for
                                                                them.

                                                                                                 continues




54	       Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Table 9: Continued

                                    Possible Activities
      Challenges                   (Approaches/Tools)                                    Examples

    Lack of consensus       •	 Keep the process of determining           Lao PDR: Determination of “mining
    on which                   “affected communities”                    affected communities” is under
    communities are            transparent, using information            discussion using a participatory
    “impacted” or              and data disclosure and measures          mechanism, with the multiple-
    “affected”                 ensuring that consultations are           stakeholder working group at its
                               inclusive.                                center. This is one of the processes
                            •	 Introduce participatory decision          created by the CDF.
                               making to reach consensus on
                               “affected communities.”

    Lack of                 •	 Publicize local-level rights in a         Sierra Leone: The Justice for the
    understanding of           way that citizens can access and          Poor (J4P) program, along with the
    rights at the local        understand.                               government, developed a Diamond
    level                   •	 Conduct community outreach                Area Community Development
                               and advocacy activities to inform         Fund (DACDF) handbook to raise
                               community members on their                awareness of the laws and entitlements
                               rights and resources available            of community members. Outreach
                               to them, including land and               also was conducted via community
                               livelihood rights, development            radio.
                               plans, and complaint-handling
                               mechanisms. (Tools: information
                               campaign, citizen charter)
                            •	 Utilize information
                               communications technology,
                               including community radio and
                               television shows, for community
                               outreach and advocacy.

    Community               •	 Promote legal frameworks                  Lao PDR: A CDF was created
    skepticism about           ensuring that funds intended for          through a multiple-stakeholder
    the local benefits         local communities benefit them.           working group that includes several
    of EI operations        •	 Use participatory decision                ministries, local authorities, and
                               making in designing national              company representatives.
                               and community development
                               plans. (Tools: participatory              DRC: The ACIDH is collaborating
                               planning, participatory budgeting,        with the POM to track the payment
                               community management)                     and use of social development funds
                            •	 Use citizens, civil society, and          at the Tenke Funkurume copper and
                               independent organizations to              cobalt mine. The POM and ACIDH
                               monitor the management of                 found that the company complied
                               development funds. (Tools:                with this obligation and that the funds
                               community monitoring,                     had been spent on tangible projects—
                               community scorecards, third-party         schools, bridges, wells—that have
                               monitoring)                               benefitted the mine’s neighbors.
                            •	 Disclose reports to the public on
                               the management of development
                               funds.

                                                                                                              continues




	       I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	55
Table 9: Continued

                            Possible Activities
      Challenges           (Approaches/Tools)                              Examples

 Tensions             •	 Through laws and regulations,       Ghana: The 2006 Minerals and
 around jobs in          define what “local procurement”     Mining Act states that the holder of a
 EI operations           means and the responsibilities of   mineral right should give preference
 reserved for local      the government, EI companies,       to materials, products, and service
 people                  and license holders on local        agencies of Ghana and employment
                         hiring and procurement.             preferences to citizens of Ghana. The
                      •	 Disseminate and disclose laws       scope of local products and service
                         and regulations concerning          agencies is also provided.
                         “local procurement and hiring.”
                      •	 Publish local procurement plans.    Burkina Faso: Three local CSOs
                      •	 Ensure that jobs are posted         monitor the hiring of national
                         in local languages, that            citizens by the Essakane and Kalsaka
                         procurement and hiring              projects. The companies are required
                         procedures are clear, and           to have staffs that are 75 percent
                         that there are mechanisms           Burkinabe. CSOs reported that the
                         for communities to provide          companies have complied with this
                         feedback and complaints. (Tools:    obligation. Quantifying and sharing
                         public display of information,      this information is improving public
                         complaint-handling mechanism)       understanding of the project.
                      •	 Government monitors the             Peru: Under the entrepreneurial
                         implementation of local             capacity-building program provided
                         procurement and hiring by EI        through the CDF (Asociación Los
                         companies and discloses reports     Andes de Cajamarca: ALAC), various
                         to the public.                      trainings are provided (e.g., on
                      •	 Encourage community                 jewelry, textile handcrafts, various
                         participation in the selection      food products, bio-commerce with
                         process for unskilled workers for   medicinal plants). From the launch
                         the EI project.                     of the CDF in 2004 through 2008,
                      •	 Provide vocational and skills       the project succeeded in generating
                         training to the local population    over 16,000 new jobs, in adopting
                         and to those who are displaced      best practices, and in creating new
                         as a result of EI activities        technologies by over 14,000 people,
                         for both mining-related and         among which 2,000 people developed
                         nonmining-related activities to     new productive activities. Vocational
                         diversify their livelihoods.        training provided a chance for
                                                             the local communities to diversify
                                                             livelihoods.

 Support to ASMs      •	 Provide extension services          Uganda: The Uganda Sustainable
                         that include training on            Management of Mineral Resources
                         accountability and transparency     Project trained officials, miners,
                         (of regulations, of licenses, of    and communities to strengthen
                         processes, etc.), combined with     governance, transparency, and
                         mechanisms so that ASMs             capacity in the management of
                         can provide feedback on local       mineral resources. It focused on
                         services.                           the improvement of ASMs and
                      •	 Establish small grants programs     community development in mining
                         that build good governance and      areas. This helped drive the creation of
                         local-level accountability into     a government strategy to formalize and
                         their design.                       support the previously ignored ASM
                                                             sector.




56	       Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Conclusion


This note has provided many examples of how SA can improve the imple-
mentation and outcomes of EI projects. SA is a powerful instrument for
development, more effective institutions, and better projects. SA can reduce
project risk and create more sustainable development outcomes. Particu-
larly in countries with developed or potential mineral wealth, transparency,
accountability, and citizen participation are key factors in how those resources
contribute to growth and poverty reduction. Although many examples have
been provided, task teams and other stakeholders will need to seek out addi-
tional ways to integrate SA in their projects. The annexes provide additional
resources and ideas for a deeper understanding of SA and how it can improve
EI projects and their outcomes.

SA approaches are not a panacea. They need to be complemented with
supply-side measures by government and EI companies. SA approaches
have to be carefully tailored to the context because many methods will not
work where there is insufficient capacity, political commitment, incentives
to use SA approaches, and other dimensions of an enabling environment.
SA approaches have costs and risks as well. SA can create tensions between
communities and government. Care must be taken in providing necessary
support before SA can be attempted. SA may not be as effective when govern-
ments lack the capacity or financial means to meet citizen and community
demands, even if they want to be responsive. Despite the costs and risks, SA
can be a valuable aspect of World Bank operations.




	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	57
      References


      Abraham, Arun, and Rodolfo B. Santos Jr. 2010. Towards a Research Framework
          for Mainstreaming Social Accountability in the Oil, Gas and Mining Industries of
          Selected East Asia Pacific (EAP) Countries. Affiliated Network for Social account-
          ability in East Asia and the Pacific.
      Acosta Mejia, Andres. 2010. Annex 4: Natural Resource Governance: Review of impact
          and effectiveness of transparency and accountability initiatives. Background paper
          for Rosemary McGee and John Gaventa, Synthesis Report: Impact and Effective-
          ness of Transparency and Accountability Initiatives. London, UK: Open Society
          Foundation, Transparency and Accountability Initiative.
      Balbo Di Vinadio, Tommaso, Priyanka Sinha, and Paramjit Sachdeva. 2012. Strength-
          ening Inclusive Stakeholder Ownership through Capacity Development. Washing-
          ton, DC: World Bank Institute.
      Centre for Environment and Development (CED) and Network Fighting Hunger
          in Cameroon (RELUFA). 2013. “Monitoring Local Content and Fiscal Obliga-
          tions of Mining Companies in Cameroon: Case of the Diamond Mining Project
          of Cameroon and Korea Mining Incorporation Mobilong, East Cameroon.”
      Clarke, Karla and Fernando Ruiz Mier. 2011. Communications for the Ones Who
          Never Spoke: Running the MIM Marathon in the Peruvian Highlands. Washing-
          ton, DC: World Bank.
      Economic Commission for Africa. 2002. “Compendium on Best Practices in Small-
          Scale Mining in Africa.”
      “Editorial: Flawed Mining Permits.” January 18, 2012. Jakarta Post.
      Eftimie, Adriana, Katherine Heller, and John Strongman. 2009a. Gender Dimensions
          of the Extractive Industries: Mining for Equity. Washington, DC: World Bank.
      Eftimie, Adriana, Katherine Heller, and John Strongman. 2009b. Mainstreaming
          Gender into Extractive Industries Projects: Guidance Note for Task Team Leaders.
          Washington, DC: World Bank.
      Ghana Minerals and Mining Act (Act 703). Government of Ghana, 2006.
      Ghana Petroleum Revenue Management Act (Act 815). Government of Ghana, 2011.
      GOXI. EI Sourcebook. 2015. Washington, DC: World Bank.
      Heller, Patrick. 2013. Putting Contract Transparency to Work. Open Contracting blog.




58	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
International Finance Corporation and Engineers against Poverty. 2011. “A Guide to
     Getting Started in Local Procurement: For Companies Seeking the Benefits of
     Linking with Local SMEs.”
International Finance Corporation. 2007. Stakeholder Engagement: A Good Practice
     Handbook for Companies Doing Business in Emerging Markets.
––––. 2010. Strategic Community Engagement: A Good Practice Handbook for Compa-
    nies Doing Business in Emerging Markets.
––––. 2013. Lessons of Experience—Peru LNG: A Focus on Continuous Improvement.
International Monetary Fund. 2007. “Guide on Resource Revenue Transparency.”
Kheyfets, Igo, Massimo Mastuzzi, Dino Merotto, and Lars Sondergaard. 2011. “ECA
   Knowledge Brief: A New Data Tool to BOOST Public Spending Efficiency.”
   Washington, DC: World Bank.
Malena, Carmen, and Mary McNeil. 2010. Demanding Good Governance: Lessons
    from Social Accountability Initiatives in Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank,
    2010.
Mayorga Alba, Eleodoro. 2009. “Extractive Industries Value Chain: A Comprehen-
   sive Integrated Approach to Developing Extractive Industries.” Working Paper,
   World Bank, Washington, DC.
McMahon, Gary. 2010. The World Bank’s Evolutionary Approach to Mining Sector
   Reform. Extractive Industries for Development Series #19, World Bank, Wash-
   ington, DC.
Natural Resource Governance Institute. 2010. “Natural Resource Charter.”
––––. 2014. “Final Analysis of Outcomes from MDTF Support to NRGI on Civil
    Society Engagement In EITI.”
––––. n.d. “Using EITI for Policy Reform: Natural Resource Governance Institute
    Guide to the EITI Standard.” http://www.resourcegovernance.org/eitiguide/
Rosenblum, Peter, and Susan Maples. 2009. Contracts Confidential: Ending Secret
    Deals in the Extractive Industries. Revenue Watch Institute.
Scott, Jen, Rose Dakin, Katherine Heller, and Adriana Eftimie. 2013. Extracting Les-
    sons on Gender in the Oil and Gas Sector: A Survey and Analysis of the Gendered
    Impacts of Onshore Oil and Gas Production in Three Developing Countries. Wash-
    ington, DC: World Bank.
Sheldon, Christopher Gilbert, Alonso Zarzar Casis, Georg Caspary, Verena Seiler,
    and Fernando Ruiz Mier. 2013. Innovative Approaches for Multi-Stakeholder
    Engagement in the Extractive Industries. World Bank, Oil, Gas, and Mining Unit
    Working Paper, Washington, DC.
Smith, Erin, and Peter Rosenblum. 2011. Government and Citizen Oversight of Min-
    ing: Enforcing the Rules. Revenue Watch Institute.




	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	59
      Stanley, Michael, and Ekaterina Mikhaylova. 2011. “Mineral Resource Tenders and
          Mining Infrastructure Projects Guiding Principles, Case Study: The Aynak Cop-
          per Deposit, Afghanistan.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
      Tayou, Emma Tarrant. 2012, May 18. Ghana Oil Report Sets New Standard for
          Accountability. NRGI blog.
      USAID. 2010. Alliance Industry Guide: Extractives Sector. USAID.
      Vaillancourt, François. 2008. “Decentralization in Madagascar: A String of Unfin-
           ished Races.” International Studies Program Working Paper 08-37, Georgia
           State University, Atlanta, GA.
      Wall, Elizabeth, and Remi Pelon. 2011. Sharing Mining Benefits in Developing Coun-
          tries: The Expereince with Foundations, Trusts, and Funds. Washington, DC:
          World Bank.
      Ward, Bernie, John Strongman, Adriana Eftimie, and Katherine Heller. 2011.
         Gender-Sensitive Approaches for the Extractive Industry in Peru: Improving the
         Impact on Women in Poverty and Their Families—Guide for Improving Practice.
         Washington, DC: World Bank.
      World Bank. 2007. Angola: Oil, Broad-based Growth, and Equity—A World Bank
         Country Study. Washington, DC: World Bank.
      ––––. 2008. Sierra Leone Mining Sector Reform: A Strategic Environmental and Social
          Assessment. Washington, DC: World Bank.
      ––––. 2010. Mining Foundations, Trusts and Funds: A Sourcebook. Washington, DC:
          World Bank.
      ––––. 2011a. “Briefing Note 1: Community Development in the Lao Mining Sec-
          tor.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
      ––––. 2011b. “How-To Notes: Feedback Matters: Designing Effective Grievance
          Redress Mechanisms for Bank-Financed Projects Part 1: The Theory of Griev-
          ance Redress.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
      ––––. 2011c. “How-To Note: Feedback Matters: Designing Effective Grievance
          Redress Mechanisms for Bank-Financed Projects Part 2: The Practice of Griev-
          ance Redress.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
      ––––. 2011d. “How-To Notes: How, When, and Why to Use Demand-Side Gover-
          nance Approaches in Projects.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
      ––––. 2011e. “Strengthening the World Bank’s Engagement on Demand for Good
          Governance: DFGG Companion Piece on the GAC Strategy II.” Washington,
          DC: World Bank.
      ––––. 2012a. “GOXI Innovation Stories Case Studies: Changing Lives of Artisanal
          Miners and Mining Communities in Uganda.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
      ––––. 2012b. “GOXI Innovation Stories Case Studies: Community Education and
          Dialogue to Assist in the Implementation of a National Diamond Mining Ben-
          efit Sharing Fund.” Washington, DC: World Bank.



60	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
––––. 2012c. “GOXI Innovation Stories Case Studies: Strategy for Gender and
    Socially Inclusive Development in the Lao Mining Sector.” Washington, DC:
    World Bank.
––––. 2012d. “How-To Notes: Using Demand Side Governance Approach to Iden-
    tify and Manage Risks in Projects.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
––––. 2012e. “Increasing Local Procurement by the Mining Industry in West Africa,
    Road-test version.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
––––. 2012f. “Strengthening Governance: Tackling Corruption, The World Bank
    Group’s Updated Strategy and Implementation Plan.” Washington, DC: World
    Bank.
––––. “The World Bank Group in Extractive Industries 2011 Annual Review.”
    Washington, DC: World Bank.
––––. 2013. “How-To Notes: Participatory and Third Party Monitoring in World
    Bank-financed Projects: What Can Non-State Actors Do?” Washington, DC:
    World Bank.
––––. 2014a. Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming Citizen Engagement in World
    Bank Group Operations: Engaging with Citizens for Improved Results. Washington,
    DC: World Bank.
––––. 2014b. “Investment Project Financing Project Preparation Guidance Note.”
    Washington, DC: World Bank.
––––. 2014c. “Results Framework and M&E Guidance Note.” Washington, DC:
    World Bank.
––––. n.d. “Small Stories: 12 Stories about Small-Scale Mining.” World Bank, Com-
    munities and Small-Scale Mining. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank Social Accountability E-Guide. Chad & Cameroon: Petroleum Develop-
   ment & Pipeline Construction: Independent monitoring through the Independent
   Advisory Group (IAG).
World Bank Social Accountability E-Guide. Peru: Community monitoring of Peru’s
   Natural Gas Pipeline Project.




	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	61
      Annex 1. Checklist
      for Designing and
      Implementing Social
      Accountability Activities


      Step 1: Identify and prioritize social accountability issues, concerns, and
      opportunities
         •	 Identify the governance concerns and opportunities associated with the project

         •	 Identify project beneficiaries and affected communities

         •	 Identify incentives and disincentives (sanctions/rewards) to achieving social
            accountability goals

         •	 Identify potential entry points for social accountability activities (in conjunc-
            tion with Step 2)

      Step 2: Diagnose the political, legal, and social context for social accountability
      activities
          •	 Conduct stakeholder mapping and analysis of their capacities

         •	 Identify individuals and organizations within government, civil society, media,
            academia, and the private sector who can support, facilitate, or oppose social
            accountability activities

         •	 Review legal framework (e.g., access to information, legal status of CSOs)

         •	 Assess political, social, and cultural conditions for citizen engagement

         •	 Review existing social accountability activities and their experience




62	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
Step 3: Select and sequence appropriate social accountability tools given the
context
   •	 Consult stakeholders on choice of social accountability activities and provide
      them feedback

    •	 Determine extent of government cooperation and civil society involvement

    •	 Assess attitudes and capacities of government and CSOs on social account-
       ability activities

    •	 Tailor social accountability activities to local context

    •	 Assess technical and financial requirements of selected social accountability
       activities

    •	 Validate initial design

Step 4: Decide on implementation modalities for social accountability activities
(actors, budgets, timing)
    •	 Identify funding—project funds, trust funds, or other sources

    •	 Match the sequencing of social accountability activities with project
       implementation

    •	 Develop communication strategy to support social accountability activities

    •	 Pilot social accountability activities, monitor, and adjust

    •	 Expand after pilot testing

    •	 Implement and document social accountability activities

    •	 Include capacity building for both government and civil society

Step 5: Decide on follow-up and institutionalization (M&E, sanctions,
incentives)
   •	 Integrate social accountability M&E with project M&E (including social
      accountability indicators)

    •	 Monitor the implementation of social accountability activities

    •	 Include citizen and CSO feedback mechanisms

    •	 Assess impact of social accountability activities

    •	 Disseminate and validate findings with stakeholders

    •	 Organize networking, peer learning, and experience sharing of social account-
       ability implementation experience


	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	63
         Annex 2: Sample
         Indicators for Social
         Accountability


       Type of Social
      accountability
          Activity                                   Sample Indicators

 Information dissemination    •	 Contracts, licenses, leases, bidding criteria, bid evaluation
                                 processes, factors in winning a license, winning bids, laws,
 (Mechanisms: public             regulations, etc. are made public (yes/no)
 disclosure of information,   •	 Procurement plans, contracts, and tender documents are made
 information-distribution        public (yes/no)
 and awareness-raising        •	 Taxes, royalties, and allocation of EI revenues are made public
 campaigns, ATI laws, open-      (yes/no)
 data activities, etc.)       •	 Transparency and disclosure of information part of World Bank
                                 lending conditions (yes/no)
                              •	 Standards proscribed by ATI or RTI laws are applied to
                                 extractive industries (yes/no)
                              •	 Inspection and regulatory enforcement monitoring results are
                                 disclosed (yes/no)
                              •	 Local-level rights are publicized in a way that citizens can access
                                 and understand (yes/no)
                              •	 Awareness-raising and community outreach activities for citizens
                                 (yes/no)
                              •	 Citizens are aware of project activities and impacts
                                 (yes/no)

 Grievance Redress            •	 Grievance redress system established to address citizen
                                 complaints (yes/no)
                              •	 Citizens filed grievances/complaints (number)
                              •	 Registered grievances that are addressed (percentage)
                              •	 Grievances addressed within stipulated time period (percentage)
                              •	 Average time required to resolve complaints (days)
                              •	 Complainants satisfied with response and grievance redress
                                 process (percentage)
                              •	 Periodic reports on grievance redress mechanism results
                                 published (yes/no)




64	      Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
         Type of Social
        accountability
            Activity                                              Sample Indicators

    Consultation                        •	 Civil society consulted when drafting EI legal frameworks and
                                           regulations (yes/no)
    (Mechanisms: focus groups,          •	 Citizens consulted during project implementation (number)
    consultations, surveys, etc.)       •	 Citizens consulted reporting satisfaction with consultation
                                           process (percentage scoring satisfied or higher)
                                        •	 Participants in consultations who are from vulnerable and
                                           marginalized groups (e.g., women, poor, youth, disabled,
                                           indigenous peoples) (percentage)
                                        •	 Civil society is consulted on social and environmental impact
                                           assessments (yes/no)

    Empowering Citizens and             •	 Citizens that feel that EI operations address their concerns
    Communities                            (percentage)
                                        •	 Representatives in community-based decision-making and
    (Mechanisms: participatory             management structures who are from the vulnerable or
    planning, citizen/user                 marginalized beneficiary population (percentage)
    membership in decision-             •	 Participation rate of the poor, vulnerable, and women in
    making bodies, etc.)                   planning and decision-making meetings (percentage)
                                        •	 Participatory decision making on revenue management and
                                           allocation (yes/no)
                                        •	 Community role in allocating community development funds
                                           (yes/no)

    Beneficiary Feedback                •	 Proportion of total beneficiaries who provided feedback
                                           (percentage)
    (Mechanisms: satisfaction           •	 Share of feedback providers who are from vulnerable and
    surveys, citizen/community             marginalized or other target groups (e.g., geographic group)
    report cards, social audit,            (percentage)
    SMS/online feedback, etc.)          •	 Actions taken by program/project managers based on user/
                                           beneficiary feedback (yes/no)
                                        •	 Programs/institutions collecting feedback publish reports on
                                           feedback received and how this feedback has been used (yes/no)

    Citizen and Third-Party             •	 Independent oversight of EI operations and regulations (yes/no)
    Monitoring, Evaluation,             •	 Citizens and/or CSO monitoring of EI contracts, revenue
    and Oversight                          allocation, etc. (yes/no)
                                        •	 Civil society and community members participate in, or
    (Mechanisms: social                    monitor, EI operations (yes/no)
    audits, public expenditure          •	 Findings of citizen-led monitoring are made public
    tracking surveys, third-party          (yes/no)
    monitoring, etc.)                   •	 Forum for validating and providing feedback on monitoring
                                           results (yes/no)
                                        •	 Use of feedback provided by independent, citizen, and CSO
                                           monitoring (yes/no)
                                        •	 Monitoring committees trained in participatory monitoring
                                           (percentage)
                                        •	 Beneficiaries satisfied with monitoring (percentage)
                                        •	 Authorities act on issues identified by the monitoring/oversight
                                           activities (yes/no)
                                        •	 Changes to policies and project activities as a result of citizen
                                           monitoring (yes/no)




	       I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	65
      Annex 3. Sources of
      Information on Social
      Accountability in
      Extractive Industries


      World Bank Resources
      Communities and Small-Scale Mining (CASM): Launched in 2001, CASM is a
      global networking and coordination facility with a stated mission to “reduce poverty
      by improving the environmental, social and economic performance of artisanal and
      small-scale mining in developing countries.” CASM is housed at World Bank head-
      quarters in Washington, DC.

      Extractive Industry Task Group (EITG): The purpose of the EITG is to improve
      knowledge sharing, coordination, and dissemination within the World Bank Group
      and among external clients and partners. A key objective of the EITG is to summa-
      rize emerging industry trends and to assess where new understandings are warranted.

      Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC): Via the GAC Knowledge and Learn-
      ing website, resources and information from all departments and units engaged in
      the World Bank Group’s GAC Strategy and activities are shared. Among them are
      Demand for Good Governance and GAC in Natural Resource Management.

      International Finance Corporation—Oil, Gas & Mining: The mission of this
      team is to help developing countries and communities realize sustainable economic
      benefits from natural resources.

      Sharing in Governance of Extractive Industries (GOXI): GOXI is a space to share,
      learn, and connect for action toward greater accountability and, in turn, better devel-
      opment outcomes of the extractive industries in Africa. It is supported by the World
      Bank Institute and its partner institutions.

      External Resources
      Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI): EITI is a coalition of gov-
      ernments, companies, civil society groups, investors, and international organizations
      that aims to strengthen governance by improving transparency and accountability of

66	   Integrating Social Accountability Approaches into EI Projects
the extractive sector. The Secretariat of the EITI is located in Norway, and its multi-
donor trust fund is managed by the World Bank.

Global Witness: Through field investigations and high-level advocacy, Global Wit-
ness has worked to increase transparency in the flow of revenues from oil, gas, and
mining companies to governments. It conceived and co-launched the Publish What
You Pay campaign (description later in this list). Also, Global Witness is a leading
participant in the EITI.

International Council on Mining and Minerals (ICMM): Established in 2001,
ICMM aims to improve sustainable development performance in the mining and
metals industry. It brings together 22 mining and metals companies and 34 national
and regional mining associations and global commodity associations.

Natural Resource Charter: The Natural Resource Charter is a global initiative designed
to help governments and societies effectively harness the opportunities created by natu-
ral resources for national and community development. The Natural Resource Charter
provides 12 precepts to inform and improve natural resource management.

Natural Resource Governance Institute (NRGI): NRGI is a nonprofit policy insti-
tute and grant-making organization that promotes the effectiveness, transparency,
and accountability management of oil, gas, and mineral resources for the public
good. It was formerly known as Revenue Watch Institute.

Open Government Partnership (OGP): OGP brings together governments and
CSOs at both the national and international levels. At the national level, govern-
ments work with CSOs to develop and implement their OGP national action plans.
Additionally, within OGP, the Independent Civil Society Engagement team works to
broaden, strengthen, and engage a strong civil society network to participate in OGP,
particularly at the national level.

Oxfam America: OXFAM has a large and growing portfolio of work on transparency
and accountability, including in extractive industries. It has a number of publications
and project case studies on community engagement around EI projects.

Oxford Centre for the Analysis of Resource Rich Economies (OxCarre): Estab-
lished in October 2007, OxCarre is a global center of excellence in the economics of
resource-rich countries.

Publish What You Pay (PWYP): PWYP is a global network of civil society orga-
nizations that are united in their call for oil, gas, and mining revenues to form the
basis for development and improve the lives of citizens in resource-rich countries. It
undertakes public campaigns and policy advocacy to achieve disclosure of informa-
tion about EI revenues and contracts.

Transparency and Accountability Initiative (T/A Initiative): The T/A Initiative is
a donor collaboration that is working to expand the impact and scale of transparency
and accountability interventions. Some of the publications from the T/A Initiative
are available on the natural resource management website.

	    I n t e g r a t i n g S o c i a l A c c o u n t a b i l i t y A p p r o a c h e s i n t o E I P r o j e c t s 	67
