THE SOUTH AFRICA AGRICULTURE PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEW




                             January 2015




 World Bank         Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation            CAADP

         RSA Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Consultants and authors
Dr Frikkie Liebenberg
Dr Moraka Nakedi Makhura
Kate Moloto

Research Assistant & Junior Economist
Nontobeko Ndaba

Data collection support
Deborah Zana, Floris Huysamer, Johan Venter

DAFF coordinators
Kabelo M
Raisibe Masemene

DAFF Project Manager
Winston Makabanyane

DAFF Project Sponsor
CFO Jacob Hlatshwayo

Provincial CFOs
M.C Hadebe, P. Mothupi, E. Habermann, P. Riet, B. Serage, S.S. Dhlamini, W.K Mbokotho,
F Huysamer)

Respondents, reviewers and workshop participants


World Bank study leader
Stephen Mink

World Bank SA office

The Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries wishes to thank and appreciate
University of Pretoria, The Land Bank and Moloto Solutions for availing their resources to
contribute to the success of this study.




                                            i
PREFACE

This report on the assessment of budget tracking and public expenditure review of the
agricultural sector in the Republic of South Africa contributes to the continental effort to
enhance budget and policy prioritisation of the agricultural sector. More specifically, the report
has three goals:

   To provide initial baseline for future review and tracking of agricultural public expenditure
   To build an initial dataset that links the SA budget system with the COFOG system as per
    the CAADP guidelines
   To establish some emerging patterns on the level, composition and quality as well as
    effectiveness of expenditures.

The report presents a range of issues for consideration by the South African government
pertaining to resource allocation to agriculture. It highlights that a change in location of budget
units creates an impediment for smooth budget tracking process. While a trial was done to
analyse data from COFOG system, most of the analysis is based on the SA system. That
analysis points to relatively unstable patterns in the total agricultural expenditure budget, which
in the main is not that much compared to the total agricultural budget and in real terms. Most
interestingly, the share of agricultural public expenditure to the total SA government
expenditure is lower that the share of agriculture to GDP.

The report also shows the institutional perspective of the expenditure of South Africa that
consists of national level, provincial level and state owned entities level (SOE). It shows the
rising importance of provincial institution in agricultural expenditure. For implementation of
agricultural programmes, this provincial institution needs to be complemented with SOEs. This
review did not cover the expenditure on agriculture in the local government level and other
departments. The programme perspective shows that the basic functions (programmes) are
stable over time (against expectation), and there was a sharp increase in expenditure on
agricultural support – which should produce new or good farmers. Although COFOG is a
useful concept, it is not easy system to link with national budgetary nomenclature.

The study was commissioned by the DAFF with support from World Bank and financial
assistance from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. It was undertaken through a concerted
group effort. The study was executed by the team led by Dr Frik Liebenberg (University of
Pretoria), with Dr Moraka Nakedi Makhura (Land Bank) and Kate Moloto (Moloto Solutions).
The work also benefited from the contribution of Nontobeko Ndaba (the Junior Economist at
the Land Bank) who acted as Research Assistant. In DAFF the project was led by Jacob
Hlatswayo (CFO and sponsor of the project), Winston Makabanyane (Director Africa Relations
and project manager). The provincial CFOs also assisted in the collection of provincial data.
The study benefited a great deal from the guidance of Stephen Mink, the Lead Economist and
study leader. Kanego M, Kabelo M and Raisibe Masemene helped to coordinate DAFF and
the consultants.



                                                ii
This draft report will be subjected to initial consultation with the Department and World Bank
in middle of June. The second round of consultation will take place in a national workshop at
the end of June 2014. This will include provincial and national departmental officials as well
as selected stakeholders in agriculture.

The report will be then be finalized and made available in print and electronically. It may be
updated regularly as feedback from readers is received.




                                              iii
CONTENTS

Acknowledgements
Preface
Table of Contents
Acronyms and Abbreviations
Executive Summary



                 INTRODUCTION AND STRUCTURE OF THE
                 REPORT...................................................................................1
  1.1 Motivation For The Expenditure Review                                                               1
  1.2 Background and Objectives                                                                           1
  1.3 Output and Deliverables                                                                             2
  1.4 Intended Audience                                                                                   3
      1.4.1 Primary audience                                                                              3
      1.4.2 Additional audience                                                                           3
  1.5 Process Followed to Undertake The Study                                                             3
  1.6 Challenges Of Collating Budget Data                                                                 4
  1.7 A Harmonised National Program Structure For Agriculture                                             5
  1.8 Allocating Expenditure To COFOG                                                                     6
  1.9 Structure of the Report                                                                             6
                 THE COUNTRY AND THE SECTOR CONTEXT ............8
  2.1 Economic Situation and Public Finance                                                               8
      2.1.1 The Economic Growth and Drivers                                                               8
      2.1.2 Key Features of the Agricultural Sector in South Africa                                      11
  2.2 Public Finance                                                                                     13
  2.3 Agricultural Sector Administration                                                                 14
      2.3.1 Ministry of Agriculture                                                                      14
      2.3.2 MAFF Establishment                                                                           15
      2.3.3 Major Support Programmes                                                                     15
      2.3.4 State Owned Entities                                                                         18
      2.3.5 Farmers’ Associations                                                                        21


                                                  iv
               SECTORAL    PERSPECTIVE   OF            PUBLIC
               EXPENDITURE ON AGRICULTURE ............................. 21
3.1 Total Public Expenditure on Agriculture                                                   21
3.2 Share And Contribution of Agriculture Sector                                              23
3.3 Total Agricultural vs Total Government Expenditure                                        26
3.4 Agricultural Spending Intensities                                                         28
               INSTITUTIONAL PERSPECTIVE OF PUBLIC
               EXPENDITURE ON AGRICULTURE ............................. 30
4.1 Expenditure by Three Categories of Institutions                                           30
    4.1.1 National departments                                                                32
    4.1.2 State owned entities                                                                33
    4.1.3 Provincial departments of agriculture                                               34
4.2 Transfers Payments and Support                                                            36
               PROGRAMME    PERSPECTIVE    OF          PUBLIC
               EXPENDITURE ON AGRICULTURE ............................. 39
5.1 Share and Trends in Agricultural Public Expenditure by Programmes                         39

               FUNCTIONAL   PERSPECTIVE   OF           PUBLIC
               EXPENDITURE ON AGRICULTURE ............................. 42
6.1 Expenditure by Main Function                                                              42
6.2 Agriculture 43
6.3 Fisheries and Forestry                                                                    44
6.4 R&D Expenditure                                                                           46
               EFFICIENCY OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ON
               AGRICULTURE .................................................................. 50
7.1 Budgeted vs Actual Public Expenditure on Agriculture                                      50
7.2 Agricultural Expenditure By Economic Classification                                       52
               SYNTHESIS OF QUALITATIVE PERSPECTIVE TO
               AGRICULTURAL PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ................. 54
8.1 Perceptions On The Three Performance Areas                                                54
    8.1.1 Coding / tracking of expenditure                                                    54
    8.1.2 The flow of funds.                                                                  55
    8.1.3 Congruency                                                                          55


                                             v
       8.1.4 The Local Government level information and programmes                                      56
       8.1.5 Public Private Partnerships                                                                56
  8.2 Key Departments/Sectors                                                                           56
       8.2.1 National Treasury                                                                          57
       8.2.2 National Agriculture Department                                                            57
       8.2.3 The Presidency                                                                             57
       8.2.4 Private Sector                                                                             57
       8.2.5 Donors                                                                                     57
  8.3 The Agricultural Programmes                                                                       58
       8.3.1 Administration, Personnel Costs & Other admin costs                                        58
       8.3.2 Sustainable Resource Management                                                            58
       8.3.3 Farmer Support and Development                                                             58
       8.3.4 Veterinary Services                                                                        59
       8.3.5 (Technology) Research and Development Services                                             59
       8.3.6 Agricultural Economics                                                                     59
       8.3.7 Training                                                                                   59
       8.3.8 Agricultural Development Planning                                                          59
  8.4 Special Focus Areas                                                                               59
  8.5 Recommendations                                                                                   59

                  SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS...................... 61
  9.1 Summary Overview of Finding                                                                       61
  9.2 Recommendations                                                                                   62
       9.2.1 Level of expenditure                                                                       62
       9.2.2 Composition of Expenditure                                                                 63
       9.2.3 Quality of expenditure                                                                     63
       9.2.4 Process of budget management                                                               64
       9.2.5 Institutionalisation of budget tracking and review                                         64
  9.3 Further Work                                                                                      65



List of Figures

Figure 1:         Sector share of Gross Domestic Product in 2012...................................... 10
Figure 2:         Gross value of agriculture: trends in constant prices ................................ 11
Figure 3:         Total expenditure on agriculture, forestry and fisheries ........................... 22

                                                 vi
Figure 4:          Total agricultural public expenditure (R billion 2010 value) .................... 23
Figure 5:          Relative contribution of agriculture .......................................................... 24
Figure 6:          Long-run trend in agricultural share of government spending and economic
contribution, 1910-2013 ........................................................................................................... 25
Figure 7:          Total government expenditure vs share of agricultural public expenditure
                   26
Figure 8:          Spending intensity per farmer and workers .............................................. 28
Figure 9:          Total agricultural expenditure by institutions ........................................... 32
Figure 10:         Expenditure by national departments ........................................................ 33
Figure 11:         Expenditure on agriculture by state owned entities .................................. 34
Figure 12:         Agricultural public expenditure by provinces ........................................... 35
Figure 13:         Relative share of provinces in agricultural expenditure ............................ 36
Figure 14:         Transfers payments and support................................................................ 37
Figure 15:         Pattern of inter-institutional transfers........................................................ 38
Figure 16:         Trends in the agricultural expenditure by programmes ............................ 40
Figure 17:         Programme share of agricultural public expenditure (2003/4; 2008/9;
2013/14)           41
Figure 18:         Functional public expenditure on agriculture ........................................... 43
Figure 19:         Agricultural public expenditure by level 4 (based on COFOG system .... 44
Figure 20:         Expenditure on Forestry ............................................................................ 45
Figure 21:         Expenditure on Fisheries ........................................................................... 45
Figure 22:         Total research expenditure ........................................................................ 46
Figure 23:         Research spending by institution .............................................................. 47
Figure 24:         Share of research spending by provinces .................................................. 48
Figure 25:         Five year average share of salaries since 2004/05 .................................... 49
Figure 26:         Budgeted vs Actual expenditure by DAFF ............................................... 51
Figure 27:         Budgeted vis Actual expenditure by provincial departments of agriculture
                   52
Figure 28:         Total agricultural public expenditure according to economic classification
                   53

List of Tables

Table 1:                   Proposed harmonised national programme structure for agriculture .......... 5
Table 2:                   Trends amongst Households (% of Households) ........................................ 9
Table 3:                   Average Annual growth Rate in GDP (%) by Sector................................ 11
Table 4:                   Top Five Agricultural traded commodities and partners for SACU ......... 12
Table 5:                   Importance of agriculture – country comparison ...................................... 27
Table 6:                   Institutions within each tier of government .............................................. 30
Table 7:                   Average rating of Departments and Sector ............................................... 56
Table 8:                   Rating table 4 ............................................................................................ 58
Table 9:                   Special focus areas .................................................................................... 59



                                                                 vii
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

ACB         Agricultural Credit Board

ARC         Agricultural Research Council

AgPer       Agricultural Public Expenditure Review

AU          African Union

BAS         Basic Accounting System

CAADP       Comprehensive African Agricultural Programme

CASP        Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme

CEO         Chief Executive Officer

CFO         Chief Financial Office

COFOG       Classification of Functions of Government

DAFF        Department of Agriculture Forestry and Fisheries

DDG         Deputy Director General

DG          Director General

DPs         Development Partners

DOA         Department of Agriculture

DORA        Division of Revenue Act

GDP         Gross Domestic Product

ENE         Estimate of National Expenditure

FFC         Fiscal and Financial Commission

Land Bank   Land and Agricultural Development Bank of South Africa

MADC        Mpumalanga Agricultural Development Corporation

M&E         Monitoring and Evaluation

NAMC        National Agricultural Marketing Council

NEPAD       New Partnership for Africa’s Development


                                         viii
NGO           Non-governmental organisation

OBPI          Onderstepoort Biological Products Incorporated

PDAs          Provincial Departments of Agriculture

PPECB         Perishable Products Export Control Board

R&D           Research and Development

SOEs          State Owned Entities

SONA          State of the Nation Address

SA            South Africa

RSA           Republic of South Africa

TOR           Terms of Reference



UNITS

R10 = US$

R17 = BP

R14 = Euro

1000 = One thousands

1 000 000 = One million

1 000 000 000 = One billion

1 000 000 000 000 = One trilion




                                            ix
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Introduction
This South African Agricultural Public Expenditure Review (AgPer) is one of a series of
similar studies undertaken in several countries in Sub-Saharan Africa under the Comprehensive
Africa Agriculture Development Program (CAADP) of the African Union’s (AU) New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) which encourages governments and
development partners (DPs) to target public expenditure on the agriculture sector as the
most effective way of stimulating growth.

The overall purpose of the budget tracking and public expenditure review is to provide
recommendations to address budgetary planning, budget execution, and accountability
in the agricultural sector, the creation of a reliable data base, and more effective intra- and
inter-sectoral coordination. It is also aimed at stimulating increased resource allocations and
to enhance the harmonization and alignment of resources around national and provincial
priorities in the agricultural sector.

The report aims to produce the following outputs:

   -   Foundation data set for understanding reflecting the COFOG and South African
       nomenclature in budgeting
   -   Synthesis of the level, composition and quality of budget
   -   Recommendations for enhancement of the budget tracking process

Investment in the South African agricultural sector stands out from other in African in that
public spending in South Africa is complemented by the private sector. Also, as a result of the
high level of development in the secondary and tertiary sectors in the economy the share
of public expenditure in agriculture is therefore relatively low. As such, the benchmark of the
Maputo Declaration of 2003 committing African Heads of State to increase public
expenditure on agriculture to ten percent is neither achievable nor appropriate for South
Africa.

The AgPer was conducted by analysing the data constructed from combining the budgets and
expenditure information in the national and the nine provinces departments. A lack of an
integrated program structure and frequent program structure changes posed challenges
in developing the database. A harmonised programme structure was used that include:
Administration and Services, Production Support, Regulatory Services, Natural Resource
Management, Farmer Support & Extension, Financing, Agricultural Economics, Forestry and
Fisheries.

The report first provides an overview of the South African economy and presents the
agricultural sector context.




                                              x
Country Context
South Africa is the second largest economy in Sub-Saharan Africa. Until recently, the
economy was number one in terms of GDP (Now second to Nigeria). South Africa is faced
with the triple challenge of poverty, inequality and unemployment. Just less than half the South
African population lives in poverty. The South African rand is convertible – and regarded as
one of the most liquid, or tradable, among the developing economies. There are adequate
international foreign currency reserves — accessible at many forex points. South Africa has
also declared itself as a developmental state.

Dependence of public finance on tax as major revenue source has generally created stability
and has pushed Government revenue collection system to be more effective. The major origin
of the tax revenue are from the personal income tax and company tax and value added tax,
which depend on the economic activity. In view of stringent economic developments and slow
growth, some views are that government may start reducing on social spending.

With an annual real GDP growth of 3.4 percent since 2002, the South Africa growth rate has
been generally linked and lagging the global growth, except for a few instances when it
surpassed the global average over the past 10 years (ie. the early 2000s and mid-2000s). While
still facing developmental challenges the economy also displays elements of a developed
economy. The main contributors of the GDP are predominantly, the secondary and tertiary
sectors.

The agricultural sector has been losing its relative importance. Agriculture in 2013
contributed only 2.5 percent to the GDP, as compared to about 9 percent for the mining sector
and 12 percent of manufacturing and 21 percent of Finance, real estate and business services.
South Africa is the main member of Southern African Custom Union (SACU) and is a net
exporter of agricultural products. In terms of trading partners, Netherlands, UK, Zimbabwe
and Mozambique were the top five agricultural export destinations over the past decade, with
the USA replaced by Angola. That is, South Africa increased its Africa focus more. While
agriculture’s relative contribution to the GDP is increasingly declining, it is still relevant in
food security and employment.

Sector Context
South Africa has a diverse agro-ecology with a diverse agricultural investment potential.
About 13.7 percent of South Africa is suitable for arable farming. With a mean annual
rainfall of approximately 450 mm, South Africa is regarded as semi-arid. As such, large parts
of the country are only suitable for extensive livestock farming, particularly sheep and
cattle. Periodic droughts and intermittent floods affect most of the agricultural activities
and government has been intervening through disaster management to rehabilitate the
affected farmers and their farming activities.

In the past, South Africa used to have a dualistic agricultural sector reflected in a modern
commercial farming sector and a communal farming sector. With the land reform process and
improved support to the communal sector this dichotomy is waning. Mixed farming systems
are in use mainly in the communal farming area, where allotments are allocated for arable crop

                                               xi
farming and a common grazing land allocated for livestock production. While the number of
commercial farmers has been declining in the recent decade average farm size and productivity
has increased. However, information on the number of communal farmers and or emerging
farmers is less well known.

Maize, as the main staple food, is grown in the maize triangle that covers the areas of
Mpumalanga, Gauteng, Free State and North West. The communal farmers tend to rear mainly
livestock, since they are generally part-time with other sources of income. In the commercial
farming sector large corporations and agribusiness companies are a dominant feature.

Land tenure is secure in both communal system and freehold land. According to the latest
Population Census 2011, there are about 2 879 638 farming households practicing some form
of agricultural activity.

Only 15 percent of the arable land is under irrigation contributing 30 percent of the
country’s crop production. In terms of National Development Plan South Africa plans to
expand the use of irrigation to increase production and employment.

Institutions in Agriculture
The Ministry of Agriculture, together with the nine provincial ministries, is responsible for the
public services for the sector. The roles are separated through a constitutional provision
(Schedule 6). Provincial departments of agriculture are subdivided into regional, or
districts offices located in the major centres or towns. Agricultural Service Centres have
been established in various parts of the country to assist farmers with extension services. The
centres provide general agricultural information and advice and occasionally coordinate the
provision of animal feed, production inputs (fertilisers and seeds). Regions or districts are
further subdivided into extension wards through which village or area level technical staff is
stationed to interface with farmers and other key stakeholders on a frequent basis.

Five major state-owned entities form part of the agricultural support system. These provide
support to farmers with a more focused mandate and less bureaucratic processes. The
Agricultural Research Council (ARC) was established by the Agricultural Research Act 86
of 1990 and is the lead agricultural research institution in South Africa. Onderstepoort
Biological Products (OBP), established in 2000 under the Onderstepoort Biological Products
Incorporation Act of 1999, is a state owned animal vaccine manufacturing company with the
mandate to prevent and control animal diseases that impact on food security, human health and
livelihoods. The Land and Agricultural Development Bank of South Africa (Land Bank)
has been the leading agricultural financier in South Africa since 1912. The Land Bank offers
tailor made financial services to established and emerging farmers. The National
Agricultural Marketing Council (NAMC) was established in terms of the Marketing of
Agricultural Products (MAP) Act (Act No. 47 of 1996). The NAMC provides strategic advice
to the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries on the marketing of agricultural products.
The Perishable Products Export Control Board (PPECB), constituted and mandated in
terms of the PPEC Act (Act No 9, of 1983) is an independent service provider of quality


                                               xii
certification and cold chain management services for producers and exporters of perishable
food products.

South African farmers are well organised, though along racial lines. At grassroots level,
farmers are members of their local farmers’ association and commodity groups, through which
they liaise with local officials to address local agricultural issues.

Sectoral Perspective of Public Expenditure on Agriculture
The total South African agricultural expenditure, inclusive of agriculture, forestry and fisheries,
has experienced a threefold increase in nominal terms in the 11 years from 2003/4 to 2013/14.
This represents an annual growth of 10.8 percent from R5.77 billion in 2003/4 to R16.97 billion
in 2013/14 in relation to the total government expenditure of about R291.52 billion in 2002/3
increasing to just over a trillion in 2013/14. After accounting for inflation using a GDP deflator
with a 2010 base year the expenditure trend is less impressive. The real agricultural public
expenditure increased by only 4.2 percent annually from R9.33 billion in 2003/4 to R14.23
million in 2013/14. This represents a slightly more than fifty percent increase in
agricultural public expenditure compared to a more than threefold increase in total
government expenditure.

The share of agriculture in the economy has declined from about 2.65 percent of the South
African GDP to about 2.18 percent in recent years. On the other hand, the share of government
spending on agriculture as a share of total government spending has increased from 1.75
percent in 2003/4 to 1.92 percent in 2008/9 from where it has decreased to an average of 1.67
in the recent three years.

Spending per farm worker has grown at 11.2 percent, about four percent faster than the
spending per farmer, as a result of the forty percent decrease in employment in the sector since
2002. The 9.9 percent increase in spending per farmer represents a respectable increase in
resources/investment available to individual farmers.

Institutional Perspective of Public Expenditure on Agriculture
After accounting for inter-institutional transfers, all three institutional cohorts experienced an
increase in expenditure with provincial departments experiencing a higher rate of growth than
national departments and state owned entities. The national departments — net of transfers to
national state owned entities and the provinces — showed a strong annual rate of growth of
18.0 percent from 2003/4 through to 2008/9 when austerity measures led to a decrease in
expenditure of R1.25 billion. From 2010/11 it regained its growth in spending at 11.9 percent
to date. National level state owned entities have experienced a growth of 9.2 percent during
the years prior to 2008/9, improving to 10.3 percent since 2010/11. Over the full 11 year period
national level state owned entities experienced an annual growth of 8.8 percent, compared to
the 10.5 percent experienced by the national departments.

The growth in expenditure by the provincial departments of agriculture was 11.3 percent
throughout the 11 year period since 2003/4. However, the growth rate up to 2008/9 was 13.9


                                               xiii
percent annually followed by an 8.9 percent rate of growth from then on. This is lower than
the growth rate experienced by the national departments.

In inflation adjusted terms, State owned entities at national level have only marginally
improved their level of expenditure. Expenditure on agriculture by the provincial
administrations has grown by 4.6 percent per year from 2002/3 to date. From 2003/4 to
2009/10 the increase was 7.5 percent per year, but over the past four years this slowed to only
0.3 percent per year.

A salient feature is the increased role of conditional grants from the DAFF in the overall
expenditure of the provincial departments. Whereas conditional grants were less than 10
percent of overall provincial expenditure a decade ago, this has increased to 14 percent by
2010/11. In 2011/12 this increased to 20 percent and now fluctuates around 22 percent, more
than double what it was a decade ago.

Program Perspective of Public Expenditure on Agriculture
The two biggest programmes were the Financing and the Farmer Support and Development
(FSD) programmes. The expenditure on farmer support and development has shown the
strongest growth of all programs. The next large program is the Administration programme.
This programme includes the senior management of the departments from the Minister through
to DDG as well as corporate services. There are significant differences in the relative
importance of this program between the national institutions and the provincial departments.
At national level, administration is the third largest program after Financing.

Functional Perspective
The total agricultural public expenditure as defined by the COFOG system accounted for 75 to
86 percent of aggregate expenditure on agriculture, forestry, fishing and agricultural R&D and
grew by 7.0 percent per year from R7.1 billion in 2003/4 to R13.6 billion in 2013/14. The
share of expenditure on R&D decreased from 16 percent in 2003/4 to 11 percent in 2013/14.
This is the result of a decrease in R&D expenditure of 1.9 percent per year during the period
2003/4 to 2009/10. Since then expenditure on research has risen by 6.6 percent per year to
reach R1.8 billion in 2013/141. Expenditure on forestry and fisheries show a marginally
declining trend over the period of 1.2 and 3.9 percent respectively.

Efficiency of of Public Expenditure on Agriculture
The efficiency of executing the total budget is measured by comparing budgeted against actual
expenditure. The actual expenditure by the DAFF has often been much higher than the initial
budget, but generally slightly lower than the adjusted appropriation made during the financial
year. Actual expenditure generally exceeds the initial budgeted expenditure by 12.2 percent,
ranging between 1.0 percent and 47.2 percent. Compared to the adjusted appropriation the




1
    This is probably an underestimate as the unit based budget data do not provide sufficient detail to account
    for expenditures on sub-functions within the unit (DAFF, 2014a)

                                                    xiv
actual expenditure on average is 3.3 percent below the adjusted appropriation and ranges
between 0.7 percent in 2009/10 and 6.3 percent in 2006/7.

The expenditures trends by economic classification show salaries and goods & services
trending high and increasing faster than the other economic classes.

Qualitative Opinion on public expenditure on agriculture
Respondents were surveyed and requested to give an opinion on the issues related to budgeting
process. The views were with respect to coding, flow of funds and congruency. The common
view is that the existing financial is good and allows for a uniform programme (objective) and
item structure. The view is not surprising since the SA budgeting and expenditure tracking
system are participatory and transparent.

In terms of the views on the efficiency of the flow of funds to allocated budget areas are that
the level of underspending is very high, attributed to bad planning; e.g. incidence of last minute
spending in January to March is quite common. This view is in line with the fact that the
revised or adjusted budget is approved late. The underspending has implications for service
delivery. Injudicious spending of the budget borders on violation of the public finance
management policies.

The views on the efficiency of the budget allocation process (in terms of allocations to priority areas)
were invited. Here a need for re-organization and re-prioritization of spending within the sector
was identified before an argument for more resources can be made. It should also be borne in
mind that the process of allocating budget to the priorities of the programmes is a collective
process during which many trade-offs are made.

Recommendations
The report recommends the following;

Recommendation 1: There is a need to increase the level of public expenditure on agriculture
as the current level of spending is regarded as insufficient if compared to the norm for similar
economies elsewhere..

Recommendation 2: The target of 10 percent of total government spending going to
agriculture is not appropriate for South Africa. Spending 10 percent of government spending
on agriculture spending is equivalent to R100 billion. This has tremendous implications for
policy, prioritisation and capacity to spend an extra more than R800 billion. A gradual increase
to levels closer to the sector’s share in the economy, along with appropriate policy and capacity
creation are recommended.

Recommendation 3: The current open economy policy and the general objective of food self-
reliance (security) have to continue. This involves ensuring that there is sufficient options to
make food available in the country through own production, import and export. Direct price
support and trade restrictions should continue to be managed carefully. On the other hand,
non-market-distorting indirect agricultural support should be enhanced. Government should
maintain the balance by developing trade relations with all the regions.

                                                  xv
Recommendation 4: The budget spending should be balanced among different (institutions,
economic classification, programmes, functional) components of expenditure, with more bias
towards those that deliver service to farmers. Farmers generally feel less supported as the funds
that reach the farmer on the ground are very little. Some farmers (including emerging farmers)
don’t experience public service support due to budgetary constraints.

Recommendation 5: There should be a consistent effort to determine and improve return on
the expenditure and increasing service delivery to the farmers or projects on the ground. The
development of the farmers or agriculture sector or output should be commensurate with the
money spent (value for money). As such, clearer delivery indicators should be developed or
established.

Recommendation 6: A harmonised national agricultural programme structure should be
implemented to aid in expenditure tracking. The programme structure should allow for the
inclusion of all government entities national and provincial level and their functions. The
COFOG system is too aggregated to inform the day-to-day management of the public sector
functions in agriculture. The envisaged structure should align to policy priorities. Efforts
should be made to harmonise the accounting system of state owned entities that of the
government system.

Recommendation 7: There is a need to rationalise the departmental structures at national
level. The process of frequent restructuring of programmes and renaming of institutional
component tends to create confusion in understanding some basic functions.

Recommendation 8: Improve coordination of budget within government and with non-
governmental stakeholders on the budget issues

Recommendation 9: There is a need to institutionalise the budget tracking and review by
setting up a budget tracking function or role in the DAFF to provide regular updates (or budget
review) and monitor the performance of the budget. This may require allocation of financial
resources and capacity to stabilise the expenditure monitoring process.




                                              xvi
                INTRODUCTION AND STRUCTURE OF THE REPORT


1.1 MOTIVATION FOR THE EXPENDITURE REVIEW

The program “Strengthening National Comprehensive Agricultural Public Expenditure in Sub-
Saharan Africa” is financed by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and implemented by
The World Bank. The aim is to improve the impact of scarce public resources spent by Sub-
Saharan African governments on agricultural sector development activities in an effort to
improve the welfare of predominantly poor rural populations. It operates in the context of the
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program (CAADP) of the African Union’s
(AU) New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), which encourages governments
and development partners (DPs) to target public expenditure on the agriculture sector as the
most effective way of stimulating growth in the sector, thus reducing hunger and poverty.

The overall objective of the project is, through providing analytical support, to promote the
articulation and implementation of strengthened national comprehensive agricultural public
expenditure programs so as to build consensus for increased levels of public expenditure in the
sector in Sub-Saharan Africa, and to enhance its efficiency, effectiveness and equity.

The program is intended to provide evidence-based recommendations that will address, inter
alia, budgetary planning, budget execution, and accountability in the agricultural sector, the
creation of a reliable data base on public expenditure, and more effective intra- and inter-
sectoral coordination. It is also aims to stimulate larger donor contributions and enhanced
harmonization and alignment of resources behind national strategies. More specific to
CAADP, the program will focus on: the level of expenditure on agriculture, with particular
reference to the explicit target by African Heads of State in the Maputo Declaration to allocate
10 percent of national budgets to the sector; to align the composition and priorities of
expenditure with respect to stated national strategies; provide evidence of impact; improve the
sustainability and absorptive capacity; and improve budget planning and implementation in
order to strengthen public financial management in general and in particular budget coherence,
outputs, outcomes and supporting mechanisms such as procurement and audit.

South Africa has requested that it benefit from this program, in a communication addressed to
the CAADP Secretariat and has solicited a basic agricultural public expenditure diagnostic
review.

1.2 BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES

The overall purpose of the budget tracking and public expenditure review exercise is to provide
evidence-based recommendations to inform subsequent budgetary planning, budget execution,
and accountability decisions and practices in the agricultural sector. It is also aimed at
stimulating increased resource allocations, and further enhances the harmonization and
alignment of resources around national and provincial priorities in the agriculture sector.



1
To this end an Inception Workshop was held on 5 September 2013 with the CFO’s of the
National and Provincial Departments of Agriculture to discuss the study purpose and the
proposed outputs of the study and to agree on the milestones and the timelines. The Inception
Report was prepared reflecting on the team’s understanding of the TOR and proposing t he
approach to be adopted in implementing the project.

The specific objectives of the budget tracking and expenditure review exercise were reflected
(or agreed) to be among others the following:

1. Collect, analyse data and present findings on the amounts and composition of
   consolidated public allocations to the agriculture sector ― combining national and
   provincial levels ― in light of the CAADP 10% target;
2. Collect, analyse and present findings on the proportions and timeliness of disbursements
   of public resources, including the producer support measures made by different
   departments at national and provincial levels;
3. Show the current and potential relationship between resource allocations and effective
   and efficient expenditures, and provincial and national growth targets.
4. Provide a synthesis of the levels, composition and quality of public expenditures in the
   agriculture sector ― at national, provincial and (if possible) lower administrative units;
5. Propose the amount and composition of agriculture investments, based on analytical
   evidence, that are required to stimulate small-holder driven agricultural growth-rates.

A number of matters were raised regarding the detail at which the study will be conducted as
well as the modus operandi to follow if the institutional capacities are to be created for
continued monitoring and evaluation by the departments.

1.3 OUTPUT AND DELIVERABLES

The report aims to produce the following outputs:

    -    Foundation dataset for understanding Classification of Functions of Government
        (COFOG) and the Basic Accounting System followed by the South African government
    -    Synthesis of the level, composition and quality of budget
    -   Recommendations for enhancement of the budget process

The following deliverables are to be presented

    -   Two presentations of expenditure data organized according to the SA Treasury
        Reporting system and the COFOG classification system
    -   Detailed report
    -   Qualitative survey instrument and a report
    -   Abridged executive summary
    -   Recommendations for improvement of the system



2
1.4 INTENDED AUDIENCE

1.4.1 Primary audience
The primary audience are the institutions/units who are directly involved in the budget and
expenditure process.

    -   Mainly DAFF
    -   Provincial departments of agriculture
    -   Portfolio committee on agriculture
    -   The presidency
    -   SOEs
    -   The National Treasury

1.4.2 Additional audience
Agricultural stakeholders impacted by the agricultural public sector action and also influence
agricultural policy serves as the additional audience. This audience needs to be informed and
made aware about the expenditure issues:

    -   Organised agriculture, including farmers’ organizations
    -   Academia
    -   NGO’s in agriculture
    -   Political parties

1.5 PROCESS FOLLOWED TO UNDERTAKE THE STUDY

To track government spending on agriculture across all the budget votes of both national and
provincial departments of agriculture and their associated state owned entities a database was
structured to allow for the analysis of the level of investment as well as the efficiency in the
allocation of resources. A key requirement is that it should enable the analysis hereof in such
a manner that it reflects both national budgetary nomenclature and the summary form of the
Classification of Functions of Government as used by the UN. Included in the analysis is the
ability to track support payments to agriculture.

A complication presented by the Estimates of National Expenditure (ENE) reports of
government is that it report expenditure to the level of sub-programs, but present the break-
down of the expenditure by economic classification only at the aggregate program level. This
practice limits the ability to identify and appropriate the spending by function and type of
support. The process followed to construct the database was to source data on spending by
economic classification directly from departmental accounting systems at the unit, or sub-
program level.

For the DAFF the source availed to the consultants were the State of Expenditure Reports used
to monitor and report on financial allocations. Provincial expenditure data were sourced at the
sub-program level according to the harmonised provincial agricultural programs implemented

3
in some provinces since 2004/05 — a programme structure that treasury recently urged all
provincial departments of agriculture to adopt.

1.6 CHALLENGES OF COLLATING BUDGET DATA

A number of challenges presented itself in the course of the data collection process. These
were, but not limited to:

1. The data availed to the analysts by the DAFF came in pdf format and all data had to be
   captured by hand. This presented a challenge in data capturing and forced the analysts to
   limit the effort to capture only data on budgeted expenditure and actual expenditure to the
   level of unit totals. Expenditure by economic classification was limited to actual
   expenditure only.
2. Four of the nine provinces still have to change their budgeting systems to the harmonised
   provincial program structure — a structure that in itself has undergone a number of
   evolutions since its inception in 2004/05. Provinces were requested to populate a master
   template using data from the Basic Accounting System of government.
3. In some provinces the provincial department of agriculture is also responsible for non-
   agricultural functions such as economic affairs, environmental affairs and tourism. In one
   instance (Gauteng) it was impossible to adequately isolate the expenditure on agriculture
   for the years prior to 2008/09.
4. Given that this review ran concurrent to on-going budgetary cycle duties this delayed
   finalizing the databases to a great extent.
5. Perhaps the biggest challenge in collating the data from the DAFF was to find a uniform
   basis to present the budget data according to a uniform program structure. The programs
   of DAFF have changed frequently over the past 10 years. Specific challenges faced in this
   regard were:
               o The programme structure of the DAFF was revised three times during the
                    past 10 years. Units and directorates were frequently relocated between
                    programs. In some cases directorates were re-located up to three times
                    during the past 10 years. This relocation of units results in structural breaks
                    in spending trends of a program and often leads to misinterpretation of the
                    level of spending. A good example of this is the Administration program of
                    the DAFF where the functions of Finance, Human Resources and certain
                    Auxiliary functions, that were formerly separate programs, were relocated
                    to administration during the latest round of program restructuring.
               o The frequent changes in unit names presented a major source of confusion
                    and were it not for information provided by staff at DAFF, it would have
                    been impossible to consistently trace the history of the units.
               o State owned entities that receive core funding from the DAFF presented a
                    further source of variability in program spending as they were shifted from
                    the responsibility of one program to the next over the years; for example,
                    the ARC was relocated 5 times since 2003/04.


4
6. The frequency of mergers of units/directorates, and more recently the sub-division of units,
   was extraordinarily high. Liebenberg (2013) and Roseboom et al (1995) found that these
   institutional changes were a frequent phenomenon in the history of the department as it
   tried to re-align itself to the needs of its clientele. The extent of these changes in the recent
   decade is, however, extreme. The number of accounting units (i.e. ministry, Director-
   Generals’ office, Deputy Director Generals’, Chief Directorships and Directorates)
   increased from 55 in 2003/04 to 124 in 2010/11. This was aided by the transfer of the
   functions of Forestry and later Fisheries since 2008, but even this is a much greater number
   than in 1988 when the provincial departments, the ARC and Fisheries formed part of the
   then Department of Agriculture.
7. State owned entities at national level presented a special challenge to source data from as
   their accounting systems do not always follow the same principles as the BAS and
   amendments had to be made to incorporate their data according to the economic
   classification used under BAS. The analysis presented here is limited to the national level
   state owned entities as provinces did not provide information on this. In many cases these
   entities were transferred to the responsibility of other departments, such as MADC in
   Mpumalanga, and no information could be sourced from provincial legislature Estimates
   of Expenditure reports.
8. Other government departments with functions related to agriculture did not have state of
   expenditure reports similar to that used by the DAFF and information on their expenditure
   on agriculture were extracted from the ENE reports to the extent possible.

1.7 A HARMONISED NATIONAL PROGRAM STRUCTURE FOR AGRICULTURE

Reporting public expenditure on agriculture inclusive of both national and provincial
governments by simply following the existing program structure of the DAFF were found to
be impossible given the very dissimilar nature and structure of programs. To do so required
the refinement of an earlier program structure used by the Department of Agriculture circa
1988. This ‘harmonised agricultural program structure’ was largely still reflected in the
accounting unit structure of the DAFF as recently as 2004/05. The earlier structure
accommodates the harmonized provincial program structure within seven programs related to
agriculture. A further two programs were added, and one each for the Forestry and Fisheries
functions. The structure and its associated functions are shown on Table 1.

Table 1:       Proposed harmonised national programme structure for agriculture
       PROGRAM                                               SUB-PROGRAM
    Administration and   Minister, Deputy Minister, Management, Finance, Corporate Services, Communication,
    Services             Stakeholder relations, legal services,
                         Programme Administration, Agronomic Research, Animal production research,
                         Horticultural Research, Industrial advice, Livestock improvement schemes, Natural
    Production Support
                         resources, Pasture utilisation research, Plant protection research, Propagation material
                         schemes, Veterinary research




5
        PROGRAM                                             SUB-PROGRAM
                        Programme Administration, Animal Health/Veterinary Services, Grading Services,
    Regulatory Services Import & Export Control, Liquor, Locust and finch control, Pest control, Plant Health &
                        seed control, Soil conservation, Weed control
                         Programme Administration, Resource Classification & Planning, Resource research,
    Natural Resource
                         Resource utilization research, Agricultural Engineering, Agricultural Risk & Disaster
    Management
                         management
                         Ad hoc advice, Agricultural Information Services, Agricultural Technology
    Farmer Support &
                         Development & Adaptation, Extension, Formal Training, Chemical Services, Chemical
    Extension
                         Services, Library Services, Program Administration
                         Assistance, Financial Support Measures, Grants-in-aid, Land Bank, Production Loans to
    Financing
                         Small Farmers, Relief of distress, Settlement of Farmers
                         Program Administration, Macro-Economic & Policy Analysis, Agricultural production
    Agricultural
                         economics, Agricultural Statistical Services, Co-operative Movement, International
    Economics
                         Trade & Administration, National Marketing Council
                         Program Administration, Natural Resources Management, Regulation & Oversight,
    Forestry
                         Forest management
                         Program Administration, Conservation Measures, Fishing Harbours, Seal & Coastal Bird
    Fisheries
                         Control, Research, Auxiliary Services



This programme structure is sufficient to provide a framework to incorporate all government
departments and state owned entities and their associated functions and may be useful for future
expenditure review initiatives.

    1.8 ALLOCATING EXPENDITURE TO COFOG

The COFOG is a classification system intended to present government expenditure in a manner
that is comparable across countries. In its current form and for the present analysis it is found
to be an inadequate structure lacking sufficient detail to clearly identify and uniquely assign
functions (Curtis and Adama, 2013). The procedure followed here was to disaggregate the
main categories of COFOG2 and insert a four level code system to these categories. This
approach proved useful enough to assign the detailed budget data to the various COFOG
functions.

    1.9 STRUCTURE OF THE REPORT

In Section 2 a description is presented of the status of agriculture in the South African economy.
Section 3 presents the picture on the overall public spending on agriculture in the country.
Section 4 describes the institutions involved in service provision to agriculture. Section 5
highlights the spending by program. Section 6 analyse the functional allocation of resources,
followed by an efficiency analysis of resource allocations in section 7. In section 8 a qualitative



2
       See the CAADP Guidance document on use of COFOG

6
overview is presented on the perceived impact of government spending on agriculture followed
by a summary and recommendations in section 9.




7
                THE COUNTRY AND THE SECTOR CONTEXT


2.1 ECONOMIC SITUATION AND PUBLIC FINANCE

2.1.1 The Economic Growth and Drivers
In 2013 the gross domestic product (GDP) of South Africa was US$350 billion, making it the
second largest economy in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) after Nigeria, but ahead of Angola.
Normalized against a population of 52.9 million (making it the 4th most populous country in
the region) South Africa’s GDP per capita was US$6 618 in 2013 — 6th in SSA, just behind
Botswana and ahead of Angola (World Development Indicators, 2014).

South Africa is faced with the triple challenge of poverty, inequality and unemployment.
Annexure B shows some selected South Africa development indicators. Just less than half of
the South African population still lives in poverty. During the period under review, the poverty
level was at 49 percent (2002/3) which declined slightly to 45 percent (by 2011/12). In terms
of employment, just about a quarter of the population are unemployed. The Gini coefficient
stood at 65 percent in 2011, up from 57.8 percent in 2000.

The South African rand is convertible – and regarded as one of the most liquid or tradable
currencies among the developing economies. There are adequate international foreign
currency reserves – accessible at many forex points. Following the end of the Apartheid
government, South Africa became a Constitutional Democracy that holds elections every five
years – currently in its fifth administration. South Africa has been enjoying a positive
investment climate with a favourable credit rating. Recently, the country has been facing a
negative outlook that left the rating at just a few notches above the point where it loses
investment grade. According to the Corruption Perception Survey by Transparency
International, South Africa is ranked 72 out of 175 countries. In the continent, it follows
Botswana, Cape Verde, Seychelles, Rwanda, Mauritius, Lesotho, Namibia and Ghana.
Unfortunately, the country’s corruption index has declined compared to six years ago.

South Africa has also declared itself as a developmental state. It seeks to change the lives of
the people, particularly vulnerable groups for the better. In terms of household surveys, from
2002 to 2012, the percentage of households with access to electricity increased from 77 to 85,
access to water from 85 to 90, vulnerability to hunger decreased from 24 to 11 percent of the
households and 29 to 13 percent of the population (Table 2). Access to assets, such as cell
phones increased from 38 to 90 percent, while TV access increased from 59 to 80 percent.
Inequality is still an issue (Chitiga et al, 2014).

The economy has grown by 3,4 percent in GDP from 2002 to 2012. The South African growth
rate has been generally linked to and lagging the global growth, with a few instances when it
over-performed compared to the rest over the past 10 years (periods being early 2000s and mid
2000s).



8
Table 2:        Trends amongst Households (% of Households)
                                                         2002      2006      2007      2008      2012      2013
     Number of Households (000s)                          11 013    12 476    12 901   133 351    14 631    15 107
                    Occupy formal dwellings (fully
                                                            53.1                          68.5      54.5      54.9
                    owned)
    Housing         Occupy informal dwellings                13       14.5       15       14.1      13.9      13.6
                    Government Housing subsidy
                                                             5.5       9.4       8.8      11.2       8.2
                    received (all types)
    Sanitation      Bucket toilet/ none                     12.3       8.4       7.8       7.6       5.3       5.1
    Electricity
                    Connected to the mains                  77.1      80.7       82       81.9      85.3      85.4
    supply
                    Cooking: paraffin/wood                  35.5       30        28        36       19.4      17.3
    Energy sources Lighting:               electricity
                                                            75.7      81.3      82.5      83.1       87       88.9
                    (main/generator)
    Refuse
                    By Municipality                         58.3      62.2      62.1      60.8       64       64.8
    removal
    Water           Piped/tap water in the dwelling         84.9      88.9      89.5      88.8      90.8      89.9
                    Vulnerability      to     hunger:
                                                            23.8      11.7      10.8      13.3      11.2      11.4
                    households
    Food
                    Vulnerability      to     hunger:
                                                            29.3      14.4      13.7      15.9      13.1      13.4
                    population
                    Partially owned                         15.5      10.5       9.8      12.4      11.1      11.5
                    Fully owned                             52.9      59.2      57.5      61.4      54.5      54.9
    Assets          Radio                                   80.8      79.7      79.9      80.1
                    Television                              59.3      66.9        67      72.4      79.5      80.2
                    Cell phone                              37.6      69.7      73.7      79.1                94.8
    Social security Receiving at least one grant            30.1                                    29.5
Source: General household survey (2002 to 2013)



While still facing developmental challenges, it also displays attributes of a developed economy.
According to Figure 1 the main sectors to the economy are the secondary and tertiary sectors.
The Finance, real estate and business services sector (at one fifth of the GDP), is the main
contributor to the South African economy that has been making SA a leading economy in the
continent. The Wholesale, retail and motor trade, catering and accommodation (16 percent)
and manufacturing (12 percent) contribute just under one third of the economy’s output. These
three sectors are also the driver of South Africa’s presence in the rest of the continent.

The primary sectors have been declining in general. South Africa’s economic position has
been anchored by mining and minerals. The discovery of gold and diamonds in the 19th and
18th century propelled the economic development and attracted other sectors. Recently, the
contribution of mining as a driver has been boosted by the exploration of platinum. South
Africa is one of the leading mining countries in the world; in gold, diamond and platinum. The
growth in income from mining has contributed to the growth and development of other sectors
such as general government services, electricity, gas and water services, as well as other service
sectors.




9
                          6%   2%                            Agriculture, forestry and fishing
                 6%                      9%
                                                             Mining and quarrying

                                                             Manufacturing
                                               12%
     16%                                                     Electricity, gas and water

                                                             Wholesale, retail and motor trade,
                                                 3%          catering and accommodation
                                                             Transport, storage and
                                                             communication
                                                             Finance, real estate and business
                                                             services
                                              16%            General government services

           21%                                               Central government

                                    9%                       Personal services



Figure 1: Sector share of Gross Domestic Product in 2012
Source: Stats SA (2014)



The agricultural sector has been losing its relative importance. Agriculture now
contributes only 2.5 percent to the GDP as compared to about 9 percent for the mining sector
and 12 percent of manufacturing and 21 percent of Finance, real estate and business services.
Over time, other sectors that include mostly tertiary industries, increased from about 50 percent
in the 1990s to about 60 percent in 2012. In the 10 years under review, the contribution of
these sectors increased by 5 percent. During the same period the contribution of the agricultural
sector dropped from about 4 percent in the 1990s to about 2.5 percent by 2012.

While other sectors grew at a faster rate over the past decade growth in the agricultural sector
was below the national average. From 2000 to 2013, the sector grew by only 1.7 percent
compared to the national average of 3.4 percent. Over the past five years, however, the sector
grew by a mere 0.5 percent in the past five years.




10
Table 3:     Average Annual growth Rate in GDP (%) by Sector
 Sector                             2000 - 2013                2008-2013
 Agriculture*                       1.7                        0.5
 Mining*                            0                          -0.1
 Manufacturing*                     2.3                        0.1
 Electricity*                       1.4                        0.1
 Construction                       6.6                        2.3
 Trade Sectors                      3.4                        2.1
 Transport & Communication          4.4                        1.7
 Financial Services                 5.4                        2.3
 Personal Services                  2.7                        2.1
 General Government                 2.7                        2.6
 TOTAL                              3.4                        1.6
Source: Stats S.A in Econometrix (2014)
Notes: * Export oriented sectors




2.1.2 Key Features of the Agricultural Sector in South Africa
Figure 2 shows that in inflation adjusted terms gross value of agricultural production grew by
2.8 percent annually since 1991/92. The aggregate gross value of production increased from
R90 797 million in 1991/92 to R117 922 million in 2001/02. From here it increased by 30
percent to reach R153 334 million in 2012/13. The share of livestock products varied between
about 40 percent of the total value of production and 51 percent over this period.




            R million (2010)
 180,000
              Livestock
 160,000
              Horticulture
 140,000
              Field crops
 120,000
 100,000
  80,000
  60,000
  40,000
  20,000
       -




Figure 2: Gross value of agriculture: trends in constant prices
Source: DAFF (2014b)




11
Until 1982, the share of field crops was consistently higher than animal products. By 1991/92,
the share of livestock products increased to 48 percent with field crops decreasing to 28 percent.
In 2001/02, the three sectors were contributing almost equally to the gross value of agricultural
production. This change in relative contribution to the value of production is as a result of a
government supported initiative to switch marginal arable areas to planted pastures and the
growth in demand for protein in response to growing incomes.

South Africa is a net exporter of agricultural products. Since 2002 agricultural imports have
increased at a much faster rate than agricultural exports, thus reducing the surplus on
agricultural trade. In inflation adjusted terms agricultural exports increased from R44.3 billion
in 2002 to R60.8 billion in 2013, while agricultural imports increased from R25.9 billion to
R48.1 billion. South Africa is a member of the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) and
the SACU’s trade patterns have changed slightly over the past decade. Wine, citrus fruit (fresh
or dried) and grapes (fresh or dried) have always been among the top five export commodities
over the years. Export of apples (pears and quinces) and maize replaced sugar and preserved
fruit and nuts in the top 5 category. Imports of rice, wheat and palm oil have been among the
top 5 agricultural imports over the years. Other meat (and edible offal of poultry) and soybean
oil-cake replaced tobacco and preparations of bread, jelly powders and other food.

Table 4 shows that in terms of trading destinations, The Netherlands, UK, Zimbabwe and
Mozambique were the top five agricultural export destinations over the decade with the USA
replaced by Angola. South Africa is thus shifting its export focus to Africa. Argentina, Brazil,
and the UK have been among the top five countries from whom South Africa imports with
China and The Netherlands replacing the US and Australia. The UK and Netherlands are both
among the top five destinations of agricultural exports and origins of agricultural imports. The
US has declined in the rank in both trade arrangements.

Table 4:     Top Five Agricultural traded commodities and partners for SACU
 2002                                                   2012
 Export (R 000)                Import (R 000)           Export (R 000)             Imports (R 000)
 Top 5 Traded Agricultural Commodities
 Wine               3 000 144 Rice            1 253 927 Citrus fruit      7 389 059 Rice          5 623 632
 Sugar              2 280 446 Maize           1 117 243 Wine              5 983 690 Wheat         3 952 439
 Citrus fruit       2 274 276 Wheat             971 090 Grapes            4 079 450 Meat          3 520 869
 Grapes             1 616 337 Palm oil          758 428 Apples,…          3 905 191 Palm oil      3 342 531
 Preserved fruit               Tobacco                  Maize                       Soybean oil-
                    1 352 210                   657 105                   3 258 965               2 177 261
 & nuts                                                                             cake
 Sub-Total         10 523 413                 4 757 793                  24 616 355              18 616 732
 Total             25 887 894                15 162 615                  55 187 993              53 071 055
 Top 5 trading Partner Countries
 UK                 3 294 189 Argentina       1 937 141 Netherlands       5 647 459 Argentina      6 772 430
 Netherlands        2 360 093 US              1 435 854 UK                4 857 472 China          4 511 353
 US                 1 443 402 Brazil          1 044 149 Zimbabwe          4 794 159 Brazil         4 337 400
 Mozambique         1 362 811 UK                966 834 Mozambique        2 818 405 UK             3 108 418
 Zimbabwe           1 329 965 Australia         917 259 Angola            2 292 586 Netherlands    2 843 880
 Sub-Total          9 790 460                 6 301 237                  20 410 081               21 573 481
 Total             25 887 894                15 162 615                  55 187 993               53 071 055
Source: DAFF (2014b)



12
While agriculture’s relative contribution to the GDP is declining, it is still relevant in food
security and employment. In 2007 the number of employees and domestic workers on
commercial farms were estimated at 773.9 thousand people, a decrease from 921.7 thousand
people in 2002. According to the StatsSA’s Quarterly Labour Force Survey workers in
Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry and Fishing was 661 thousand by 2012.

    2.2 PUBLIC FINANCE

Emerging from Apartheid that excluded the majority of the population from benefiting from
the wealth; for the past 20 years, South Africa has taken a position to apply prudent measures
in the management of the public resources. The State receives a significant share of revenue
through taxes — and has used the resources to realise the developmental state vision by
maintaining and improving infrastructure and social development (education, health, housing
and social grants).

Dependence of public finance on tax as a major revenue source has generally created stability
and has pushed the Government revenue collection system to be more effective. Over the past
20 years, in particular the past 10 years, the revenue collection of government has been stepped
up by expanding the revenue base and adding enhanced new collection methods.

The major origins of the tax revenue are from the personal income, company and value added
tax, which depend on the economic activity. These sources are heavily dependent on the
performance of the economy. When the economic activity slows down, employment declines,
company profits and margins narrow and consumer spending is lower. There is thus a
continued effort to balance the revenues and spending between the public and private sector by
keeping private sector active in economic activities and negotiating policies, and creating
efficiencies in revenue collection.

The other revenue sources, such as those from the SACU custom pool are insignificant as the
current formula gives a disproportionally high share to the smaller countries of the Union (such
as Swaziland, Lesotho, Namibia and Botswana).

In view of restricted economic development and slow growth government may start reducing
its social spending. This is in the event the increase in revenues gets constraints. However,
there seems to be hope for further areas to tap for additional revenues3.

Realising impossibility to demarcate equal wealth and solve regional inequality through
equitable distribution of national revenue, the FFC advises national and provincial legislature
on equitable shares and revenue sharing (De Visser, 2014).

The impact of revenue allocation complicated by centralised bargaining system and
decentralised provincial budgeting system. Provinces are responsible for service delivery in



3
      Check SARS Strategies and budget framework.

13
sectors relevant to SERs (Education, health, social services) yet they only raise 3 percent of
revenue, with the rest coming from national government (Jagwath & Soltau, 2014)

2.3 AGRICULTURAL SECTOR ADMINISTRATION

The agricultural sector is led by the Ministry of Agriculture and at provincial level through the
Members of the Executive Council. At both national and provincial level it is further served
through State Owed Entities (SOE).

2.3.1 Ministry of Agriculture
The Ministry of Agriculture of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry (MAFF) has its national
offices in Pretoria. In line with the Constitution, Provincial Ministries of Agriculture are found
in the nine provinces.

Under the Director General of DAFF there are nine branches for Corporate Services,
Stakeholder Relations and Legal Services; Policy, Planning and Monitoring & Evaluation;
Economic Development, Trade and Marketing; Food Security and Agrarian Reform;
Agriculture Production, Health and Food Security; Forestry and Resources Management;
Marine Fisheries and Coastal Management; each headed by a Deputy-Director General. Below
the Deputy Director General are 24 Chief-Directorate headed by a Chief Director. Below the
chief directors are the technical functions headed by a director.

The Provincial offices of the Department of Agriculture are located in major provincial
cities and capitals. The provinces execute agricultural functions in terms of Schedule 6 of the
SA Constitution (Annexure 5). Provinces are a separate sphere of government with a full
complement of other services or departments such as health, education, treasury etc. The
Provincial ministries of agriculture are led by the Minister of Executive Council (MEC) and
the head of department.

The provincial offices do not necessarily mirror the national ministry and national
department at national level. In some provinces the functions of agriculture are combined
with that of economic affairs, environmental affairs, etc. The provincial departments were
formed in 1995 from the former Agricultural Development Institutes and amalgamated with
the former homeland administrations for agriculture. At local government level, government
also provides for both District and Local municipalities.

Provincial departments of agriculture are subdivided into regional or district offices located in
major centres or towns. The Directorates of Veterinary Services and Animal Husbandry
operate livestock advisory centres in all regional offices. The advisory centres provide handling
instruments, while the vaccines are available at the cooperatives. Agricultural Service Centres
have also been established in various parts of the country to assist farmers with extension
services. The centres generally provide agricultural information and advice. They sometimes
coordinate the provision of animal feed and production inputs (fertilisers and seeds),
particularly during difficult years.


14
Regions or districts are further subdivided into extension wards in which village level technical
staff are stationed to interface with farmers and other key stakeholders more frequently. The
number of extension areas in each district depends on the size and farming population. The
extension officers are generally trained for two to three years at agricultural colleges. The
assistant extension officers would have a matric or junior certificate.

2.3.2 MAFF Establishment
MAFF at national level has about 6245 staff (2011), of whom about 2632 (or 42 percent)
are professionally qualified, experienced specialists, middle managers, skilled technical and
academically qualified workers, junior management, supervisors and foremen (Annexure 6).
These are trained in various agricultural disciplines of agronomy, livestock, husbandry,
economics, extension, agricultural engineering, veterinary, services soil conversion, land use
etc. The unskilled, semi-skilled and support staff include drivers, messengers, cleaners etc.

2.3.3 Major Support Programmes
MAFF is undertaking the typical functions to provide public goods to the agricultural
sector. It provides vaccinations, maintains fences and regulates livestock movement to control
animal diseases, engages in research through the Directorate of Research and Innovation – and
the Agricultural Research Council. Staff in the local areas provides technical advice to farmers.

There are many support programmes emanating from other ministries, such as roads, housing,
water, dams and infrastructure. In addition to the routine public functions, MAFF also
maintains special support schemes, as described briefly below. The support schemes provide
private goods to farmers and consist mainly of direct and indirect subsidies, infrastructure
support and or inputs.

Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme (CASP)
Soon after attaining democracy in 1994, the Department of Agriculture (now, Department of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries) attached greater importance to delivering effective
agricultural support services to the agricultural community, particularly previously
disadvantaged subsistence, emerging and commercial farmers with the vision to have a united
and prosperous agricultural sector in South Africa.

Policy reforms formulated in the White Paper on Agriculture (DoA, 1995), the BATAT
document, the Strauss Commission Report into the Provision of Rural Financial Services and
the Strategic Plan for South African Agriculture (DoA, 2001) reshaped the agricultural sector
over the years and resulted in inter alia:

    the termination of a range of agricultural services and grants, largely due to the deregulation
     of agriculture and the virtual collapse of support services in communal areas; and
    a growing backlog between access to land and the delivery of services as the government’s
     land reform programme gained momentum through redistribution and restitution (DoA,
     2001).



15
Many reforms were implemented through the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development
Strategy (ISRDS), the Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development sub-programme
(LRAD), the Integrated Food Security and Nutrition Programme (IFSS) and the National
LandCare Programme. To enable the beneficiaries of land reform access to agricultural support
and service delivery, the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme (CASP) was
introduced in 2004.

CASP aims to provide post-settlement support to targeted beneficiaries of land redistribution
and reform, previously disadvantaged producers, and farmers who acquired land through
private means and who are engaged in value adding enterprises.

The conceptualization of CASP was based on the outcome of the investigation of the Strauss
Commission, which recommended financial “sunrise” subsidies, and the adoption of a
“sunrise” package to support the beneficiaries of the land reform programme requiring finance.
The package would include a graded entry to repayment, a flexible repayment system, a
discount subsidy for timely repayment, and a minimalist insurance scheme.

CASP was also meant to close the gap created when the Agricultural Credit Board (ACB)
closed down - when access to formal credit for smallholder producers became even more
difficult.

CASP support (services) are organised according to six ‘pillars’ (Department of Agriculture,
2004) as follows:

     a)   Information, knowledge and management;
     b)   Technical advice and assistance;
     c)   Marketing and business development;
     d)   Training and capacity building;
     e)   On- and off-farm infrastructure; and
     f)   Financial and input support.

The target population for CASP services are identified as

     a) the hungry (to improve food security);
     b) previously disadvantaged subsistence, emerging and commercial farmers (to reduce
        poverty and increase incomes); and
     c) entrepreneurs to establish agribusinesses to increase sustainable employment.

Since its inception, CASP has supported about 387 000 beneficiaries, with a total budget spend
of R5.8 billion from inception to 2012/13. This resulted in the programme assisting a total of
about 6 098 projects. According to DAFF (2012), the budget allocation for CASP for 2011/12
was R1.029 billion for 588 projects and 36 504 beneficiaries. This translates to an average
allocation of R1.75 million per project and R28 226 per beneficiary (Department of
Performance Monitoring and Evaluation, 2013).



16
Ilima / Letsema
The mandate of the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF) is to lead and
support sustainable agriculture (including forestry and fisheries) and food security for all South
Africans. This is driven through ensuring rural economic development, job creation and the
sustainable use of natural resources. The Ilima Letsema funding mechanism was initiated by
the Department in the 2008/9 financial year with specific objectives targeting specific areas
such as the reduction of poverty through increased food production initiatives.

The primary aim of the intervention is to address the triple challenges of poverty,
unemployment, and inequality through increased food production for vulnerable households
with the emphasis on women and youth as well as smallholder farmers; and ensuring that the
surplus production has a market, thus increasing the incomes of these households and farmers.

The intervention targets households, subsistence and smallholder farmers, who are supported
through the provision of starter packs, production inputs and mechanization services. It also
invests in infrastructure that will unlock the agricultural potential of the relevant areas, e.g. the
revitalization of irrigation schemes.

Since its inception in 2008/9, a total of R1.236 billion was allocated for the intervention, of
which R1.201 billion has been spent by provinces up to the end of the 2012/13 financial year.
In 2009/10, National Treasury approved the funding for the Ilima Letsema intervention and it
was voted as a schedule 5 grant under the Division of Revenue Act (DORA). The funds are
transferred and administered by provinces according to the set conditions as required by the
Act.

Microfinance institution of South Africa
The Micro Agricultural Financial Institutions of South Africa (MAFISA) is the state’s primary
instrument for offering production and small equipment loans to smallholder farmers. The
Commission of Inquiry into the Provision of Rural Financial Services of 1996 (Strauss
Commission) found that the supply of financial services to rural communities at the time was
both inadequate and expensive (Strauss Commission, 1996) and recommended the
establishment of a rural financial system that is demand-led, draws on existing retail networks
such as the Post Bank, and that the state should not provide loans directly to the public
(Presidency, 2014). This resulted in the closure of the Agricultural Credit Board in 1997 that
historically provided loans below market rates to white farmers who could not access credit
through retail banks, other commercial institutions, and the Land and Agriculture Development
Bank (Land Bank, 2011).

By 2003, there was consensus within the state that the agriculture sector was underfunded and
that financial services to smallholder farmers remained inadequate, particularly production
credit.

MAFISA was designed as an independent public development finance institution (separate
legal entity) with dedicated staff at national and local levels offering a range of services .
Smallholder farmers would access financial services via the diverse financial intermediaries

17
that are accredited by DAFF and agricultural extension officers would assist in vetting potential
loan applicants and offer loan recipients technical assistance. This approach would facilitate
“crowding the market” and R1 billion was made available for MAFISA from the Agricultural
Debt Management Account of the former Agricultural Credit Board. MAFISA was to:

     1. Facilitate balanced geographical distribution of rural finance capacity and flows in
        accordance with the distribution of demand for such finance.
     2. Reduce the cost of funds for retail lenders in the agricultural sector and hence the cost
        of finance to end users on a basis which is sustainable at the required scale in the long
        term.
     3. Increase outreach by stimulating the expansion of existing and/or the creation of new
        retail lending capacity in the rural areas through appropriate support programmes,
        incentives and funding programmes.
     4. Provide an effective and efficient agency service to Government for the management
        of Government initiated/funded programmes directly related to MAFISA core business
        functions.
     5. Enhance the formulation; implementation, coordination and monitoring of agricultural
        credit policy.

MAFISA was piloted between July 2005 and December 2007 to test the implementation
approach and determine the acceptability through existing structures (Provincial Development
Finance Institutions (PDFI) and the Land Bank). In the Eastern Cape, (OR Tambo District) the
Eastern Cape Rural Finance Corporation (ECRFC) retailed MAFISA loans while the Land
Bank acted as the financial intermediary in KwaZulu Natal (Umkhanyakude District) and
Limpopo (Sekhukhune District) provinces (Presidency, 2014).

The MAFISA pilot offered only two credit products to smallholder farmers i.e. production and
small equipment loans. The maximum loan value was R100 000 per person. The financial
intermediaries were allowed to lend at an interest rate of 8 percent, with a 1 percent agency fee
to the MAFISA Fund at Land Bank and the remaining 7 percent of the interest collected to
cover the costs of retail lending. All interest accrued on non-disbursed funds resided with
MAFISA (Presidency, 2014). The first loan was disbursed in December 2005.

In 2009 the pilot was expanded into a larger roll-out to include nine financial intermediaries.
This extended MAFISA’s reach nationally and to diverse commodity producers, development
finance institutions (DFI), and private retailers. The loan amount per individual was raised to
R500 000 per person. To date MAFISA remains a programme within the Department of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF) and not a separate institution (or instituted within
the Land Bank’s Development Finance Unit).

2.3.4 State Owned Entities
Four major state-owned entities have been in existence as part of the agricultural support
system. These provide additional support to farmers with a more focused mandate and less
bureaucratic processes.


18
The Agricultural Research Council (ARC) was established by the Agricultural Research Act
86 of 1990 (as amended) and is the principal agricultural research institution in South Africa.
It is a schedule 3A public entity in terms of the Public Finance Management Act 1 of 1999, as
amended by Act 29 of 1999. The objectives of the ARC are conducting of research,
development and technology transfer in order to: promote agriculture and industry; contribute
to a better quality of life; facilitate natural resource conservation; and alleviate poverty. In
accordance with the need to focus on national development priorities, the ARC conducts
agricultural research and development and drives technology development and dissemination.

The organisation performs its functions throughout South Africa and beyond its borders
through the following programmes:

        Crop production, improvement and protection;
        Animal health, production and improvement;
        Natural resources management;
        Mechanisation and engineering;
        Agro-processing, food technology and safety;
        Smallholder agricultural development;
        Agricultural economics and commercialisation; and,
        Training and extension.

Onderstepoort Biological Products (OBP), corporatized in the year 2000 under the
Onderstepoort Biological Products Incorporation Act, 1999 *Act of 1999, is a South African
state owned animal vaccine manufacturing company with mandate to prevent and control
animal diseases that impact food security, human health and livelihoods. The mandate is
delivered through continued development of innovative products and efficient manufacturing
that ensures vaccine affordability and accessibility through varied distribution channels.

The objective of the corporatization was to create an environment that is favorable for the
organization to build capacity in manufacturing technologies, infrastructure and the
development of new products; the critical success factors for financial viability and
sustainability. Over the past 14 years, OBP has been involved in the prevention and control of
animal diseases in South Africa, Africa and the world. In its 3-year strategic plan (OBP
Strategic Plan 2009-2013), the vision is to be a global biotech manufacturer and provider of
animal health products underpinned by a skilled, innovative and passionate team. The mission
is to translate science into biological product, knowledge and technology resulting in improved
animal and human health, food security and safety for all stakeholders. Basically, OBP exists
to prevent and control animal diseases that impact food security, human health and livelihood.
The company’s total budget for 2011/12 was R146.5 million.

The Land and Agricultural Development Bank of South Africa (Land Bank) has been the
leading agricultural financier in South Africa since its inception in 1912. Land Bank offers
tailor made financial services to established and emerging farmers. The Land Bank does not
receive any financial subsidy from the government, but gets its money from the money markets.
It competes with other financial institutions to lend money from the markets which it then lends

19
to clients at market related interest rates. However, because Land Bank does not pay tax and
dividends to the government, it uses the money that could have been used in those instances to
support development. Stressing the need for the Bank to serve a much broader spectrum of
clients, the Strauss Commission Report also emphasized that rural development should not be
based on a scaled down version of traditional commercial farming, but on far-reaching
innovation. This has involved the development of unique products to provide world-class
service and delivery at competitive rates.

Land Bank recognizes that as an institution it may not always directly provide all the elements,
as some are not in its competence, but it will seek out partners and create alliances to ensure
that collectively, the key ingredients that a farmer requires to be successful are delivered. The
alliances and partnership, entered into, will ensure delivery on the most important aspects for
emerging farmers' success, which are land, capacity/skills, markets and financial resources.

Since its inception in 1912, Land Bank has undergone various phases of transformation. With
recommendations of the 1997 Strauss Commission's report, Land Bank has a new mandate-to
de-racialise the agricultural sector and bring onboard farmers from previously marginalized
groups to the mainstream of South Africa's agricultural sector.

The National Agricultural Marketing Council (NAMC) was established in terms of the
Marketing of Agricultural Products (MAP) Act No. 47 of 1996, as amended by Act No 59 of
1997 and Act No. 52 of 2001. NAMC provides strategic advice to the Minister of Agriculture,
Forestry and Fisheries on the marketing of agricultural products. The work of the NAMC is
aligned to the four strategic objectives as set out in Section 2 of the MAP Act, 1996 namely;

        to increase market access for all market participants;
        to promote the efficiency of the marketing of agricultural products;
        to optimize export earnings from agricultural products; and
        to enhance the viability of the agricultural sector.

The council’s total budget for 2011/12 was R32,5 million

Perishable Product Export Control Board (PPECB) constituted and mandated in terms of
the PPEC Act, No 9, of 1983, is an independent service provider of quality certification and
cold chain management services for producers and exporters of perishable food products. Its
services reduce risk for the producers and exporters of these products. PPECB has been
delivering valuable services to the perishable products industry by enhancing the credibility of
the South African Export Certificate and by supporting the export competitiveness of South
Africa’s perishable products industries since 1926.

PPECB also delivers inspection and food safety services as mandated by the Department of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries under the APS Act, No.119 of 1990. PBECB presence in
the export industry is further enhanced by its approval as 3rd country inspection authority
through the EU 1580/2001 standard. PPECB controls all perishable exports from South Africa,
the value of which is around R20 billion a year. PPECB employs more than 300 people, who

20
deal with more than 200 products and 500 varieties. There are 50 service types, over 30 offices
in 11 production regions, at more than 1,500 locations. The company’s total budget for
2011/12 was R146.5 million.

The South African Veterinary Council is the regulatory body for the veterinary and para-
veterinary professions in South Africa and has a statutory duty to determine scientific and
ethical standards of professional conduct and education. The vision is to be a representative
organization of the veterinary and para-veterinary professions, promoting the health and well-
being of all peoples of South Africa through the promotion of animal health, production and
well-being.

The South African Veterinary Council seeks, through the statutes of the Veterinary and Para-
Veterinary Professions Act, 1982 to serve the interests of the people of South Africa by
promoting competent, efficient, accessible and needs-driven service delivery in the animal
health care sector; protect the health and well-being of animals and animal populations; protect
and represent the interests of the veterinary and para-veterinary professions; regulate the
professional conduct of the veterinary and para-veterinary professions; and set and monitor
standards of both education and practice for the veterinary and para-veterinary professions.

Ncera Farms is a schedule 3B company in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
(Act No. 1 of 1999). The company has the mandate to perform development functions on
identified land administered by the DAFF. The company’s total budget for 2011/2012 was
R4.2 million.

2.3.5 Farmers’ Associations
South African farmers are highly organised, though along racial lines. At grassroots level,
farmers are members of their local farmers’ associations and commodity groups, through which
they liaise with local officials to address local agricultural issues. The local farmers’
associations delegate representatives to district or provincial agricultural unions — which liaise
with provincial authorities to address issues affecting farmers in the province. The provincial
agricultural unions in turn send representatives to the national unions. Farmers may voluntarily
be part of organised agricultural structures through local farmers’ associations, cooperatives or
commodity organisations. The national level associations and unions include Agri SA,
National African Farmers’ Union of South Africa (NAFU SA), TAU SA and African Farmers
Association of South Africa (AFASA).

                 SECTORAL PERSPECTIVE OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ON
                 AGRICULTURE


3.1 TOTAL PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ON AGRICULTURE

The total South African agricultural expenditure, inclusive of agriculture, forestry and fisheries,
has increased almost threefold in nominal terms in the 11 years from 2003/4 to 2013/14. This
represents an annual increase of 10.8 percent from R5.77 billion in 2003/4 to R16.97 billion in

21
2013/14. From Figure 3 public expenditure on agricultural has grown at a rate of 15.0 percent
per year until 2008/9, stagnated briefly for two years before resuming to growth at 8.9 percent
per year to 2013/14. The initial phase follows on the adoption of the agricultural sector strategy
in 2001.

           R million
18,000
16,000
14,000
12,000
10,000
  8,000
  6,000
  4,000
  2,000
     -




Figure 3: Total expenditure on agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Source: see text
Notes: Inter-institutional transfers from DAFF to SOE's included in the analysis and provincial departments
       were accounted for to avoid double-count


After accounting for inflation using a GDP deflator with a 2005 base year the expenditure trend
is less impressive as shown in Figure 4. The real agricultural public expenditure increased by
4.2 percent annually from R9.33 billion in 2003/4 to R14.23 million in 2013/14. Except for a
brief decrease of R1.51 billion in 2010/11 expenditure has remained stagnant at the 2009/10
levels and reached R14.27 billion in 2013/14.

Starting in 2008/9 and accompanied by the austerity measures introduced to head the
international financial crises the main agricultural support programs were restructured to
introduce the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Program (CASP). This led to a stronger
focus on agricultural rural development and farmer settlement and financing. These changes
coincided with restructuring of the DAFF and the transfer of Forestry and Fisheries to the
portfolio of the Ministry of Agriculture.




22
           R million (2010)
16,000

14,000

12,000

10,000

  8,000

  6,000

  4,000

  2,000

     -



Figure 4: Total agricultural public expenditure (R billion 2010 value)
Source: See text
Notes: Deflated using the GDP Deflator with base year 2005. Inter-institutional transfers from DAFF to SOE's
       and provincial departments were accounted for to avoid double-count




3.2 SHARE AND CONTRIBUTION OF AGRICULTURE SECTOR

The issue of total agricultural budget is contentious and critical when thinking about the overall
economy, the importance of food and its contribution to the overall economy, and associated
bias against rural sectors such as agriculture in the budget and resource prioritisation. In South
Africa, the position of agriculture is rarely calibrated to other economic sectors in policy and
budgetary terms. However, the agricultural data are frequently presented along with other
economic indicators. When it comes to the budget process it is viewed in isolation or absolute
terms. This study attempts to integrate the economic importance and contribution of
agriculture with the budgetary and thus policy attitude towards agriculture.

Figure 5 shows that the share of agriculture to GDP has declined from 2.65 percent of the South
African GDP to 2.18 percent in recent years. The share of government spending on agriculture
as a share of total government spending has increased from 1.75 percent in 2003/4 to 1.92
percent in 2008/9 from where it has decreased to an average of 1.67 in the recent three years.
This is far below the 10 percent target of the Maputo Declaration. However, one would expect
a loose degree of congruency between the share of the agricultural contribution to the economy
and its share in total government expenditure.




23
            Percent
     3.00

     2.50

     2.00

     1.50
                      Share of Agric Spending of Govt
                      Spending
     1.00
                      Share of Agric in GDP

     0.50

       -




Figure 5: Relative contribution of agriculture
Source: Stats SA (2014)



Given that the secondary and tertiary sectors in the South African economy are more developed
than in other African countries this target is not entirely valid for South Africa. It should be
noted that agriculture is largely driven by private activity, and private investment, hence it is
not surprising that at certain stages of economic development public spending on agriculture is
not as high a share of the sector contribution to GDP, as say social sectors such as health or
education.

This can be substantiated when public expenditure on agriculture in South Africa is viewed
over the long-run since 1910. Figure 6, panel a, shows the trend in the share of public
expenditure on agriculture and the contribution of the sector to the GDP of the country.
Liebenberg (2013) reports that during the first two decades after the establishment of the Union
of South Africa expenditure by the Departments of Agriculture fluctuated at fairly low levels
of around 4 to 6 percent (R214 to R599 million in inflation adjusted values) of total government
expenditure whilst agricultural contribution to the economy hovered around 18.3 percent. This
period was characterised by high levels of poverty and recessionary phases in the economy
(Lumby, 1990). Spurred by the depression and the subsequent drought and aided by the
changing fortunes of the gold mining sector government increased its levels of investment in
agriculture and rural infrastructure starting in FY 1933 — spending on agriculture increased
from 7.7 percent of total government expenditure in FY 1932 to 16.9 percent in FY1933,
slightly higher than the 12 percent average agricultural share of the economy for the 1930
decade. This investment largely took the form of subsidies aimed at soil and veld reclamation
interventions and subsidies on the transport of livestock and fodder to and from drought
stricken areas and marks the earliest steps in policy change to the era of industrialization of
farming in South Africa.



24
Panel a: Share of Agriculture in economy, vs Agricultural share of government
         expenditure
         Percent
30.0
                            Agric. share of GDP

25.0                        Agric. Spending Share
                            of Total Expenditure
20.0

15.0

10.0

  5.0

     -




Panel b: Agricultural expenditure as a share of RSA GDP
         Percent
 2.0
                                                                     Agric. spending share
 1.8
                                                                     of GDP
 1.6
 1.4
 1.2
 1.0
 0.8
 0.6
 0.4
 0.2
     -



Figure 6: Long-run trend in agricultural share of government spending and economic
          contribution, 1910-2013
Source: Liebenberg (2014)
Notes: Public expenditure by Agricultural Research Council, DAFF and the provincial departments of
       agriculture only.




With the outbreak of the Second World War spending on agriculture declined slightly, but in
FY1942 the share of government spending on agriculture again increased to reach 14.2 percent
(R5 674 million) in FY1947 — agricultural share of the economy averaged 12.6 for the 1940s
increasing to 15.4 for the 1950’s. From here spending on agriculture erratically decreased to
25
reach 2.2 percent of total government expenditure in FY1980 — with a 5.8 percent share of the
GDP in that year. The drought relief payments and subsidies paid to assist farmers in marginal
crop production areas to switch to livestock farming increased the share of public spending on
agriculture to 5.07 percent in FY 1981, which also mark the shift in policy development to the
phase of deregulation aimed at achieving ‘optimal production in agriculture’ (DAEM 1984).
From here the share of government spending on agriculture declined to reach 1.7 percent of
total government expenditure in FY 1994 (GDP share 4.9). The change to a fully democratic
dispensation in 1994 marked the change to a new era in policy development in agriculture.
With the closure of the control boards and the scrapping of the Agricultural Credit Board from
1996 to 1997 most of the support programs administered by them also ceased to exist and
spending on agriculture stagnated around 1.4 percent of total government spending during this
policy phase.

3.3 TOTAL AGRICULTURAL VS TOTAL GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE

The total South African agricultural budget ranged from R7.68 billion in 2002/3 to R18.14
billion in 2013/14 in relation to the total government expenditure, as shown in Figure 7, of
about R291.52 billion in 2002/3 and just over a trillion in 2013/14. This represents a slightly
more than twofold increase in agricultural public expenditure compared to a more than
threefold increase in total government expenditure. As a result the share of public spending on
agriculture has decreased over the study period from 2.64 percent in 2003/4 to 1.73 percent in
2013/14. The share has remained relatively stable at 2.11 percent from 2004/5 to 2008/9, but
decreased sharply in 2010/11 to a low of 1.60 percent before slightly recovering to 1.79 percent
in 2012/13.



            R Million (2010)                                      Agricultural share (%)
1,000,000                                                                                  3.0
  900,000           Total Government Spending
                    Total agric expenditure                                                2.5
  800,000
  700,000
                                                                                           2.0
  600,000
  500,000                                                                                  1.5
  400,000
                                                                                           1.0
  300,000
  200,000
                                                                                           0.5
  100,000
        0                                                                                  -




Figure 7: Total government expenditure vs share of agricultural public expenditure
Source: See text



26
As a share of the economy, spending on agriculture fluctuated between 0.24 percent and 0.56
percent during the first two decades since 1910. As shown in Figure 6, panel b, this increased
to an all-time high of 1.9 percent in 1933. The only time this level was approached again was
in 1947. Most of the peaks observed since then coincided with adverse weather or market
conditions. This metric reached its lowest level in 1995 when spending on agriculture
represented only 0.22 percent of the RSA economy. Today it hovers around 0.5 percent (if
spending by non-agricultural departments is included). According to Table 5 in most
developing countries and OECD countries this share averages between 1-2 percent of the GDP.
This indicates that the fiscal costs of agricultural policy relative to the size of the overall
economy are very low. South Africa is not prioritising agriculture sufficiently in its fiscal
policy.

Table 5:      Importance of agriculture – country comparison
                                                   Share           of   Share           of   Share          of
                                  Share       of   agricultural         agricultural         agricultural
  2010-2012                       agriculture      budget               budget               expenditure    to
                                  in GDP           expenditure in the   expenditure in the   national
                                                   national GDP         agricultural GDP     expenditure
  High income revenue countries
  Australia                       3.0%             0.3%                 10.0%
  Canada                          2.3%             0.5%                 22.0%
  UE                              2.3%             0.7%                 28.0%
  USA                             1.6%             0.7%                 46.0%
  Middle income countries
  Turkey                          13.0%            2.0%                 15.0%
  Mexico                          4.0%             0.7%                 18.0%
  Venezuela                       5.0%             0.5%                 12.0%
  China                           15.0%            1.2%                 8.0%
  Brazil                          9.3%             0.7%                 8.0%
  Russia                          6.0%             1.0%                 16.0%
  Ukraine                         11.6%            1.3%                 11.0%
  South Africa                    2.5%             0.5%                 22.4%                1.7%
  Low income countries
  Cameroon, 2012                  20.9%            0.9%                 4.1%
  Burkina Faso, 2004-2011         33.0%            2.7%                 8.2%
  Senegal, 2009                   13.7%            2.8%                 20.4%
  Cote d' Ivoire                  23.0%            0.6%                 2.5%
  Guinee, 2003-12                 22.0%            1.5%                 6.8%
  Uganda                          32.0%            1.5%                 4.7%
  Tanzania                        45.0%            1.2%                 2.7%
  Ethophia                        44.0%            2.7%                 6.1%
  Kenya                           29.0%            1.3%                 4.5%
  Togo                            41.0%            1.9%                 4.6%
Source: World Bank (2011)



Agriculturally related spending by other government departments has changed markedly since
the early half of the century. In the 1920s, for example, spending by non-agricultural
departments added the equivalent of 20 percent to the annual spending by the agricultural
departments (Union of South Africa 1922). Currently agricultural related spending by non-
agricultural departments is estimated at about 5.9 percent of spending by the agricultural


27
departments — inclusive of the provincial Departments of Agriculture and the Agricultural
Research Council (National Treasury, 2009).

The picture that is unfolding is that despite the strong growth in public spending on agriculture,
driven by the increased focus on support to farmer development and settlement the emphasis
of government spending has shifted toward support to the rest of the economy. Agriculture has
not been able to maintain its relative importance in government support. Stated differently,
this means that agriculture has been contributing more than is has been supported from public
funding.

3.4 AGRICULTURAL SPENDING INTENSITIES

The exact number of farmers involved in farming in South Africa varies according to the
definitions used. The agricultural censuses traditionally only focus on the larger commercial
farmers and completely exclude smaller farmers, especially black farmers in the communal
areas. Here the number of commercial farmers as identified in the Labour Force Surveys since
2000 is used as basis (StatsSA, 2014). The same is true for employment in agriculture.

The spending per farmer, or employee, presents a measure of the resources, services provided
to the individuals within the sector. Bearing in mind that the number of farmers has decreased
by 0.3 percent annually since 2002 and that the number employed in the sector by 4.6 percent,
one would expect that this measure would trend upward.

Figure 8 shows that in inflation adjusted terms public expenditure on agriculture per worker
has increased at 11.2 percent or about four percent faster than the spending per farmer. This is
as a result of the forty percent decrease in employment in the sector since 2002. The 9.9 percent
increase in spending per farmer represents a respectable increase in


          R'000 (2010)                                           per worker R'000 (2010)
  350                                                                                      30
               Commercial Farmers
  300          Workers                                                                     25
  250
                                                                                           20
  200
                                                                                           15
  150
                                                                                           10
  100

     50                                                                                    5

     -                                                                                     -




Figure 8: Spending intensity per farmer and workers
Source: See text

28
resources/investment available to individual farmers.

With the closure of the commodity control boards and the scaling down and eventual phasing
out of most support payments to farmers commercial farmers have adapted remarkably well to
this more competitive environment. However, this has in time resulted in a growth in farming
unit sizes and major cost cutting exercises, such reducing the number of workers employed and
a gradual switch to more mechanized farming. Given that the mandate of the departments has
expanded to now support subsistence farmers the intensities quoted here is misleading. The
exact number of these farmers remains an elusive number as no agricultural census has been
conducted since the introduction of the new democracy. The Population Census of 2011 found
that there are 2.8 million households involved in a farming activity, with the reason for doing
so still to be tested. According to the GHS of 2012, this number is about 2.6 million of which
1.7 million are involved in backyard gardening and only 214 000 are producing to sell for an
income. If the latter are considered to be commercial farmers, they represent about four times
as many commercial farmers as the 53 000 upon which the intensity ratio calculated here. If
so, then the level of spending on agriculture is woefully inadequate.




29
                    INSTITUTIONAL PERSPECTIVE OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ON
                    AGRICULTURE


4.1 EXPENDITURE BY THREE CATEGORIES OF INSTITUTIONS

The institutional arrangement of South Africa budget is based on three tiers of government;
national, provincial and, each with its own affiliated state owned entities. In this study only
the national departments, provincial departments of agriculture and national level SOEs are
included. The provincial level agencies and municipalities will need to be considered in a
further round of budget tracking.

Table 6 lists the institutions incorporated in this review, each with its associated agencies. The
DAFF which is responsible for general policy administration provides funding to state owned
entities such as the Agricultural Research Council, the Agricultural Marketing Council,
Onderstepoort Biological Products as well as the Perishable products Export Control Council.
Funding to the Land Bank are only included to the extent to which transfers/subsidies are made
to its operations, but since it is profit based its total expenditure are not considered to be public
expenditure and therefor excluded from the aggregates.

Table 6:      Institutions within each tier of government
 National Institutions                                    Provincial
 Department               of   Agricultural   Research    Eastern Cape
 Agriculture Forestry and      Council
 Fisheries
 Land Affairs (Land            National    Agricultural   Free State
 Reform For Agriculture)       Marketing Council
 Water Affairs (lack           Onderstepoort Biological   Gauteng
 agricultural specific data)   Products
                               Marine Living Resources    KwaZulu-Natal
                               Fund
                               Ncera Farms                Limpopo
                               Perishable      Products   Mpumalanga      Mpumalanga Agricultural
                               Export Control Board                       Development Corporation
                               Land Bank                  Northern Cape
                               Ncera Farms                North West
                               Marine Living Resources    Western Cape    Casidra
                               Fund


For national departments with agriculturally related programs only the programs that have a
direct agricultural focus were included. Water Affairs, although identified as important to
include, were not able to provide the study team with information.

For provincial level state owned agencies, involved in agricultural and rural development, it
was decided at the inception of the study that this would be excluded from the study. The
reason being that for most provinces the task of sourcing and then structuring their historic
expenditure data to fit the new harmonised provincial agricultural programs presented enough
of a challenge and that the provincial level agencies and local government programs should


30
wait for a further round of analysis. The impression was that the amounts spend through these
entities are not (perceived to be) sufficient to warrant the effort.

Figure 9, Panel a, shows the trends in spending of the three cohorts of institutions involved in
agricultural service delivery. After accounting for inter-institutional transfers, all three
institutional cohorts experienced an increase in expenditure with provincial departments
experiencing a higher rate of growth than national departments and State owned entities. The
national departments — net of transfers to the national agencies included in this study and the
provinces — showed a strong annual rate of growth of 18.0 percent from 2003/4 through to
2008/9 when austerity measures led to a decrease in expenditure of R1.25 billion. From
2010/11 it regained its growth in spending at 11.9 percent to date. National level SOE’s have
maintained experienced a growth of 9.2 percent during the years prior to 2008/9, improving to
10.3 percent since 2010/11. Over the full 11 year period national level SOEs experienced an
annual growth of 8.8 percent, compared to the 10.5 percent experienced by the national
departments.

The growth in expenditure by the provincial departments of agriculture was 11.3 percent
throughout the 11 year period since 2003/4. However, the growth rate up to 2008/9 was 13.9
percent annually followed by an 8.9 percent rate of growth from then on. This is lower than
the growth rate experienced by the national departments.

In inflation adjusted terms, Figure 9, Panel b, it is evident that State owned entities at national
level have only marginally improved their level of expenditure. For national departments the
growth occurred in the earlier part of the decade under review and they currently hover around
almost the same level of expenditure as 9 years ago. Provincial departments have experienced
a more persistent growth over the period, largely supported by the increases in conditional grant
transfers from the DAFF.




31
Panel a: Expenditure by institutional cohort (R billion)
           R million
12,000
                     National
10,000               Agencies
                     Provincial
  8,000

  6,000

  4,000

  2,000

     -




Panel a: Expenditure by institutional cohort (R billion – 2005)
          R million (2010)
 9,000
                 National
 8,000
                 Agencies
 7,000           Provincial
 6,000
 5,000
 4,000
 3,000
 2,000
 1,000
     -




Figure 9: Total agricultural expenditure by institutions
Source: This study
Notes: Transfer from the national Departments to provinces and SOE’s included in the analysis were deducted
       from the expenditure of the national departments.




4.1.1 National departments
The expenditure trends of the individual national departments have followed remarkably
different growth paths in the past decade (Figure 10). Stripped of transfer payments to
provincial departments expenditure by DAFF has grown at 5.1 percent per annum until 2007/8,

32
before decreasing by nearly R1 billion over the subsequent three years as the transfers under
CASP started to take prominence. From 2010/11 expenditure at DAFF renewed its growth by
6.6 percent per year and now fluctuates around the same level as nine years ago.

Transfers to the ARC and the NAMC — included in the expenditure data for DAFF —
represented about 24 percent of the expenditure of DAFF after accounting for conditional
grants to the provinces. Starting at 21 percent in 2003/4 and decreasing to 19 percent by
2009/10, however, the share of their transfers has increased to around 27 percent per year. This
phenomenon will be analysed in the following section.

Expenditure on the Land reform for agriculture by the Department of Land Affairs grew from
R0.7 billion in 2003/4 to slightly over R1.1 billion by 2006/7. It then tripled to R3.2 billion in
2008/9. Hit by the same austerity measures faced by all government departments, expenditure
on this program decreased by 40.8 percent over the subsequent two years before recovering to
roughly R2.5 billion per year since 2011/12.



         R million (2010)                                                              Percent
4,000                                                                                            40

3,500                                                                                            35

3,000                                                                                            30

2,500                                                                                            25

2,000                                                                                            20

1,500                                                                                            15
                                                                                DAFF
1,000                                                                                            10
                                                                                Land reform
  500                                                                                            5
                                                                                SOE Share
     -                                                                                           -




Figure 10: Expenditure by national departments
Source: This study
Notes: Transfer from the DAFF to provinces and SOE’s included in the analysis were deducted from the
       expenditure of the national departments.




4.1.2 State owned entities
The trend in expenditure by state owned entities is shown in Figure 11 to average around R1.2
billion per year during most of the period. Since 2011/12 it is increasing, however, this is as a
result of increased core support payments to the ARC and the NAMC rather than increasing its
expenditure from non-core funding sources. Whereas the Parliamentary Grant to the ARC

33
constituted about 58.6 percent of the ARC turnover during the first four years since 2003/4 its
dependence on core funding from the DAFF has increased to an average of 81.5 percent in the
recent five years. This is in contrast to its aim of achieving a 50:50 proportion between core
funding and external income.

As a science council the ARC is expected to generate additional income and to use its core
funding to funding as a strategic investment in science. This high dependence on PG is a
concern and may be indicative of an organisation that no longer competitive in the agricultural
R&D environment.

In contrast, the NAMC is not expected to generate additional income and is largely borne by
its core funding from the DAFF.



           R million (2010)
 1,400

 1,200

 1,000

     800

     600

     400

     200

       0



                         Core support          Additional income            Total Expenditure


Figure 11: Expenditure on agriculture by state owned entities
Source: This study
Notes: Only actual expenditure is of the ARC is included in the analysis and not its total income as its objective
       is not to make a profit.




4.1.3 Provincial departments of agriculture
In South Africa each province has its own department of agriculture which has a shared
competence under Schedule 6 of the Constitution with the DAFF over agriculture
(Annexure 5). Formed from the former regionally focussed Agricultural Development
Institutes these departments are primarily responsible for the development of the agricultural
sector within each province. Regulatory services, such as veterinary inspection services and
soil conservation, were transferred to the responsibilities of the former ADI’s to form the new


34
provincial administrations. Overall coordination is handled through technical working groups
between the national and provincial departments.

Figure 12 shows the aggregate spending by the provincial departments of agriculture since
2003.4. In inflation adjusted terms expenditure on agriculture by the provincial administrations
has grown by 4.6 percent per year from 2002/3 to date. From 2003/4 to 2009/10 the increase
was 7.5 percent per year, but over the past four years this slowed to only 0.3 percent per year.
An interesting feature is the increased role of conditional grants from the DAFF in the overall
expenditure of the provincial departments. Whereas conditional grants were less than 10
percent of overall provincial expenditure a decade ago, this has increased strongly to reach 14
percent by 2010/11. In 2011/12 this has increased to 20 percent and now fluctuates around 22
percent. In fact, expenditure by the provincial departments originating from allocations from
the provincial treasury has in recent years decreased by 2.5 percent per year since 2009/10.
This indicates a growing reliance by provincial departments on support from the national
government and that provincial treasuries are substituting provincial resources with transfers
from DAFF.



         R million (2010)                                                           Percent
 9,000                                                                                        25
 8,000
 7,000                                                                                        20

 6,000
                                                                                              15
 5,000
 4,000
                                                                                              10
 3,000
                                                                            Total
 2,000                                                                                        5
 1,000                                                                      Grant Share
     0                                                                                        0




Figure 12: Agricultural public expenditure by provinces
Source: This study



The relative share of expenditure on agriculture by provincial departments has shown little
change over the past 11 years. Figure 11, panels a to b, shows the relative share of each
province in the overall provincial expenditure on agriculture. The three main provinces
(Limpopo, Kwazulu-Natal, and Eastern Cape) has retained their position as the biggest
spenders, the relative position of provinces such as Northern Cape has increased significantly
in recent years.


35
Panel a: 2002/3                                       Panel b: 2008/9
            Western                                               Western
Northern
             Cape                                         North    Cape
 Cape
              5%                                          West      6%
  2%
                                                           9%
Mpumal         North                 Free        Northern
                          Eastern    State                                     Eastern
 anga          West        Cape                   Cape
                                      5%                                        Cape
  9%           11%         21%                     4%
                                                                                23%


                                                                                           Free
                                                                                           State
                           KwaZul                                                           6%
                           u-Natal                          Limpopo
           Limpopo                                                          KwaZul
                            15%       Gauteng                 17%                        Gauteng
             30%                                                            u-Natal
                                        2%       Mpumal                                    4%
                                                                             21%
                                                  anga
                                                  10%




Panel c: 2012/13
               Western
       North    Cape
        West     6%
         9%
Northern                 Eastern
 Cape                     Cape
  5%                      19%
                                         Free
                                         State
                                          6%



                         KwaZul
           Limpopo       u-Natal      Gauteng
             17%          23%
Mpumal                                  4%
 anga
 11%




Figure 13: Relative share of provinces in agricultural expenditure
Source: This study




4.2 TRANSFERS PAYMENTS AND SUPPORT

Much of the services provided to the sector by government are outsourced to other departments
(mainly at provincial level), public agencies, non-profit organizations, universities, foreign
institutions, and private organizations. Included in the transfer payments are support payments
(subsidies) to households, which may take the form of input subsidies/grants and compensation
for disaster relief (droughts, flood damage). Figure 14 show the trend in these types of transfers
for all institutions included in this review (panel a) and for agricultural departments and

36
agencies only (panel b). When including the Land Reform programme of the Department of
Land Affairs the top three types of transfers are public agencies and accounts (largely driven
by the agricultural holding account), provincial departments and offices and transfers to
households support payments for farmer settlement.



Panel a:               Total public expenditure on agriculture
             R million (2010)
 4,000
 3,500
 3,000
 2,500
 2,000
 1,500
 1,000
     500
      -



           Provinces            Agencies        Foreign          Municipalities   Non-profit
           Private              Public corp     Universities     Households


Panel b:               Agricultural departments only
             R million (2010)
 2,000
 1,800
 1,600
 1,400
 1,200
 1,000
   800
   600
   400
   200
     0



           Provinces            Agencies        Foreign          Municipalities   Non-profit
           Private              Public corp     Universities     Households


Figure 14: Transfers payments and support
Source: This study




37
As land administration and settlements are not typically regarded as part of what is understood
to be expenditure on agriculture, Panel b shows the trend in expenditure by the agricultural
departments and agencies only. Here the main transfers are transfers to provincial departments
by the DAFF, public agencies (mainly the ARC and the Agricultural Marketing Council), and
households followed by transfers to public corporations such as the Land Bank and
development corporations. Transfers to provinces show a distinct and strong growth over the
whole period, rising from third most important (7 percent) a decade ago to the largest (41
percent) type of transfer payments today. Transfers to the public agencies changed from being
the largest (60 percent) to the second largest (27 percent) although this has been increasing
steadily since 2005/6. The share of transfers to non-profit institution changed from 23 percent
in 2003/4 to only 2 percent today, whereas transfers to households increased from only two
percent a decade ago to 19 percent today.

The transfers between the DAFF, provincial departments and state owned agencies included in
this review represent a significant risk of double accounting. Figure 15 show the extent of the
transfer payments to these institutions since 2003/4. Starting at 11 percent of total expenditure
on agriculture (transfers excluded) this share has increased to 15 percent in 004/5 from where
it has in the past three years increased to 21 percent. This emphasises the need for analysts to
pay attention to this phenomena when analysing the investments made in agricultural service
provision.



         R million (2010)                                                               Percent
20,000                                                                                            25
18,000
16,000                                                                                            20
14,000
12,000                                                                                            15
10,000
 8,000                                   Total Expenditure, total transfers by cohort included    10
 6,000                                   Total Expenditure, total transfers by cohort excluded
 4,000                                   Share of expenditure                                     5
 2,000
     0                                                                                            -




Figure 15: Pattern of inter-institutional transfers
Source: This study




38
                PROGRAMME PERSPECTIVE OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ON
                AGRICULTURE


The previous sections looked at the total agricultural public expenditure in terms of how they
reflect policy and strategy through fiscal spending on agriculture. It was followed by the
analysis of institutional perspective that locates institutions implementing delivery of services.
This section analyses the expenditure pattern from the perspective of focal areas or
programmes. The programmes are in the main a reflection of strategies themselves. As
discussed in section 1, over the past 11 years there has been a number of restructuring processes
that led to fundamental changes to the programme structure for agricultural services at both
national and provincial tier of government. This presents a challenge to tracing the expenditure
patterns on these programmes in a synergistic manner. Using the proposed harmonized
programme structure discussed in section 1, about nine programmes were identified. Two of
these focus on forestry and fisheries and the remainder on agriculture and land reform. Here
the management and corporate services were aggregated as this relates better to the manner in
which the departments of agriculture manage its own affairs and thus better understood. This
then yields the following program structure:

-    Administration and Management
-    Production Support
-    Regulatory Services
-    Natural Resource Management
-    Farmer Support & Extension
-    Financing
-    Agricultural Economics

These seven programmes thus form the basis to analyse the focal areas of expenditure of
agricultural service delivery in aggregated form for the country.

5.1 SHARE AND TRENDS IN AGRICULTURAL PUBLIC EXPENDITURE BY PROGRAMMES

Figure 16 show that of the seven programmes presented here the two biggest programmes were
the Financing and the Farmer Support and Development (FSD) programmes. The expenditure
on farmer support and development has shown the strongest growth of all programs. The next
large program is the Administration programme. This programme includes the senior
management of the departments from the Minister through to DDG as well as corporate
services. Surprisingly, there are significant differences in the relative importance of this
program between the National institutions and the provincial departments. At national level
administration is the third largest program after Financing. At provincial level administration
represents the second largest programme — total administration cost at provincial level is three
times as much as the national departments in aggregate, or three quarters of the total
expenditure on administration in agriculture. This is a disconcerting statistic and raises the



39
question as to the cost of the pseudo federal basis for administrating public sector agricultural
service delivery under the new constitutional dispensation.

Next to the Financing program the Regulatory Services programme shows the next highest
growth per year and the fourth largest programme. A position it has maintained throughout the
period. The Natural Resource Management programme has also grown significantly over the
11 year period by 23.9 percent per year. It currently represents the fifth largest programme
followed by production support — the latter includes the expenditure by the Agricultural
Research Council.. The Agricultural Economics programme is a relatively small program, but
has increased fourfold over the past decade.



           R million (2010)                                                 R million (2010)
  3,000                                                                                        7,000

  2,500                                                                                        6,000

                                                                                               5,000
  2,000
                                                                                               4,000
  1,500
                                                                                               3,000
  1,000
                                                                                               2,000
     500                                                                                       1,000

       0                                                                                       0




           Admin        Production   Regulatory    NRM        AgEcon       FSD          Financing



Figure 16: Trends in the agricultural expenditure by programmes
Source: This study



Figure 15 shows the changing relativities in expenditure per programme. The largest
expenditure was on Financing with a 30 percent to 41 percent share of overall expenditure by
programme. The Farmer Support and Development programme (mostly extension support)
increased in importance from 24 percent to 32 percent today reflecting the change in policy
position to support farmer settlement. The remainder of the programs retained their relative
positions in terms of the share of expenditure on programs.




40
 2008/09                                             2003/04
                     AgEcon                                           AgEcon
                       1%                                               0%

                           Admin         Productio                           Admin      Productio
                            13%              n                                15%           n
                                            5%                                             7%

                                                          Financing
       Financing                  Regulator                 38%                  Regulator
         41%                         y
                                                                                    y
                                    9%
                                                                                   8%
                                                                                   NRM
                                              NRM
                                                                                    8%
                                               6%
                           FSD                                         FSD
                           25%                                         24%




 2013/14
                     AgEcon
                       1%

                              Admin      Productio
                               14%           n
                                            5%
         Financing
           30%
                                  Regulator
                                     y
                                    10%
                                    NRM
                                     8%

                     FSD
                     32%




Figure 17: Programme share of agricultural public expenditure (2003/4; 2008/9; 2013/14)
Source: This study




41
                  FUNCTIONAL PERSPECTIVE OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ON
                  AGRICULTURE


This section presents the trends of agricultural public expenditure based on the COFOG system
of classification which classify government spending according to the purpose of for which
funds are used. Within this classification system agriculture, forestry and fisheries appears as
a group under the heading of ‘Economic Affairs’ and is then listed as three separate classes for
agriculture, forestry and fisheries and hunting (multi-purpose development projects are
excluded). Within each class expenditure is distinguished by categories for:

        Administration of agricultural affairs and services;
             - conservation, reclamation or expansion of arable land;
             - agrarian reform and land settlement;
             - supervision and regulation of the agricultural industry;
        construction or operation of flood control, irrigation and drainage systems, including
         grants, loans or subsidies for such works;
        operation or support of programmes or schemes to stabilize or improve farm prices and
         farm incomes;
             - operation or support of extension services or veterinary services to farmers,
             - pest control services,
             - crop inspection services and
             - crop grading services;
        production and dissemination of general information, technical documentation and
         statistics on agricultural affairs and services;
        compensation, grants, loans or subsidies to farmers in connection with agricultural
         activities, including payments for restricting or encouraging output of a particular crop,
         or for allowing land to remain uncultivated.

Excludes: multi-purpose development projects

Expenditure on R&D is accounted for as a separate group from agricultural policy
administration under the heading ‘R&D Economic Affairs’ and includes expenditure on
forestry and fishery research and development as well.

6.1 EXPENDITURE BY MAIN FUNCTION

Figure 18 shows the total agricultural public expenditure as defined by the COFOG system.
Expenditure on agriculture accounted for 75 to 86 percent of aggregate expenditure on
Agriculture, forestry, fishing and agricultural R&D and grew by 7.0 percent per year from R7.1
billion in 2003/4 to R13.6 billion in 2013/14. The share of expenditure on R&D decreased
from 16 percent in 2003/4 to 11 percent in 2013/14. This is the result of a decrease in R&D
expenditure of 1.9 percent per year during the period 2003/4 to 2009/10. Since then



42
expenditure on research has risen by 6.6 percent per year to reach R1.8 billion in 2013/144.
Expenditure on forestry and fisheries show a marginally declining trend over the period of -1.2
and 3.9 percent respectively.



             R million (2010)                                                      R million (2010)
     2,000                                                                                             16,000
     1,800                                                                                             14,000
     1,600
                                                                                                       12,000
     1,400
     1,200                                                                                             10,000
     1,000                                                                                             8,000
      800                                                                                              6,000
      600
                                                                                                       4,000
      400
      200                                                                                              2,000
        0                                                                                              0



         Forestry (CS)          Fishing and hunting (CS)      R&D Agriculture         Agriculture (right axis)


Figure 18: Functional public expenditure on agriculture
Source: This study




    6.2 AGRICULTURE

Figure 19 shows the expenditure by class within the agricultural expenditure group.
Administration of agricultural affairs and services (not to be confused with the management
programme of the South African public expenditure nomenclature) represent 46 to 49 percent
of total expenditure on agriculture. The expenditure on the operation or support of programmes
or schemes to stabilize or improve farm prices and farm income represent the most important
share of the expenditure focus. This varied between 45 and 53 percent of expenditure on
agriculture over the 11 year period since 2003/4. Expenditure on irrigation, information and
general support in aggregate ranged between 9 and 11 percent from 2003/4 to 200/10 and is
currently about 5 percent. This is largely as a result of decreased spending on irrigation.




4
      This is probably an underestimate as the unit based budget data do not provide sufficient detail to account
      for expenditures on sub-functions within the unit.

43
               R million (2010)
     6,000

     5,000

     4,000

     3,000

     2,000

     1,000

        0



             Administration       Irrigation   Income Support   Information   General Support

Figure 19: Agricultural public expenditure by level 4 (based on COFOG system
Source: This study




6.3 FISHERIES AND FORESTRY

Information on the expenditure on Fisheries and Forestry pre-2010/11 still needs some
improvements as the administration of these function were then part of other government
departments and the detail on their financials could not be obtained. However, Figure 20 and
21 shows that the administration of the affairs of these function make up 76 percent of the
overall expenditure of these functions. This is much higher than with agriculture, but here
government support programs play a much less significant part in the economic activities of
these industries.




44
           R million (2010)
     500
     450
     400
     350
     300
     250
     200
     150
     100
      50
       0
      2009/10                         2010/11                       2011/12                      2012/13


                Administration             Operation               General info            Support

Figure 20: Expenditure on Forestry
Source: This study




             R million (2010)
     100
      90
      80
      70
      60
      50
      40
      30
      20
      10
       0
      2010/11                         2011/12                       2012/13                      2013/14


                     Administration                    Operation                  General info

Figure 21: Expenditure on Fisheries
Source: This study




45
6.4 R&D EXPENDITURE

In Figure 22 the trend in expenditure on agricultural and Fisheries research is shown
(expenditure on forestry research, or transfers to forestry research institutions, was impossible
to identify from the state of expenditure data files provided). Both show largely the same trend
of an initial phase of decrease followed a period of recovery to date. The expenditure on
fisheries research consist of transfers to the marine and living resources fund, whereas the
expenditure on agricultural research is the aggregate of the expenditure by the Agricultural
Research Council, the Grootfontein Agricultural Development Institute and the provincial
technology research and development program. This in all likelihood is an under
representation of the investment made in agricultural research by the departments, since the
level of accounting from which the underlying data was drawn is still too aggregated to pin
down this information accurately.



           R million (2010)
     900
     800
     700
     600
     500
     400
     300
     200
     100
       0




                                    Agriculture      Fisheries


Figure 22: Total research expenditure
Source: This study



Figure 23 shows the levels of spending by agricultural research institutions. The Agricultural
Research Council is by far the largest research service provider in agriculture followed by the
and Provincial Departments of Agriculture. In inflation adjusted terms the expenditure by the
Agricultural Research Council has increased by 2.2 percent per year since 2003/4, whereas the
Grootfontein Agricultural Development Institute has showing clear signs of stagnation since
2008/9. In contrast the provincial departments have experienced a 4.1 percent annual growth
over the period.




46
           R million (2010)                                               R million (2010)
  1,400                                                                                      45

  1,200                                                                                      40
                                                                                             35
  1,000
                                                                                             30
     800                                                                                     25
     600                                                                                     20
                                                                                             15
     400
                                                                                             10
     200                                                                                     5
       0                                                                                     0




                              ARC        PDA         GADI (right axis)


Figure 23: Research spending by institution
Source: This study



It is worth noting the changing landscape in terms of the share in agricultural research as shown
in Figure 24. In 2003/4 North West province were responsible for 27 percent of the expenditure
on agricultural R&D followed by the Western Cape Province (18 percent). Kwazulu-Natal at
that time represented 12 percent of the total provincial level expenditure on agricultural R&D,
but by 2013/14 the situation has changed significantly with Kwazulu Natal now being the
leader with a 27 percent share, followed by the Eastern and Western Cape departments of
agriculture.




47
2004/05

                     Western Cape                  Eastern Cape
                        18%                            14%


                                                           Free State
                                                              8%
                                                             Gauteng
                                                               4%


             North West                                     KwaZulu-Natal
                27%                                             12%

                                                     Limpopo
                              Northern Cape   Mpumalanga5%
                                   5%            7%


2013/14

                     Western Cape                    Eastern Cape
                        16%                              19%


             North West
                8%
                                                             Free State
                                                                8%
         Northern Cape
                                                            Gauteng
              7%
                                                              3%
             Mpumalanga
                5%
                        Limpopo
                          7%                       KwaZulu-Natal
                                                       27%

Figure 24: Share of research spending by provinces
Source: This study



An interesting phenomenon is the disparities in structure of research expenditure differ across
these institutions. In figure 25 the average of the share of salaries of expenditure on agricultural
R&D is shown. The Agricultural Research Council maintained an average spending on salaries
of about 59.8 percent compared to the 40.4 percent of Grootfontein Agricultural Development
Institute and the 67.2 percent of the provincial departments. Among the provincial departments
the share of salaries of expenditure on agricultural R&D varied between 47.8 percent for
Gauteng and over 70 percent in Eastern Cape and Mpumalanga. In the case of Gauteng the
low share is explained by the fact that the province, due to its proximity to the research institutes
of the Agricultural Research Council, relies on outsourcing of its research needs. For
provincial departments, however, a ratio of salaries to total expenditure this high is indicative
of having too little operational funds available.

48
         Percent
 80.0                            74.9                               75.6

 70.0                     67.2          65.9          67.1   66.4                 65.2   65.6
                                                                           63.8
          59.8
 60.0
                                               47.8
 50.0
                   40.4
 40.0
 30.0
 20.0
 10.0
     -




Figure 25: Five year average share of salaries since 2004/05
Source: This study




49
                EFFICIENCY OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ON AGRICULTURE


In executing the budget institutions are responsible for different responsibilities and mandates.
In the main this section tries to unravel some of the objectives of the study viz assessing the
levels, amount, composition and quality of the agricultural budget determining the relationship
between the resource allocations and effective expenditures and also overview the timeliness
of disbursements of the public resources. This is basically the “efficiency” analysis and the
congruence (World Bank 2011).

7.1 BUDGETED VS ACTUAL PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ON AGRICULTURE

The efficiency of executing the total budget is measured by comparing the budgeted against
the actual expenditure. Note that under the MTEF mid-year adjustments are made to
appropriation allocations to program budgets. These can represent, and often do, major shifts
in financial resources available to departments, or to programs within a department. The
difference between the adjusted appropriation and the actual expenditure are marginal and over,
or under expenditure never exceed the margins permissible under the PFMA. It has been
mentioned by some officials that fluctuations between budgeted expenditure and actual
expenditure is a source of instability in their program execution.

Here the analysis is limited to the DAFF and the provincial departments of agriculture only as
the information on budgeted expenditure, and adjusted appropriation in the case of DAFF, were
only consistently available for these departments.

The point on the differences between budgeted, adjusted appropriation and actual expenditure
made above is illustrated by the information of the DAFF. Figure 26 shows that the actual
expenditure by the DAFF has often been much higher than the initial budget, but generally
slightly lower than the adjusted appropriation made during the financial year.

On average the adjusted appropriation exceeds the initial budget by 16.1 percent, ranging from
as little as 0.6 percent for preliminary data for 2013/14 to as high as 53.4 percent in 2007/8.

Consequently the actual expenditure generally exceeds the initial budgeted expenditure by 12.2
percent, ranging between 1.0 percent and 47.2 percent. Compared to the adjusted appropriation
the actual expenditure on average is 3.3 percent below the adjusted appropriation and ranges
between 0.7 percent in 2009/10 and 6.3 percent in 2006/7.




50
             R million (2010)
     5,000
     4,500
     4,000
     3,500
     3,000
     2,500
     2,000
     1,500                                                                 Budget
     1,000                                                                 Adjust
      500
                                                                           Actual
        -




Figure 26: Budgeted vs Actual expenditure by DAFF
Source: This study



These adjustments introduce a fair degree of instability in the expenditure patterns of the
DAFF, especially around points where program changes are introduced as in 2007/8.

For provincial departments of agriculture the situation is significantly different. Here the
deviations from budget is less extreme, but the extent of over and under spending is much
larger. On average for the period 2005/6 to 2013/14, the proportion of over spending on the
adjusted appropriation is 1.3 percent, however, this ranges from an under spending in 2007/8
of 7.4 percent to over spending of 14.3 percent in 2009/10. These events can be explained by
the variations in transfer payments under the CASP program to provinces. In 2007/8 the
amount paid to provinces almost doubled from 2006/7 and in 2009/10 the payment was nearly
three quarters less than in the previous year.




51
              R million (2010)
     8,000

     7,000

     6,000

     5,000

     4,000

     3,000
                                                                                                Budget
     2,000
                                                                                                Adjust
     1,000
                                                                                                Actual
          -




Figure 27: Budgeted vis Actual expenditure by provincial departments of agriculture
Source: This study
Notes: North West and Gauteng excluded.




This variation in transfers from the national department to the provincial departments obviously
disrupts the programme activities of the provincial departments. Naturally, provincial
administration would be more cautious in their endeavours and from 2011/12 they tended to
under spend between 0.6 and 3.4 percent on the adjusted appropriation allocated to them.

    7.2 AGRICULTURAL EXPENDITURE BY ECONOMIC CLASSIFICATION

The economic classification is divided into 4 main categories5;

      -       Salaries
      -       Goods and services
      -       Capital
      -       Transfers payments made by a department for which the department does not directly
              receive anything in return

The expenditures trends by economic classification show salaries and Goods & services
trending high and increasing faster than the other economic classes. Expenditure on salaries
has increased by 150 percent from R3.5 billion in 2002/3 to about R5.3 billion in 2013/4.



5
       Payments for financial assets (payments made by departments as loans to public corporations or as equity
       investments in public corporations) as these are not part of the core business of the agricultural departments
       and really small in total.

52
However, the continuing investment in human capacity – thus it may be conjectured that the
human capacity in the department is expected to improve. Turnaround of expenditure on
salaries around 2006/7 should a sharper increase as compared to the earlier period. This
increasing trend turns up as well around 2010/11.

The reality of the increasing spending on salaries could have been better explained by checking
the head count. That is to determine whether the salary bill is due to additional staff or due to
increase in remuneration. This could not be determined as total staff numbers could not be
obtained from the departments in time for this analysis. Nonetheless the fact is that the
Department is retooling itself to take up neglected functions. In that regard it is critical to
manage vacancy rate. If effort is made to fill vacancies these may lead to more growth in
spending on salaries. It is also important to determine and monitor where the growth is
happening.



            Percent
     100%
     90%
     80%
     70%
     60%
     50%
     40%
     30%
     20%
     10%
      0%



                            Salaries   G&S      Capital   Net Transfers


Figure 28: Total agricultural public expenditure according to economic classification
Source: This study
Notes: Excluding transfers to ARC, NAMC, and provinces




The expenditure on goods and services has also been trending parallel to salaries. It showed
an increase from just above R1.7 billion in 2002/3 (and about R1.8 billion in 2003/4) to just
above R2.9 billion in 2013/14. This represents an increase of 59 percent from 2003/4, but it
has been largely stagnant since 2008/9. In relation to expenditure on salaries until 2008/9 the
two items have been increasing parallel. From then the gap started widening.




53
                SYNTHESIS OF QUALITATIVE PERSPECTIVE TO
                AGRICULTURAL PUBLIC EXPENDITURE


This section provides an overview and highlight of the opinion survey conducted to explain
and validate the results of the agricultural public expenditure. The survey involved soliciting
perceptions from expert informants either involved in the budgeting process and/or involved
in agriculture at high level. This was due to the suspicion that the budget process in South
Africa is not very linked with stakeholders in the agricultural sector.

The qualitative responses were solicited with the aid of the questionnaire. The questionnaire
required respondents to complete or answer the list of questions rating different angles from 1
to 5 - representing the lowest score to the highest score. The respondents were identified from
the list of expert informants compiled by the team together with the DAFF. The informants
were identified on the basis of their active involvement in the sector. Out of the long list, the
target respondents were purposefully selected taking account of their willingness and
availability. Initially the intention was to have a face to face talk. However, because of time,
the questionnaires were emailed to about 20 respondents. About nine questionnaires were
returned. Some respondents were followed up with telephone calls to clarify other issues.

The purpose of the opinion survey was to provide complementary information in lieu of group
discussion with stakeholders. The questionnaires were analysed using frequencies.

8.1 PERCEPTIONS ON THE THREE PERFORMANCE AREAS

The respondents were requested to give an opinion on the issues related to budgeting process.
The views were with respect to coding, flow of funds and congruency. These areas are
subsequently rated by different dimension. Put differently, Different dimensions of the public
budgeting system are then rated for coding, flow of funds and congruency.

8.1.1 Coding / tracking of expenditure
The respondents were requested to give opinion on the accessibility of the South African
system of coding and tracking of agricultural expenditure. This involves the classification of
agricultural expenditure and how easy / difficult it is to track expenditure on crucial areas over
a number of years from available resources. The common view is that the SA system in place
is good and allows uniform programme (objective) and item structure. The view is not
surprising since the SA budgeting and expenditure tracking system has been there for a while
and the budgeting process has been participatory and made transparent. For example, The
Minister of Finance has always solicited tips on budget from the public. The budget is also
presented through public platforms (TV’s and radio channels). The National Treasury also
publishes the Estimate of National Expenditure on annual basis as point of seven years
reference for 3 year expenditure




54
8.1.2 The flow of funds.
The views on the efficiency of the flow of funds to allocated budget areas are:

The level of under-spending is very high, and attributed to bad planning; e.g. incidence of last
minute spending in January to March is quite common. This view is in line with the fact that
the revised or adjusted budget is approved late. Accordingly there is an under-spending trend
against the adjusted budget, but there is overspending against the budget. Accordingly, the
under-spending is not as dramatic. It is viewed that with an improved timing and clearer
communication about pending adjusted budget.

The under-spending has implications for service delivery. On the other hand, there are also
lots of challenges linked to service delivery. Service delivery is very slow; e.g. Disaster Relief
Funds take up to 2 years at times to reach beneficiaries. The slow implementation is generally
associated with the public service bureaucracy, a necessary pill to ensure that disbursement of
public funds is done appropriately.

Injudicious spending of the budget borders on violation of the public finance management
policies. Some of comments from the respondents asserted to the lot of wastage, especially at
local (provincial / local government) level, for instance on workshops. This mostly results in
inefficient spending away from planned areas. As a result, there may not be effective
development in intended focus areas.

Perhaps the most pointed view pertained to the perceived behaviour of public servants. In
particular, one of the reasons in under-spending and/or not delivering is the lack of discipline
in public officials - e.g. not being in office during working hours. There is also very little
empathy from Government officials with the needy public; i.e. little demonstration of the
required “ubuntu /batho pele.”

8.1.3 Congruency
The views on the efficiency of the budget allocation process, - (in terms of allocations to
priority areas) were invited.

There is a need for re-organization and re-prioritization of spending within the sector before an
argument for more resources can be made. It should also be borne in mind that the process of
allocating budget to the priorities of the programmes is a collective and trade off process. It is
not left to the programme concerned. The programme would prepare its business case for
funding but whether that gets approved is a function of intensive deliberations and trade-offs.
Against this back-drop the views of not being consulted and insufficient of budget priorities
and process by some major stakeholders is thus a concern.

The National treasury has reprioritized funds from land acquisition to invest in emerging
commercial farms.




55
8.1.4 The Local Government level information and programmes
There is very little information available and yet it’s the level facing the most service delivery
challenges. It is not yet clear whether this is due the absence of activity or effective information
management or flow.

8.1.5 Public Private Partnerships
Most stakeholders support PPPs, but the implementation from Government side is poor.

8.2 KEY DEPARTMENTS/SECTORS

The study was also interested in determining the level of agricultural public expenditure in
different departments. These departments or sectors also implement some of agricultural or
farming activities directly or indirectly. As such, they keep or influence the spending of
agricultural budget. These departments include National Treasury, National Department of
agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF), The Presidency, Respondent’s department or
organization, private sector and donors. The Forestry and fisheries were included as subsectors
since they have been separate from agriculture for the most part of the study period.

The respondents were requested to rate the different departments in terms of the three rating
criteria; namely coding, flow of funds and congruent. The rating ranged from poor (1), fair
(2), average (3), good (4), and excellent.

Table 7 shows the rating of the performance of each department with respect to coding, funds
flow and congruency are as follows. In terms of coding, the respondents rated the departments
into two groups; National Treasury, National Department of agriculture and respondents’ own
organization were average to above average. The Private Sector, Forestry, The Presidency and
Donors were rated fair to poor on coding. National Treasury could be rated high since it is its
primary role to guide and track the budget. With agriculture and own department, it may be
that the respondents are more familiar with the tracking system. It is instructive that there is
poorer perception about the coding and tracking of agricultural spending for others.

With the flow of funds, the departments were rated on average worse than for coding. National
Treasury, National Department of Agriculture, Own Department and Private Sector were rated
higher (fairly to above average), while other were rated lower (just fair). It is interesting that
the private sector is rated better for flow of funds as to tracking.

In terms of congruency, Donors seems to implement their budget more appropriately than other
sectors. National Treasury, National Department of Agriculture and Private Sector are then
rated being fairly congruent.




Table 7: Average rating of Departments and Sector
 Department                       Coding         Flow of Funds                   Congruency


56
 National Treasury                           3.6               2.8                2.4
 National Agriculture Department             3.0               2.2                2.4
 The Presidency                              1.6               1.8                1.8
 Respondent’s      department       /
                                             3.4               2.2                2.0
 organization
 Private Sector                              1.0               2.2                2.2
 Donors                                      1.8               2.0                2.6
 Forestry                                    1.6               2.0                1.8
 Fisheries                                   2.0               2.0                1.8


Views on the performance of key departments/ sectors follow below



8.2.1 National Treasury
National Treasury is rated highly (highest) by most respondents as above average for coding
and average for flow of funds and congruency. Total expenditure is however only available at
financial year end after the audit is completed and has been published by National Treasury.
No access to any information in between. CFO’s are reluctant to give out any information
during this period especially on spending or commitments.

8.2.2 National Agriculture Department
 The DAFF is ranked second highest as average for coding and slightly below average for flow
of funds and congruency. The department is said to sometimes delay the transfers to provinces
for conditional grant funding, sometimes withholding funding earlier than necessary. They do
on occasion agree to an arrangement of “spend and claim” and default or delay refunds.

Whilst there is understanding that DAFF has to make tough decisions w.r.t. provincial
allocations, there is also a perceived lack of support with regard to requests for additional
funding. Stakeholders believe there is no consultation and they do not have sufficient
knowledge of the budget process.

8.2.3 The Presidency
No direct interaction by most respondents.

8.2.4 Private Sector
The lack of bureaucracy in the Private Sector, whereby most CEOs have delegated authority,
results in relatively quick decisions.

8.2.5 Donors
Funds received from Donors are generally in support of Government priorities. Strict adherence
to the purpose is required failing which future tranches could be withheld.



57
8.3 THE AGRICULTURAL PROGRAMMES

The budget is normally implemented through the programs. As indicated earlier, for this
analysis, the programs were categorized into eight. They include Administration, Resource
Management, Farmer Support and Development, Research and Development Services,
Agricultural economics, Training and Agricultural Development Planning. Respondents were
requested to rate the programs in terms of coding, flow of funds and congruency.

The rating of the performance of each department with respect to coding, funds flow and
congruency are as follows:

Table 8: Rating table 4
  Programme                            Coding Flow of funds              Congruency
  1. Administration                     3.4         2.2                        2.4
   Personnel Costs                                  2.0                        1.4
   Other admin costs                    3.6         2.8                        2.2
  2.Sustainable Resource Management     3.0         2.6                        1.8
  3. Farmer Support and Development     2.6         2.4                        2.0
  5. (Technology) Research and
                                        3.0         2.4                           1.6
  Development Services
  5. Agricultural Economics             2.4         2.6                           1.6
  6. Training                           2.4         2.2                           1.6
  7. Agricultural Development Planning  2.2         1.8                           1.6


Views on the performance of the various programs follow below:



8.3.1 Administration, Personnel Costs & Other admin costs
Personnel items are standard across various departments. That is why the high ranking on
coding. Flow of funds and congruency are however rates just under-average.

8.3.2 Sustainable Resource Management
The Agricultural sector has tremendous problems in obtaining funding for disasters like
droughts, veld fires and floods. In some cases it can take up to two years to obtain funds. The
Disaster Management Act, 2002 however has a very good system in place. It appears then that
the problem is insufficient capacity, in the form of qualified and trained people, with the
necessary will and drive.

8.3.3 Farmer Support and Development
It is seen as lowest ranking in terms of efficient prioritization. However the National Treasury
has re-prioritized funds from land acquisition to investment in emerging commercial farms.
Concern with the use of unskilled staff who have never been on a farm.



58
NAMC budget has been allocated to Farmer support and development.

8.3.4 Veterinary Services
Activities are driven by the Vets and are less challenging when it to comes management and
alignment

8.3.5 (Technology) Research and Development Services
Inadequate budget has been allocated towards research and development services over the
years.

8.3.6 Agricultural Economics
Of the NAMC budget 37 percent are allocated to Agricultural economics. The prioritization
within the agricultural sector should consider the diversity of production systems and
agricultural economic units in rural areas.

8.3.7 Training
Inadequate training takes place as the major reason for slow service and flow of funds is lack
of skills. Inadequate budget has been allocated towards training of emerging commercial
farmers

8.3.8 Agricultural Development Planning
The activities of this programme are not yet as standardized and may therefore vary from
province to province.

8.4 SPECIAL FOCUS AREAS

The rating of the performance of each focus area with respect to coding, funds flow and
congruency are as follows:

Table 9: Special focus areas
  Per focus area          Coding            Flow of funds              Congruency
  1.Producer support          2                       2.2                      1.6
  2.Small-holder support     1.8                      2.2                      1.4
  3.Tax incentives           1.2                      1.2                      1.4
  4.Trade and marketing      2.0                      1.8                      1.6
  5.Regulatory services      1.8                      1.8                      1.6


The information for these special focus areas is very scanty; hence the low ranking of even the
coding for these expenses.

8.5 RECOMMENDATIONS

The following recommendations can be made with respect to these matters:

59
        National Treasury needs to be stricter on disallowing roll-overs (to curb bad planning
         and transfer of funds to unplanned low-priority areas)
        Recruitment to key positions to be more in line with skills requirements.
        More and better training of staff, including support staff.
        The project segment on the accounting system should be configured to identify specific
         focus areas so as to be able to better track these.
        Better consultation with key stakeholders on particularly budget priorities and a more
         robust feedback / monitoring and evaluation mechanism.
          It is essential to form public-private partnerships to ensure that large value chain
             players are incentivized and supported to provide proper technical assistance to
             small producers of their commodities. Assistance could also be given to commodity
             organizations to develop more effective small farmer development programmes
             with greater outreach. This will necessitate more data collection on commodity
             production in traditional tenure areas.
        Reference has been made to a study on ”An alternative funding model for disasters” for
         the Fiscal and Financial Commission (FFC) which is believed would alleviate the (slow
         disaster support process) if the recommendations are followed.
        More research and therefore spending there-on are required.




60
                SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS


9.1 SUMMARY OVERVIEW OF FINDING

This review assesses public expenditure on the agricultural sector and contributes to the effort
to enhance the budget and policy prioritisation of the agricultural sector in Sub-Saharan Africa.
The review has three goals:

    To provide a base for future review and tracking studies of public expenditure on the
     agricultural sector
    To develop an initial database that links the South African budget system with COFOG
     system
    To identify the emerging patterns on the level, composition and quality as well as
     effectiveness of expenditure

The report presents a range of issues for consideration by the South African government
pertaining to resource allocation to agriculture. It highlights that the frequent unit name
changes and its allocation to different programs creates an impediment for smooth budget
tracking process. While a trial was done to analyse data using the COFOG system, most of the
analysis is based on the South African budget nomenclature. The analysis points to relatively
unstable relativities in the total agricultural expenditure amongst the different tiers of
government, but a relatively stable trend in total agricultural expenditure in nominal and in real
terms. The total agricultural public expenditure has increased by an annual average of about
10.8 percent in nominal terms from R5.77 billion to R16.97 billion over 10 years. However,
in real terms, the increase was far less from about R9.33 billion to R14.27 billion.

The share of public expenditure on agriculture in total South African government expenditure
is lower that the share of agriculture in the economy. Share of expenditure has decreased from
about 2.5 to less than 2 percent, whilst the contribution of agriculture to GDP decreased from
a little over 4 percent to about 2.5 percent.

The institutional expenditure trends (consisting of national, provincial and state owned entities)
shows the rising importance of provincial departments in agricultural expenditure. The
implementation of agricultural programmes at provincial level is complemented by provincial
level with state owned entities and local government. This review did not cover the expenditure
on agriculture in the local government level in this round of analysis. The programme
perspective shows that the spending on the programmes are stable over time, but with
significant increase in expenditure on agricultural support. The use of the COFOG for the
analysis of spending by function proved to be a useful concept, but do not provide sufficient
detail in its construct to assist in the detailed analysis of agricultural functions executed by
government.




61
9.2 RECOMMENDATIONS

9.2.1 Level of expenditure
Recommendation 1: There is a need to increase the level of public expenditure on agriculture
    in relation to other sectors.

Motivation:
Although public expenditure on agriculture has increased over the 10 years both in nominal
and real terms, as a share of the economy the level of spending fluctuated 0.5 percent during
the past decade. In most developing countries and OECD countries this share averages between
1-2 percent of the GDP. This indicates that the fiscal costs of agricultural policy relative to the
size of the overall economy are very low

Recommendation 2: Reaching the Maputo target of 10 percent of the budget for agriculture
    is neither achievable nor appropriate for South Africa given the degree to which the
    secondary and especially the tertiary sectors in the economy have developed. he South
    African government should, however, determine an appropriate target for spending on
    agriculture along the lines of recommendation 1.

Motivation:
The 10 percent share of government spending for South Africa is equivalent to R100 billion —
more than four times the current level of spending. This has tremendous implications for
policy, prioritisation and capacity to spend an extra R80 billion more than the current level. At
best the South African government can be expected to double its expenditure on agriculture,
but this will still require the development of twice the current capacity in agriculture to absorb
and invest the increased budget wisely.

The Maputo Declaration is still a noble position to encourage South Africa to allocate more
funds to the agricultural sector. There is still scope to increase agricultural investments through
support emerging and new farmers, investing in irrigation, intensive and technology driven
productivity improvement and strengthening its regulatory services. This could be done in the
context of NPD 2030.

Recommendation 3: The current open economy policy and the general objective of food self-
    reliance (security) have to continue. This involves ensuring that there is sufficient
    options to make food available in the country through own production, import and export.
    The reliance on direct price support and trade restrictions has to be minimised. On the
    other hand, non-market distorting indirect agricultural support should be enhanced.
    Government should maintain the balance by developing trade relations with all trade
    partners.

Motivation:
Since the deregulation of the agricultural sector and the new political dispensation, South
Africa has focused on creating a competitive agricultural sector that is subject to global
economic developments.

62
The trade relations have shifted from emphasising relations with the West, to building relations
with the East, the South and with the rest of the African continent. As such, the government
has to navigate through a complex of requirements imposed by different trade relations.
Effectively, the country has signed different trade agreements including those that avoid market
distortion.

9.2.2 Composition of Expenditure
Recommendation 4: The budget spending should be balanced among different (institutions,
    economic classification, programmes, functional) components of expenditure, with more
    bias towards those that deliver service to farmers. Farmers generally feel less supported
    as the funds that reach the farmer on the ground are perceived to be very little. Some
    farmers (including emerging farmers) don’t experience public service support due to
    budgetary constraints.

Motivation:
There is an increasing proportion of expenditure by provinces. As the institution responsible
for the administration of programmes at regional level this development should be supported
with appropriate amount of funding at the right time.

The expenditure by economic classification shows that salaries represent a probably
disproportionate share of expenditure leaving insufficient funds for developmental
(operational) expenditure. The diverging spending relativities between provinces indicate a
need for benchmarking proportions of expenditure.

Spending by program shows that the Finance and Farmer Support and Development Programs
have grown strongly. The Agricultural economics and Production support programs have
experienced the lowest levels of growth in expenditure. These programs together with
regulatory control and natural resource management are the basic tenets of agriculture and
should enjoy more emphasis if the flow of funds is deemed to be appropriate (to the farmers).
Functional support shows more spending on income support and administrative support and
less on technical support, which is a concern.

9.2.3 Quality of expenditure
Recommendation 5: There should be consistent effort to determine and improve return on
    the expenditure in the interest of increasing service delivery to the farmers or projects on
    the ground. The development of the farmers or agriculture sector or output should be
    commensurate with the money spent (value for money). As such, clear indicators should
    be developed or established to measure performance.

Motivation:
There is a wide divergence between budgeted and adjusted expenditure. Less so, however,
between the adjusted budget and actual expenditure, with the latter being generally a little lower
than the adjusted budget estimates. This means that not all of the allocated funds are spent.
The reason for this is that the budget adjustments are done late and provinces are unable to


63
implement timeously. This has implications for service delivery and the quality of the
expenditure.

While the expenditure per farmer or farming population increased, there is a need to create a
working definition and number of farmers in South Africa to enable the consistent and reliable
determination of average agricultural public spending per farmer. This may require a review
of the definition and the conduct of a comprehensive census of agriculture.

A need has also been identified to enhance the response time to service delivery by reducing
duplication of approval process. For example, currently the response time to disaster has been
very slow because CASP funds are used for disaster relief instead of generating a new budget.
To deliver on disaster relief requires approval of two Directors.

9.2.4 Process of budget management
Recommendation 6: To develop or establish a harmonised programme structure adapted from
    the proposed programmes. This would result in realigned programme structure at
    national and provincial level. The structure should thus be harmonised to priorities and
    the same should be applied across national, provincial, SOEs and local level. Efforts
    should be made to harmonise the accounting systems of state owned entities with the
    overall government system.

Recommendation 7: Rationalisation and maintenance of the institutional structure,
    particularly at national level. The process of frequent restructuring of programmes and
    renaming of institutional units tends to create confusion in understanding some basic
    functions. In so doing caution must be exercised not to mix program structure changes
    with institutional structure. There has been a pattern to copy institutional structure with
    programme focus. While it may be easier to see high level position of units, service
    delivery gets affected. Programmes should be used to deliver services, while institutional
    structure provides the functional/disciplinary capacity to implement.

Recommendation 8: Improve coordination of budget within government and with non-
    governmental stakeholders on budget issues.

Motivation
Improve coordination and effective guidance or leadership by national department on the
shared functions with provinces. This also encompasses strong guidance when introducing
new units or programmes in relation to existing programmes to ensure continued coordination.
The case of deterioration of enterprise budgets and production economics are pointers. Create
understanding and awareness about agricultural budgeting process by involving stakeholders
in the process.

9.2.5 Institutionalisation of budget tracking and review
Recommendation 9: There is a need to establish a Budget tracking function or role in the
    DAFF to provide regular updates and monitor the performance of expenditure and service


64
       delivery throughout the whole system. This may require allocation of additional
       resources and capacity to affect the expenditure monitoring process.

Motivation:
The review also created an opportunity to consider a system-wide M&E system for agricultural
spending, which can be done within the existing means in collaboration with National Treasury.
This would involve reporting on quarterly basis on actual spending to budget, spending by
critical focus areas, and staff capacity trends.

9.3 FURTHER WORK

As it stands the database that underpins this analysis needs further development for it to become
a sound basis for policy analysis. It do, however, present a firm basis to develop an annual
basis to monitor the levels of expenditure on agriculture and presents an opportunity, if linked
to the human resources databases and the monitoring of output targets and reported delivery,
to develop a useful tool for the DAFF and Treasury to track the performance of the sector. For
this to happen, a number of activities need to be implemented:

     1. The harmonised program structure used here is based on a system that was in use in the
        late 1980s, which allowed for a much richer technical sub-division of functions. Since
        the data availed were unit level expenditure data (in the case of DAFF) and sub-program
        level (level four of the BAS at provincial level) the database currently fail to reach the
        level of detail that would be desirable for in-depth analysis of functions (see next point)
        and it is advised that the exercise should be repeated using more detail in order to more
        accurately account for the various functions of government. For example, the
        expenditure report for Grootfontein Agricultural Development Institute include
        spending on extension, research and training — all three of which are critical inputs in
        the farmer support and development, Technology Development and Training initiatives
        of government and key pillars under the CASP. It is essential that one then accurately
        track the investment in these functions.
     2. A further example of a function that needs to be analysed in detail is Research. This
        function within the various departments’ links to state owned entities and other public
        institutions, such as universities, as well as he private sector. Together with the training
        and extension functions/services it forms an area of government investment in the
        development and capacity within the sector that in aggregate represent a significant
        level of investment and therefore would require careful monitoring. For the past four
        decades it has continuously been lamented that investment into these functions, with
        R&D being at the forefront of the complaints, are woefully too low. However, as
        experience has shown we do not have the ability to accurately measure the level of
        investment in R&D in the sector. To plan for capacity development we are in dire need
        of accurate estimates of the true level of investment in these areas and should therefor
        allow for more detailed analysis on this in the database. In doing so, the department
        would also do away with the need to contract expensive surveys to determine the
        investment levels within the public sector on R&D.

65
     3. The claim is often made that South Africa do not support its farmers properly in terms
        of subsidies, etc. However, by unpacking the transfer payments properly this study has
        shown that some support to households (farmers) does happen, but insufficient detail is
        available from the expenditure reports to analyse the nature of these support payments.
        As these support programs form the focus of trade negotiations, etc. it is advisable to
        adapt the database to allow for quick access to the information when required. The
        basis for doing this is provided for if one refine the COFOG coding by either, 1) using
        a fifth level of coding, or 2) by adopting a different classification system as discussed
        in this report.
     4. An effort must be made to develop a more elaborate/comprehensive inventory of all the
        public institutions involved in agriculture, especially at local government level. Here
        we mostly excluded the provincial level state owned entities and municipalities, but as
        they present another tier of service delivery it is essential that future development of
        the expenditure tracking framework to include them as they are/may become an
        important vehicle in service delivery to agriculture.

The basis for institutionalizing these activities to become an ongoing function within the
government system is best left to the DAFF and Treasury to decide upon. Lest be said that it
would be wise if such a monitoring function becomes the responsibility of the DAFF as it is
the lead institution responsible for the development of the agricultural sector and needs the
information to improve on the use of financial resources for agriculture throughout the
government sector.




66
REFERENCE LIST

Agricultural Research Council. 2003 — 2012. Annual Reports. Pretoria : Agricultural
     Research Council.

Chitiga, M, Josi J & Verryn A. 2014. HSRC. Fiscal decentralization and provision of
      constitutionally mandated basic services (CMBS). A review of South African System.
      Presented at the Fiscal and Financial Commission (FFC) 20th Anniversary Conference:
      “A Review of South Africa’s Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations (IGFR) System: An
      African Perspective on Fiscal Decentralisation”. Cape Town ICC, 11-13 August.

Curtis, M., and Adama, D. 2013. What constitutes agriculture spending? Areas of consensus
      and contention. Discussion paper. Action aid

DAEM (Department of Agricultural Economics and Marketing) 1984. White Paper on
   Agricultural Policy. Pretoria: Department of Agricultural Economics and Marketing.

DAFF (Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries). 2012. Annual Report 2011/12.
    Human Resource Oversight Statistics.

DAFF (Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries). 2014a. Annual Report 2013/14.
    Human Resource Oversight Statistics p90-107.

DAFF (Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries). 2014b. Abstract of Agricultural
    Statistics. Pretoria: Directorate of Agricultural Information Services.

DoA (Department of Agriculture). 1995. White Paper on Agriculture. Pretoria : Department
     of Agriculture.

DoA (Department of Agriculture). 2001. The Strategic Plan for South African Agriculture.
    Pretoria : Directorate of Agricultural Information Services.

DoA (Department of Agriculture). 2003. Strategic Plan for the Department of Agriculture:
    2003 - 2008. Pretoria : Directorate of Agricultural Information Services.

De Visser, J. 2014. Reflections on 20 years of the FFC’s Role in IGFR in SA. : A 20 year
     Presented at the Fiscal and Financial Commission (FFC) 20th Anniversary Conference:
     “A Review of South Africa’s Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations (IGFR) System: An
     African Perspective on Fiscal Decentralisation”. Cape Town ICC, 11-13 August.

Saras, S and Soltau, F. 2014. On accounting for economic rights in South Africa’s
      intergovernmental fiscal relation system. Presented at the Fiscal and Financial
      Commission (FFC) 20th Anniversary Conference: “A Review of South Africa’s
      Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations (IGFR) System: An African Perspective on Fiscal
      Decentralisation”. Cape Town ICC, 11-13 August.
Econometrix. 2014. Quarterly Group Presentation
Land Bank. 2007 - 2013. Annual Reports. Pretoria: Land Bank
67
Land Bank. 2013. History of the Land Bank: Financing agriculture for 100 years. Pretoria:
     Pretoria: Public Information Centre.
Liebenberg, F and Kirsten, J. 2013. Statistics on Farm Labour in South Africa. UP Agricultural
     Economics Working Paper 2013/#2. Pretoria : University of Pretoria.

Liebenberg.. F. 2013. South African Agricultural Production, Productivity and Research
     Performance in the 20th Century. PhD thesis, Universioty of Pretoria
National Planning Commission. 2011. National Development Plan. Pretoria

National Treasury. 2003 – 2013. Estimates of National Expenditure. Pretoria : National
     Treasury.

National Treasury. 2009. The Estimates of National Expenditure 2009. Pretoria : National
     Treasury.

National Treasury and the South African Revenue Service. 2013. 2013 Tax Statistics.
     Pretoria: National Treasury and the South African Revenue Services.

OBP (Onderstepoort Biological Products). 2009. Strategic Plan 2009-2013. Pretoria : OBP.

Roseboom, J., P.G. Pardey, H.J. Sartorius van Bach, and J. Van Zyl, (1995). Statistical Brief
     on the National Agricultural Research System of South Africa. ISNAR Indicator Series
     Project. Statistical Brief No. 23. The Hague: International Service for National
     Agricultural Research.

SARS (South African Revenue Services). 2013. Revenue Trends and Tax Proposals

SARS (South African Revenue Services). 2011 – 2013. Annual Report

Stats SA. 2009. Census of Commercial Agriculture 2007: Financial and Production
      Statistics. Pretoria: Statistics South Africa.

Stats SA. (2013a). Census 2011: Agricultural Households. Pretoria: Statistics South Africa.

Stats SA. (2013b). General Household Survey, 2012. [Online]. www.statssa.gov.za

Stats SA. 2014. Statistical Release: P0441. Gross Domestic Product: Annual estimates 2004-
      2013. Third Quarter 2014. Pretoria: Statistics South Africa.

Stats SA. 2014. Poverty Trends in South Africa, An examination of absolute poverty between
      2006 and 2011. Pretoria: Statistics South Africa.

Stats SA. 2014. Quarterly Labour Force Survey. [Online]. www.statssa.gov.za

Strauss Commission. 1996. Final Report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Provision of
      Rural                  Financial                 Services.                [Online]:
      http://www.polity.org.za/polity/govdocs/commissions/strauss1.html

68
The Presidency. 2012. Development Indicators, 2010. Pretoria: The Presidency.

The Presidency. 2014. Main Report on MAFISA Impact Assessment Study. Unpublished
     report. Pretoria: The Presidency

Transparency International. 2014. Corruption Perceptions Index, 2014. Berlin: Transparency
     International.

Public Services Commission.      1994.   Annual Report: 1993.      Pretoria Public Service
      Commission.

Union of South Africa. (1922) Estimates of Expenditure to be Defrayed from the National
     Income Account. Pretoria: Department of Finance

World Bank 2011. Practitioners’ Toolkit for Agricultural Public Expenditure Analysis. Report
     number 60015-GLB. Washington DC: IBRD / The World Bank.
     www.worldbank.org/rural

World     Bank.        2014.        World     Development    Indicators.     [Online]    at:
     http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators




69
     ANNEXURES




70
Annexure 1:       COFOG Coding

  COFOG Coding         Description of Items
  4 2 1                Agriculture (CS)
  4 2 1 1              - Administration/Management of agricultural affairs and services
                   1   conservation, reclamation or expansion of arable land;
                   2   agrarian reform and land settlement;
                   3   supervision and regulation of the agricultural industry;
              2        - Irrigation Works: construction or operation of flood control, irrigation and drainage
                       systems, including;
                   1   Grants
                   2   Loans
                   3   Subsidies
  4   2   1   3        - Income Support: operation or support of programmes or schemes to stabilize or
                       improve farm prices and farm incomes;
                   1   operation or support of extension services or veterinary services to farmers,
                   2   pest control services,
                   3   crop inspection services and
                   4   crop grading services;
              4        - Information: production and dissemination of general information;
                   1   general information
                   2   technical documentation
                   3   statistics
  4   2   1   5        - General Support: compensation, grants, loans or subsidies to farmers in connection
                       with agricultural activities , including payments for restricting or encouraging output of
                       a particular crop or for allowing land to remain uncultivated.
  4   2   2            Forestry (CS)
  4   2   2   1        - Administration of forestry affairs and services;
                   1    conservation, extension and rationalized exploitation of forest reserves;
                   2    supervision and regulation of forest operations and issuance of tree-felling licences;
  4   2   2   2        - operation or support of
                   1    reforestation work,
                   2   pest and disease control,
                   3   forest fire-fighting and fire prevention services and
                   4   extension services to forest operators;
  4   2   2   3    1   - production and dissemination of general information, technical documentation and
                       statistics on forestry affairs and services;
  4   2   2   4    1   - grants, loans or subsidies to support commercial forest activities.
  4   2   3            Fishing and hunting (CS)
                       This class covers both commercial fishing and hunting, and fishing and hunting for
                       sport.
  4   2   3   1        - Administration of fishing and hunting affairs and services;
                   1   protection, propagation and rationalized exploitation of fish and wildlife stocks;
                       supervision and regulation of
                   2   freshwater fishing,
                   3   coastal fishing,
                   4   ocean fishing,
                   5   fish farming,
                   6   wildlife hunting and
                   7   issuance of fishing and hunting licences;
  4   2   3   2        - operation or support of
                   1   fish hatcheries,
                   2   extension services,
                   3   stocking or culling activities, etc.
  4   2   3   3        - production and dissemination of general information, technical documentation and
                       statistics on fishing and hunting affairs and services;
  4   2   3   4        - grants, loans or subsidies to support
                   1   commercial fishing and
                   2   hunting activities,
                   3   including the construction or operation of fish hatcheries.

71
 COFOG Coding        Description of Items
                     Excludes: control of offshore and ocean fishing (03.1.0); administration, operation or
                     support of natural parks and reserves (05.4.0).
 4   8   2           R&D Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting (CS)
 4   8   2   1       - Administration and operation of government agencies engaged in applied research
                     and experimental development related to agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting;
                 1   Agriculture
                 2   Forestry
                 3   Fishing
                 4   Hunting
 4   8   2   2   1   - grants, loans or subsidies to support applied research and experimental development
                     related to agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting undertaken by non-government
                     bodies such as research institutes and universities.
 4   8   2   2   1   Agriculture
 4   8   2   2   2   Forestry
 4   8   2   2   3   Fishing
 4   8   2   2   4   Hunting




72
Annexure 2: South Africa development indicators

Indicator                              2002/3    2003/4    2004/5    2005/6    2006/7    2007/8    2008/9   2009/10   2010/11   2011/12   2012/13
GDP @ current prices (in R mil)     1 171 085 1 272 537 1 415 273 1 571 081 1 767 422 2 016 184 2 256 484 2 406 402 2 659 366 2 917 539 3 155 195
Per capita growth (in %)                 1.60      1.10      2.80      3.60      4.00      4.10      2.30     -2.70      1.90      2.30      1.50
Population (in thousand)               45 454    46 429    46 586    46 889    47 391    47 850    48 686    49 321    49 991    50 587    52 982
% of population living in poverty        49%       48%       47%       45%       43%       41%               56.8%               45.5%
Unemployment (%)                        27.20     27.10     24.70     23.90     22.60     22.30     22.90     23.90     24.90     24.90     25.10
Source: Stats SA (2008 - 2014), The Presidency (2012)




73
Annexure 3: Key Agricultural Indicators

                                                              2006                                      2012
INDICATOR           2000
                    Area           Production   Consumption   Area           Production   Consumption   Area           Production   Consumption
                    Number   (in                              Number   (in                              Number   (in
LIVESTOCK                          1000t        Kg per year                  1000t        Kg per year                  1000t        Kg per year
                    mil)                                      mil)                                      mil)
Cattle              13.5           524          554           13.9           830.7        849           13.9           885          892
Sheep               23.5           105.4        159           21.9           141.1        183           21.4           153.1        160
Goats               2.4                                       2.1                                       2.0
Poultry                            869          938                          1200         1470                         1529         1899
FIELDCROP           1000ha         1000t        Kg per year   1000ha         1000t        Kg per year   1000ha         1000t        Kg per year
Maize               3 189          7 772        90.46         2 897          7 339        65.76         3 238          12 365       77.11
Sunflower           522            691          8.68          316            312          5.28          505            579          7.26
G Sorghum           88             206          1.92          69             202          1.86          63             169          1.81
HORTICULTURE                       R1000        Kg per year                  R1000        Kg per year                  R1000        Kg per year
Viticulture                        1 551 712    39.59                        2 785 205    44.40                        4 277 469    45.73
Citrus fruit                       1 531 422    18.64                        2 956 939    6.99                         7 924 992    14.66
Subtropical fruit                  1 008 261    28.23                        1 673 453    25.10                        2 743 196    23.36
Source: DAFF (2014b)




74
Annexure 4: Number of agricultural households involved in specific activity by province

                         Livestock                         Vegetable Production of other   Fodder/grazing
Province                           Poultry production                                                         other
                        production                        production               crops      production
Western Cape                28 334             29 176         39 337             22 725           16 516     23 804
Eastern Cape               330 354            334 665        246 412             99 052           24 335     33 493
Northern Cape               28 040             25 853          9 334             11 324             4 518     5 415
Free State                  45 207             51 414        106 809             63 193           11 106     13 811
KwaZulu Natal              268 656            356 881        340 743            109 580           27 393     45 715
North West                  88 633            117 453         36 620             42 923           16 013     25 301
Gauteng                     62 047             82 403        147 870             89 167           50 650     78 847
Mpumalanga                  72 896            127 759         91 214             59 885           11 439     20 595
Limpopo                    172 683            173 681        105 181            161 888           13 995     31 067
South Africa             1 096 854          1 299 288      1 123 524            659 740          175 968    278 051
Source: Stats SA Census 2011 Agricultural Households




75
Annexure 5: Division of agricultural functions between the national and provincial spheres of
competence.

      NATIONAL                                                     PROVINCIAL
      Determination of norms and standards.                        Rendering of support to farmers and agricultural
      Plant improvement.                                           communities regarding:
      Livestock improvement.                                       Extension services.
      Subdivision of agricultural land.                            Training.
      Agricultural resource conservation.                          Financing.
      Utilisation of agricultural resources.                       Household food security.
      Agricultural credit and financial assistance.                Disaster aid.
                                                                   Agricultural economics.
      Regulation of:                                               Agricultural engineering technology.
      Animal health.                                               Marketing infrastructure.
      Plant health.                                                Irrigation.
      Agricultural marketing.                                      Stock-watering systems.
      Combating of agricultural pests.                             Promotion of:
      Co-operatives.                                               Agricultural resource conservation.
      Quality of plant and animal material and products.           Sustainable utilisation of agricultural resources.
      Veterinary public health.                                    Agricultural technology development, adaptation and
      Livestock brands.                                            transfer.
      Determination of macro agricultural policy                   Improvement of livestock, plants and related products.
      Control of:                                                  Agricultural marketing.
      Import and export of animals, agricultural material and      Rendering of:
      products.                                                    Animal health services
      Agricultural and stock remedies, stock feeds and             Veterinary public health services.
      fertilisers.                                                 Plant health services.
      Rendering of:                                                Agricultural statistical services.
      Specialised diagnostic and research services regarding       Veterinary laboratory services.
      animal diseases.                                             Determination of agricultural economic policy

      Agricultural statistical services.
      Financial assistance in national disaster situations.        Administration of matters pertaining to state
                                                                   agricultural land.
      Maintenance of international agricultural relations.         Combating of agricultural pests.
                                                                   Regulation of abattoirs and subdivision of agricultural
                                                                   land.
      Promotion of agricultural        research,      technology
      development and transfer.
                                                                   Registration of livestock brands.
      Production of vaccines and other animal health
      products.
Source:         PSC (1994)




76
Annexure 6: MAFF Establishment by occupational bands, gender and race

  Total number of employees in each occupational category as at 31 March 2014
                                      Male                                        Female
  Occupational category               African     Coloured       Indian   White   African   Coloured   Indian   White   Total
  Legislators, Seniors, Officials and
                                      47          7              -        7       29        4          2        5       101
  managers
  Professionals                       360         22             12       109     294       26         14       83      920
  Technicians      and      associate
                                      509         115            8        98      454       52         9        56      1301
  professionals
  Clerks                              243         37             3        14      454       64         7        142     964
  Service and sales workers           336         4              1        15      102       2          -        1       461
  Craft and related trade workers     33          6              -        11      -         -          -        2       52
  Plant, Machine operators and
                                      178         9              -        1       9         -          -        -       197
  assemblers
  Elementary occupations              1033        113            -        5       926       40         -        2       2119
  Total                               2739        313            24       260     2268      188        32       291     6115
The provincial establishments are reflective/not related to the national level establishment.




77
Annexure 7: Policy Context

A7.1 Evolving policy context

The South African agricultural development and the budget processes have been generally affected and directed by national policies. Since 1994,
these policies have evolved as the quest to rebuild the country unfolded. The evolution can be divided into three phases: The reconstruction and
development phase underlied by adoption of the Constitution, first democratic elections and implementation of the reconstruction and development
programme (RDP). These were guided by the globalising environment that urged the country to liberalise and deregulate its markets. The White
Paper on Agricultural Policy (DOA, 1995) aimed at opening up the sector, i.e broadening agricultural thrust. Major agricultural programmes for
the period involved redesigning land reform, agricultural finance, agricultural marketing and trade, and resource management programs.

 The second phase could be dubbed the consolidation phase that involved tightening of the macro-economic environment and making the economy
resilient. This phase saw the introduction of the Growth, Employment and Redistribution (GEAR; 1996) policy that intended to maintain the
shared growth and reduce class differences. During this phase the integrated rural development strategy was implemented to uplift poor
municipalities (nodes). In the agricultural sector the sector strategy was developed to create a united and prosperous agricultural sector. This saw
increased role of the market for both outputs and inputs.

The final/current or third is the advancement phase. This is about identifying critical areas for transformation and creating programmes and
outcomes. This phase is underpinned by the National Development Plan (NDP, 2011). During the phase, five priority areas were identified that
include; education, health, human settlement, security and corruption, and rural development and land reform. The rural development outcome
was reflected or to be measured by the level of expansion of commercial farming and agri-processing to create jobs, and increase in the number of
small-holding farmers and their market share

Table A7.1 presents a policy map showing the pattern of policy developments over these years.

Agriculture and the allocation of fiscal resources are not immune to the policy developments. Sometimes the development might have been too
abrupt and not as continuous. Such direction would also be reflected in the resource allocation, but it also ends up affecting the structural or
institutional arrangements and programming of the department of agriculture.

A7.2 Agricultural sector strategy

78
The study period starts in 2002/3, following the adoption of the agricultural sector strategy the previous year. The vision of the agricultural sector
is (Department of Agriculture, 2001: pp viii and 3):

A united and prosperous agricultural sector

The strategic goal to support the vision is to “generate equitable access and participation in a globally competitive, profitable and sustainable
agricultural sector contributing to a better life for all”

The three core strategies were:

     Equitable access and participation through land reform and support services;
     Global competitiveness and profitability by addressing factor conditions, demand conditions, related and supporting industries, supply chain
      performance, enabling policy environment, risk management and international trade;
     Sustainable resource management through genetic development, conservation, investment in infrastructure and services, biotechnology,
      horticulture production and farming system perspective; and
     With complementary strategies that include good governance, integrated sustainable rural development, knowledge and innovation,
      international cooperation, as well as safety and security.

Table A7.1: Policy Map

    Period      Policy Event                                    Implication for Agriculture
                The Restitution of Land Rights Act, No 22 of
    1994                                                        To restore or compensate people for land rights they lost because due to discriminatory laws of 1913
                1994
    1995        White Paper on Agriculture                      Definition of the farmer: as anyone involved in any agricultural activities
    1996        Growth Employment & Redistribution ((GEAR)      Growing agricultural sector with employment
    1996        Land Reform Act (No 3 of 1996)                  Provide for land reform through restitution, redistribution and tenure security
    1995        Agriculture as share competence                 Creation of Provincial departments
    1996        National Agric Marketing Act                    Deregulated agriculture
    1997        Closure of all control boards                   Loss of institutions to support emerging farmers
                Extension of Security of Tenure Act (ESTA) No
    1997                                                        Deregulated agriculture
                62 of 1997
    1997        Closure of ACB                                  Land Bank to accommodate developing farmers


79
Period   Policy Event                                       Implication for Agriculture
         Prevention of Illegal Eviction and Unlawful
1998
         Occupation of Land Act (No 19 of 1998)
1999     General Elections                                  Growth & unity in agriculture
         Integrated Sustainable Rural Development
2000                                                        Nodal poor municipalities: agricultural projects to relieve poverty
         Strategy
2001     Agricultural Sector Strategy                       A united and prosperous agricultural sector
         Land      Redistribution     for  Agricultural     Sub program of Redistribution Programme designed to provide grants to black SA to access land for
2001
         Development (LRAD)                                 agricultural purpose
2001     Land Bank Act                                      Land and agricultural development through finance
         Biosecurity (through Animal Health Act 7 of
2002                                                        To promote animal health and to control animal diseases and movement
         2002)
                                                            Commitment to reduce combined greenhouse emissions by promoting sustainable form of agriculture and
2002     South Africa acceded to Kyoto Protocol
                                                            enhancing energy efficiency
                                                            Transformation charter for the agricultural sector to encourage agricultural businesses to measure and
2003     AgriBEE (2005)
                                                            report on the role they play in uplifting the society they operate in
                                                            Transformation charter for the agricultural sector to encourage agricultural businesses to measure and
2005     AgriBEE (2005)
                                                            report on the role they play in uplifting the society they operate in
         Comprehensive    Agricultural            Support   Provide post settlement support to the targeted beneficiaries of land reform and producers who acquired
2004
         Programme (CASP)                                   land through private means
                                                            State’s primary instrument for offering production and small equipment loans to smallholder farmers in
2005     MAFISA
                                                            South Africa
         Integrated Food Security and Nutrition             To reduce number of food-insecure households by half by 2015 – through increased domestic food
2006
         Programme                                          production
2007     LARP: Land and Agrarian reform                     Apex priority project to establish 10 000 farmers in two years
2008/    Global financial crisis                            Economy shrinks: agricultural
2009     General elections
2010     SONA: Rural development as priority                Agriculture to drive rural development
         Merger of DOA to DAFF
2011     New Growth Path                                    Creation of 5 million jobs and reduction of unemployment from 25 percent to 15 percent
2011     NDP – National Development Plan                    Increase capacity of the economy and productivity of agriculture to create jobs in 20 years.
                                                            Outline of key development areas integrating the three sectors of agriculture, forestry and fisheries over
2012     Integrated Growth & Development Plan
                                                            the medium term




80
