   LEARNING FROM THE MEXICAN
 EXPERIENCE WITH TAXES ON SUGAR-
SWEETENED BEVERAGES AND ENERGY-
 DENSE FOODS OF LOW NUTRITIONAL
             VALUE
 DISCUSSION PAPER               JUNE 2016




 María Eugenia Bonilla-Chacín
 Roberto Iglesias
 Agustina Suaya
 Claudia Trezza
 Claudia Macías
 LEARNING FROM THE MEXICAN EXPERIENCE WITH
  TAXES ON SUGAR-SWEETENED BEVERAGES AND
ENERGY-DENSE FOODS OF LOW NUTRITIONAL VALUE




          Poverty and Social Impact Analysis




María Eugenia Bonilla-Chacín, Roberto Iglesias, Agustina Suaya,
             Claudia Trezza and Claudia Macías




                          June 2016
      Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the World Bank.
The papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics
to encourage discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in
this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the
World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the
countries they represent. Citation and the use of material presented in this series should take into
account this provisional character.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor, Martin
Lutalo at mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.




                               Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.


Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office
of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-
2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




© 2016 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.




                                                                                                  ii
       Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

   Learning from the Mexican Experience with Taxes on Sugar-Sweetened
       Beverages and Energy-Dense Foods of Low Nutritional Value

                           Poverty and Social Impact Analysis

    María Eugenia Bonilla-Chacína Roberto Iglesiasb Agustina Suayac Claudia Trezzad Claudia
                                           Macíase

a Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, World Bank, Washington DC, USA
b Consultant, Sao Paulo, Brazil
c Consultant, Buenos Aires, Argentina
d Consultant, Washington DC, USA
e Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, Mexico City, Mexico



 Paper prepared with funds from the Poverty and Social Impact Analysis Multi-Donor Trust Fund
                                  and World Bank own funds

Abstract: Faced with a large and increasing obesity epidemic, the Mexican Government in the last
years has increased efforts to prevent and control it. In October 2013, Mexico’s Congress passed
legislation imposing taxes on sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs) and calorie-dense foods of low
nutritional value. These taxes were part of a comprehensive strategy to prevent and control obesity,
overweight and diabetes. In addition to fiscal policy and regulation, this strategy included other
health promotion and prevention interventions as well as measures to ensure better access to
effective health care services. The decision to implement this fiscal policy was the result of a long
advocacy process in which different actors participated, including civil society organizations and
government agencies, which provided needed evidence on the status of the epidemic and options
to fight against it. The taxes were designed to avoid, as much as possible, the substitution of
consumption of the taxed goods for other unhealthy foods and beverages not subject to taxation.
These taxes have been successful in increasing both the fiscal revenues and the price of the
products taxed. There is also evidence that they have reduced consumption, particularly of SSBs.
The taxes seem to have the highest impact among people in the poorest quintiles of the income
distribution, who had experienced the highest increase in consumption of the goods under taxation
in the last years. A debate remains on the actual impact of the taxes, particularly on health
outcomes. Thus it is important to continue monitoring the impact of the taxes through the
development of price and volume indicators, based on publicly available data, as well as health
outcome indicators.

Keywords: taxes, sugar-sweetened-beverages, diets, obesity, Mexico.

Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in the paper are entirely those
of the authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the
countries they represent.

Correspondence Details: Maria Eugenia Bonilla-Chacin, World Bank, 1850 I Street NW, MSN I7-
700,    Washington   DC     20433   USA.      Telephone:       202-458-9204.         Email:
mbonillachacin@worldbank.org




                                                                                                  iii
                                                      Table of Contents

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................. 1
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ................................................................................................................ 4
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS ............................................................................................. 5
I. INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................... 6
II. OVERWEIGHT AND OBESITY IN MEXICO ............................................................................... 7
    Mexico’s epidemiological and nutritional transition ..................................................................... 7
    National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Overweight, Obesity and Diabetes ........... 9
III. WHY FISCAL POLICY TO PREVENT OVERWEIGHT AND OBESITY? ................................ 12
    Foods and Beverages Subject to Taxes ................................................................................... 12
    Evidence of the Health Impact of Foods and Beverages Subject to Taxation .......................... 12
    Effect of Taxes on SSB Consumption and Health Outcomes ................................................... 13
    International Experience in Imposing Taxes to SSBs and Foods of Low Nutritional Value...... 14
    Consumption Patterns of Foods and Beverages Subject to Taxation in Mexico ...................... 16
    Consumption in Mexico Compared to the Rest of the World .................................................... 20
IV. THE TAX POLICY .................................................................................................................... 21
    Political Process towards the Taxation of SSBs and Energy-dense Foods of Low Nutritional
    Value ......................................................................................................................................... 21
    Designing an Effective Tax ....................................................................................................... 25
    A Closer Look into the Mexican Taxes on SSBs and High-energy Foods ................................ 29
V. AGGREGATE IMPACT OF THE TAXES AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK OF THIS
IMPACT ......................................................................................................................................... 31
    Impact of the Taxes on Revenue Collection ............................................................................. 31
    Using Available Public Data to Analyze the Aggregate Impact of the Taxes............................ 32
    Gathering and Processing Public Data to Monitor the Effects of Taxes on Sugar-sweetened
    Beverages and Energy-dense Foods of Low Nutritional Value ................................................ 33
    A Simple Monitoring Framework of Aggregate Impacts of the Taxes ....................................... 33
    Elements of a Monitoring Framework for Mexico ...................................................................... 35
    Analysis of Price, Consumption and Substitution Effects of the Tax Reform ........................... 40
    Energy-dense Foods of Low Nutritional Value .......................................................................... 45
    Comparing Prices of Taxed Products in Mexico with other Countries and Implications of these
    Differences ................................................................................................................................ 47
    Next Steps ................................................................................................................................. 49
VI. CONSUMPTION PATTERNS ACROSS POPULATION GROUPS LINKED TO THE TAXED
FOODS AND BEVERAGES .......................................................................................................... 50
    Data and Limitations.................................................................................................................. 50
    Consumption Levels within the Mexican Population before the Fiscal Policy .......................... 51
    What Happened after the Implementation of the Taxes? ......................................................... 52


                                                                                                                                                    v
   Regression Results for the Demand of SSBs and Foods of Low Nutritional Value .................. 59
   Regression Results for the Demand of SSBs and Foods of Low Nutritional Value Across
   Income Quintiles ........................................................................................................................ 62
VII. CONCLUSIONS ..................................................................................................................... 66
VII. REFERENCES ........................................................................................................................ 69
VIII. ANNEXES .............................................................................................................................. 76
   Annex I: Average Price Definitions and Values of Foods and Beverages Subject to the Taxes
   ................................................................................................................................................... 76
   Annex II. Sales Volume Indexes – Definitions and Values ....................................................... 79
   Annex III: TTest for Statistical Significance of Descriptive Analysis of Section VII .................. 82
   Annex IV: Methodology to Estimate the Own-price and Cross-price Elasticities of Demand of
   Foods and Beverages Subject to the Tax ................................................................................. 91




                                                                                                                                                     vi
                                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Mexico faces a major health and economic burden due to the large and increasing number of adults and
children suffering from overweight and obesity. More than two-thirds of adults are overweight or obese and
at least a third is obese. The country has the second largest adult obesity rate among OECD countries.

Obesity is one of the main risk factors for the development of some non-communicable diseases, especially
diabetes and cardiovascular diseases, which are the main causes of healthy life years lost in Mexico. Since
these conditions require extended and continuous contact with the health sector and generate large
productivity losses, due to premature deaths and workers absenteeism, they also negatively impact the
economy of the country.

Faced with this epidemic, the Mexican Government in the last years has increased efforts in the prevention
and control of obesity. Among these efforts, in 2013, the Health Secretariat launched a National Strategy
for the Prevention and Control of Overweight, Obesity, and Diabetes. One of the main pillars of this
comprehensive strategy is the use of fiscal policy to improve diets.

In October 2013, Mexico’s Congress passed legislation imposing taxes on sugar sweetened beverages
(SSB) and calorie-dense foods of low nutritional value to help slow the country’s rising obesity rates and to
generate tax revenues. The law went into effect on January 1, 2014, and includes a one-peso-per-liter tax,
equivalent to a 10 percent price increase on drinks containing added sugar. It also includes an ad valorem
tax equivalent to 8 percent of the value of high-calorie foods of low nutritional value, defined as foods
containing 275 kcal or more per 100 grams. These taxes were not only part of the strategy to prevent
obesity, but were also part of a comprehensive fiscal reform aimed at increasing tax revenue and reducing
the over reliance on oil in government revenues. Both taxes were part of a reform of the Law on the Special
Tax on Production and Services (Impuesto Especial sobre Productos y Servicios -IEPS).

The purpose of this study is to learn from Mexico’s experience in implementing this novel fiscal policy in the
fight against obesity. The specific objectives of this work are to: (i) understand the context in which the
fiscal policy was enacted; in other words, the reasons behind the Mexican Government’s decision to tax
SSBs and calorie-dense foods of low nutritional value ; (ii) describe in detail main features of these taxes;
(iii) evaluate the design and implementation process of the policy; (iv) take stock of what is known about
the impact of these taxes on fiscal revenue, prices, and consumption among different population groups;
and (v) provide options to monitor this reform on a regular basis using publicly available data.

There are several reasons behind the decision of the Mexican Government to enact these two taxes as
part of a comprehensive strategy to fight obesity. First, there is evidence linking the foods and beverages
that are subject to the taxes with an increasing trend in overweight, obesity and other chronic conditions.
These products tend to be rich in calories but provide little nutritional value. In addition, the consumption of
these products had been increasing fast over the years; indeed Mexico is one of the countries in the world
with the highest consumption of SSBs. Within Mexico, high-income families have been consistently more
likely to consume SSBs than low-income families; however, it is the low-income families (in quintiles I and
II) that experienced the steepest increase in consumption over the years. Finally, although this fiscal policy
is novel, there is limited but increasing evidence from other countries that these taxes can have a negative
impact on consumption of taxed goods.

The decision to implement this fiscal policy was the result of a long advocacy process in which different
actors participated, including civil society organizations and government agencies such as the National
Institute of Public Health, which provided needed evidence on the status of the epidemic and options to
fight against it. These efforts resulted in the enactment of these two taxes as part of the overall fiscal reform
that Congress approved at the end of 2013.




                                                                                                               1
The taxes were designed to avoid as much as possible the substitution of consumption of the taxed goods
for other unhealthy foods and beverages not subject to taxation. For instance, the tax on SSBs includes
all beverages with added sugar and includes a broad definition of sugar (monosaccharides, disaccharides
and polysaccharides) to include table sugar, high fructose corn syrup, and other high caloric sweeteners.

These taxes have been successful in increasing fiscal revenues and the price of the products taxed. There
is also evidence that they have reduced consumption, particularly of SSBs. However, there is still a debate
about the nature and extent of this impact, particularly on health outcomes.

A review of the studies conducted so far on the impact of the reform on prices (Grogger (2015) and Colchero
et al. (2015b)), including our analysis, highlight the following: (i) the prices of soda drinks tended to increase
by the amount of the tax or more; (ii) prices of smaller packages of the taxed products increased more than
1 peso per liter and larger packages increased around 1 peso; (iii) other SSBs (flavored waters and
industrialized juices) increased by less than 1 peso; (iv) it is not clear whether diet soda prices were affected
by the tax; and (v) there were regional differences on price setting.

When comparing the prices of SSBs in Mexico after the tax reform with comparison countries like Argentina
and Brazil, the prices in Mexico remain relatively low, which make these goods more affordable in Mexico
than in those two countries. This suggests there may be additional room to increase prices and possibly
achieve a larger impact on reducing consumption.

Our own analysis of the price structure of SSBs in Mexico before and after the tax shows that the price
differences between competing brands (that is, among cola soft-drinks) and the different types of sodas
(cola and flavored sodas) were high before the fiscal policy was enacted, and that the tax increase was not
large enough to move the entire price structure up. It was reasonable to expect that consumers could
purchase cheaper versions of the taxed product at almost pre-tax levels. For example, in December 2013,
before the taxes came into effect, the 2 liter Coke bottle was on average MXN 19.5 while that of Pepsi was
MXN 15.6. Also, the price of the 2 liter Fanta bottle was almost 4 pesos cheaper than that of Coke. In
December 2015, two years after the reform, the 2 liter Pepsi bottle was MXN 19.8, similar to the price of
the 2 liter Coke bottle before the reform, while the 2 liter Fanta bottle was cheaper (about MXN 18).

In addition, before the reform, a liter of the cheapest presentation of Coke averaged MXN 9.3 to the Mexican
consumer. After more than two years of the reform, it is possible to buy, through large sale promotions, one
liter of cola and flavored sodas with MXN 4.4 in Mexican supermarkets. For those consumers able to buy
at these sale promotion prices, the tax reform has not drastically changed the financial incentives to reduce
the consumption of regular sodas.

In terms of volumes purchased, existing studies, for instance Colchero et al. (2016) found that the post-tax
purchases of SSBs during the first year were 6 percent lower on average than the pre-tax trend. They also
found that purchases of untaxed beverages (mainly bottled water) were 4 percent higher. They found that
the reduction in purchases of non-carbonated taxed beverages was larger than the reduction in carbonated
taxed beverages. This could be due to higher prices and high price elasticities of non-carbonated
beverages; and consumers shifting to lower priced versions of taxed carbonated beverages given the large
variation in prices. They also found that the largest impact on consumption was among households of low
socioeconomic level.

Another study published by ITAM (Aguilar et al., 2016) found that the tax appeared to have incentivized
moderate reductions in consumption of SSBs. The tax on SSBs, contrary to what was found by the previous
study, appears to have had a greater effect among households in the higher income level. As per the taxes
on high-calorie foods, in order to control for potential product substitution resulting from the taxes, the
researchers studied the total calories consumed (taxed and untaxed foods). They found a weekly decrease
in calorie consumption of 1 percent. In their measures of BMI (Body Mass Index), the researchers found
no discernible difference across the years under examination, which is in line with the small impact seen
for calories consumed.



                                                                                                                2
Our analysis also used a series of the National Household Income and Expenditure surveys to observe the
behavior of consumption before and after the tax. These data have limitations to study the impact of the
taxes; however, the data provide some insight on the possible direction of the changes and who could have
been more affected by the tax. The descriptive analysis of the data shows a reduction in the percentage of
households that purchased and consumed SSBs between 2012 and 2014; this is particularly the case
among households in the poorest three income quintiles. It also showed a significant increase in the
percentage of households that purchased bottled water and, among the poorest 20 percent of households,
there was a significant increase in the percentage of families that bought milk. The data also show slight
decreases in the consumption of some foods of low nutritional value within households.

The data also show a significant decrease in the per capita consumption of SSBs and an increase in per
capita consumption of bottled water. Regarding the second tax, the percentage of households that
purchased energy-dense foods of low nutritional value, such as cookies, jellies and candies slightly
decreased from 2012 to 2014. The decrease in per capita consumption however was not statistically
significant.

Regression analysis of the demand for foods and beverages subject to the taxes shows that the own-price
elasticity of demand of SSBs is inelastic. This might be partly due to the imprecise definition for SSBs used
in this study since it was not possible to distinguish sodas, juices and other flavored beverages with and
without added sugars. However, when we look at the demand of sodas, which are more likely to have
added sugar (the market for light or low calorie versions is small in Mexico), the own-elasticity of demand
becomes more elastic. Across income quintiles, the own-price elasticity of demand of SSBs decreases
with income; while the own-price elasticity of demand of sodas is highest among people in the middle of
the income distribution.

Fiscal policy used for health promotion purposes is still a controversial issue. These reforms face major
risks. They tend to affect a relatively small group of powerful and concentrated businesses with capacity
to fight back. In addition, if the tax is small and there is potential for consumption substitution within the
taxed products (that is, cheaper brands, cheaper packages within the same brand, or through promotions)
the impact of the tax on the consumption of the unhealthy good could be small. Then, policymakers should
be aware of the possible resistance and producers and consumers strategies that could reduce the
expected impact of the tax. For all these reasons, it is important to continue monitoring the reduction in
consumption and consumption substitution (to healthy or unhealthy substitutes). This is possible to do
through the development of price and volume indicators based on publicly available data. These indicators
are important and it is relatively easy-to-generate tools for the political debate about effectiveness of the
reform design and implementation. Mexico faces a major health and economic burden due to the large and
increasing number of adults and children suffering from overweight and obesity. More than two-thirds of
adults are overweight or obese and at least a third is obese. The country has the second largest adult
obesity rate among OECD countries.




                                                                                                            3
                                  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was conducted by a team of World Bank staff and consultants. The core team of authors
comprised of María Eugenia Bonilla-Chacín, Roberto Iglesias, Agustina Suaya, Claudia Trezza, and
Claudia Macías. Maria Eugenia Bonilla-Chacín led the entire study as Task Team Leader; Roberto Iglesias
developed the analysis of the impact of the taxes based on aggregate data on prices and volume of sales;
Agustina Suaya carried out the analysis of the household data base; Claudia Trezza helped to put all the
pieces together and developed sections II and III of the report; and Claudia Macías supported the study by
identifying contacts and researching needed information. Nany Montes de Oca provided great support to
the team.

This work would not have been possible without the support and the joint effort of several people at the
Mexican Health Secretariat, including: Eduardo Jaramillo and Lucero Rodriguez Cabrera from the General
Directorate of Health Promotion; and Maria Cristina Gutierrez, Nelly Aguilera Aburto, Roman Rodriguez
Aguilar, and Diana Nicte-Ha Sansores from the Economic Analysis Unit.

The authors received valuable comments from Wendy Cunningham, Samuel Freije-Rodriguez, Fernando
Blanco, Edmundo Murrugarra, Alessandra Marini, and Claudia Rokx. This work was developed under the
overall guidance of Daniel Dulitzky.

The authors are grateful to the World Bank for publishing this report as an HNP Discussion Paper.




                                                                                                        4
                       ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
ANPEC - La Alianza Nacional de Pequeños Comerciantes
ANPRAC - Asociación Nacional de Productores de Refrescos y Aguas Carbonatadas
BMI – Body Mass Index
CCIs - Chronic Conditions and Injuries
CPI – Consumer Price Index
DALYs – Daily Adjusted Life Years
EMIM - Encuesta Mensual de la Industria Manufacturera
ENIGH - National Survey on Household Incomes and Expenses
ENSANUT – Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición
EURO – European Monetary Unit
FAO – Food and Agriculture Organization
FEMSA - Fomento Económico Mexicano, S.A.B. de C.
GDP – Gross Domestic Product
GDP – Gross Domestic Product
HDL – High-density Lipoprotein
HFCS - High Fructose Corn Syrup
HUF – Hungarian Forint Regional Currency
IEPS - Impuesto Especial Sobre Productos y Servicios
IESPS - Impuesto Especial Sobre Productos y Servicios
INEGI – Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Georgrafía
ITAM – Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México
ITAM - Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México
MXN – Mexican New Peso
NAICS – North American Industrial Classification System
NCD – Noncommunicable Diseases
NGO – Non-governmental Organization
NSO – National Statistical Office
OECD – Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OMENT – Observatorio Mexicano de Enfermedades No Transmisibles
PAN - Partido Acción Nacional
PRD – Partido de la Revolución
PRI – Partido Revolucionario Institucional
PRODECON – Procuraduría de la Defensa del Contribuyente
SEP – Secretaría de Educación Pública
SHCP – Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público
SS – Secretaría de Salud
SSB - Sugar Sweetened Beverages
TV – Television
VAT – Value-added Tax
WHO – World Health Organization




                                                                                5
                                          I. INTRODUCTION
In October 2013, Mexico’s congress passed legislation imposing taxes on sugar sweetened beverages
(SSBs) and energy-dense foods of low nutritional value to slow the country’s rising obesity rates and to
generate tax revenues. The law went into effect on January 1, 2014, and includes a one-peso-per-liter tax,
equivalent to an approximate 10 percent price increase on drinks containing added sugar. Milk and some
dairy products are excluded from the legislation. It also includes an 8 percent value excise tax on foods of
low nutritional value, defined as foods containing 275 kcal or more per every 100 grams. Some foods that
fall within this definition but considered basic-foods were exempted, such as corn and wheat tortilla and
unsweetened bread.

The Mexican Congress created these taxes as part of a comprehensive fiscal reform that was aimed at
increasing tax revenue and reducing the weight of oil in government revenues. Both taxes were part of a
reform of the Law on the Special Tax on Production and Services (Impuesto Especial sobre Productos y
Servicios -IEPS). But the taxes, applied to domestic and imported products, were also part of a broad
government plan to counter the growing obesity, overweight and diabetes epidemics in the country. The
president had launched the “National Strategy for Prevention and Control of Overweight, Obesity and
Diabetes” and the taxes represented one of its main pillars. The strategy’s three pillars are: (i) improved
public health, (ii) better medical care for patients with chronic diseases, and (iii) increased regulations and
fiscal measures to decrease the intake of foods and beverages of low nutritional value. The SSB and
nutrient-poor food tax is coupled with other interventions such as regulations on labeling and advertising
and is a result of a long period of negotiations between tax authorities, members of the legislative bodies,
civil society organizations, and the private sector that took place in Mexico between the mid-2000s and
2013.

Fiscal policies to reduce the consumption of food and beverages that are energy dense and of low nutritional
value are relatively novel policies. These policies have been increasingly discussed in the public health
arena as possible options to contribute to the fight against the growing trend of obesity around the world.
Since these are relatively new policies, the evidence on their impact on prices, consumption, and health
outcomes is still limited. In addition, these policies are difficult to enact since they tend to be controversial
especially because the products in question are considered harmful only when consumed in high or
inappropriate levels. Learning from recent experiences could help close the knowledge gap in this regard.

The purpose of this study is precisely to learn from the recent Mexican experience with the enactment of
taxes on sugar-sweetened beverages and energy dense foods of low nutritional value. The specific
objectives of the study are to: (i) understand the context in which the fiscal policy was enacted; in other
words, what were the reasons behind the Mexican Government’s decision to implement these taxes; (ii)
describe in detail the main features of these taxes; (iii) evaluate the design and implementation process of
the policy; (iv) take stock of what is known about the impact of these taxes on fiscal revenue, prices, and
consumption among different population groups; and (v) provide options to monitor this reform on a regular
basis using publicly available data.

The study is divided into seven sections. After this introduction, there is an overview of the Mexican
epidemiological and nutritional transition and the levels of overweight, obesity, and diabetes in the country.
This section also provides an overview of the comprehensive strategy the country is currently implementing
to prevent and control the epidemic. This is followed by a discussion on the main reasons explaining the
decision to include a fiscal policy as part of the Government Strategy to prevent and control overweight,
obesity and diabetes. Section four, explains the process to develop and implement these taxes, as well as
the detailed features of both tax measures. The last two sections detail what is known about the impact of
these taxes on fiscal revenue, prices, and consumption of the goods taxed and that of their substitutes
among different population groups. The first of these sections also proposes a framework for the
continuous monitoring of the impact of the taxes on prices and volumes of sales. The last section provides
the main conclusions of the work.




                                                                                                               6
                      II. OVERWEIGHT AND OBESITY IN MEXICO

Mexico’s epidemiological and nutritional transition

Mexico is confronting an obesity epidemic that is threatening to undermine the country’s economic and
social wellbeing, since this condition is one of the main risk factors for diabetes and other chronic
conditions. 1,2 Indeed, chronic conditions and injuries (CCIs) currently represent the main causes of death
and disability in the country. With improvements in child and maternal health and the control of
communicable diseases, life expectancy in Mexico has increased. This aging of the population, combined
with changes in diet, physical activity, tobacco use and alcohol abuse has resulted in large shifts in the
burden of disease of the population. Currently CCIs, such as diabetes and ischemic heart disease are the
main causes of healthy life years lost in Mexico (Figure 1). These conditions also generate a large economic
burden to Mexican households and the health sector since they require continuous contact with the health
system over long periods of time. They also generate large productivity losses due to premature deaths
and workers absenteeism.

                   Figure 1: Shift in Leading Causes of DALYs in Mexico, 1990-2010




Source: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, Human Development Network, The World Bank. 2013.

Mexico has a “double burden of disease” related to nutrition. Though the rates are declining, the country is
still facing challenges with malnutrition caused by nutritional deficiencies such as stunting and anemia. 3,4
At the same time, social and economic progress experienced in the past decades has led to changes in the
population’s lifestyle and dietary patterns which in turn have led to increased rates of overweight and obesity
(Figure 2) and subsequent chronic diseases.




1 WHO. 2002. http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/publications/trs916/summary/en/.
2 WHO. 2015. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/.
3 Kroker-Lobos MF et al. 2004.
4 Uauy R and C.A. Monteiro. 2004.



                                                                                                             7
                 Figure 2: Percentage of Adults Overweight and Obese, Mexico 2012

                   80
                   70
                   60
                              24.2             34.5              26.8              37.5
                   50
                   40
                   30
                   20         42.5             37.4              42.6
                                                                                   35.5
                   10
                     0
                              Male            Female             Male            Female
                                      2006                               2012
                                                 Overweight        Obesity
      Source: National Health and Nutrition Survey (Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición, ENSANUT) 2012

By 2012, the prevalence rate of obesity and overweight among adults in Mexico was 71 percent (32 percent
being obese and 39 percent overweight). 5 In that year, about 40 percent of adult women and 27 percent
of men were obese (Figure 2). This condition not only affects adults but also children and adolescents;
according to the ENSANUT 2012 survey, 12 percent of girls and 10 percent of boys 6-11 were obese.
Mexico had become the second country in the OECD after the USA to have such high obesity rates (Figure
3). Not surprisingly, the prevalence of diabetes had grown rapidly. In 2015, it is estimated that 15.9 percent
of the adult population was suffering from the disease, up almost 3 percent since 2011 6 and representing
more than double the OECD average of 6.9 percent. 7




5 Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición. 2012. http://ensanut.insp.mx/doctos/analiticos/ObesidadAdultos.pdf
6 OECD. 2012. http://www.oecd.org/health/49716427.pdf last accessed January 14, 2016.
7 OECD. 2016. http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/social-issues-migration-health/oecd-

reviews-of-health-systems-mexico-2016_9789264230491-en#page155,


                                                                                                               8
           Figure 3: Percentage of Adult Population Obese in OECD Countries: 2000 and 2013




Overweight and obesity not only generate an important health burden in Mexico, but also a large negative
economic impact. In 2008, it was estimated that the direct costs of obesity in Mexico, due to treatment of
14 complications of four groups of diseases linked to it, reached MXN 42 billion; while its indirect costs, due
to productivity losses, reached MXN 25 billion. 8

National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Overweight, Obesity and Diabetes

Faced with the high prevalence rates of overweight, obesity, and diabetes and their negative consequences
on public health and healthcare costs, the Mexican government sought a solution. This is a complex issue
since no country in the world has been able to reverse the increasing trend in overweight and obesity among
adults. 9 The available evidence shows that in order to stop and reverse the increasing trend not one but a
combination of interventions need to be put in place. In this context, the Mexican Government, continuing
the efforts started in 2010 with the National Agreements for Food Health (Acuerdos Nacionales de Salud
Alimentaria), launched the “National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Overweight, Obesity and
Diabetes” in 2013 with its three pillars, further delineated in Box 1. One of the pillars of the strategy is
precisely the imposition of fiscal measures, including a tax on SSBs and nutrient-poor foods, coupled with
regulations on food labeling and on marketing food and beverages to children. Key aspects of this public
health policy were agreements among all stakeholders on cross-cutting actions; the inclusion of health
aspects in all public policies; considering the social determinants as the strategy’s focus of attention, with
a comprehensive approach that includes everything from health promotion to health care services; and the
inclusion of measurement of the impact of actions and accountability mechanisms as essential elements
for the strategy’s proper operation.


8 Mexico   Health Secretariat. 2013.
9   Global Nutrition Report. 2015.

                                                                                                             9
Box 1: Mexico’ National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Overweight, Obesity and
                                         Diabetes

 Main objective of the strategy: “to increase the welfare of the Mexican population and
 contribute to the sustainability of economic development by stabilizing and reducing the
 incidence of obesity in order to reverse the epidemic condition of non- communicable diseases
 (in particular, diabetes) through actions of public health, following an integrated medical model
 characterized by intersectoral public policies.”[1] More specifically, the strategy aims to promote
 physical activity, improve diets and awareness of nutrition and healthy eating, increase the
 availability of water, and promote breastfeeding during the first 6 months of life [2].


 Approach: the Strategy tackles risk factors and social and environmental determinants during
 the life course. The goal is to develop an integral, multistakeholder plan. The agreement was
 signed by 15 government agencies in various sectors including health, economic, agricultural,
 labor, social welfare and social development sectors. NGOs, academia, and food and beverage
 industry were also involved.

 The Strategy is based on 6 principles: research and scientific evidence, responsibility,
 transversality, intersectoriality, impact assessment, accountability. The strategy relies on three
 main pillars:
                                                           Elements of the Axes
 Pillars                    Strategic Axes
 I. Public Health: The      Epidemiological                Information network, creation of an
 strategy    aims      to   surveillance      of Non       Observatory, definition of indicators of
 promote         healthy    Communicable Diseases          the epidemic, and assessment of
 lifestyles     through     and its risk factors           impacts.
 education          and                                    Promotion of: healthy nutrition; physical
 prevention programs                                       activity; availability of drinking water and
 like screening for                                        vegetables and fruits; ban of advertising
 NCD risk factors. The      Health Promotion        and    of       non-healthy          foods      and
 strategy also includes     educational                    encouragement to reduce sugar, sodium
 monitoring          the    communication                  and fats in foods. Increased education
 incidence of NCDs                                         on healthy nutrition, preparation of
 and its determinants                                      material for text books and creation of
 across the population.                                    teachers' networks.
                                                           Guidelines for prevention, improvement
                            Prevention
                                                           of early detection of diseases.
 II. Health Access:                                        Equal access to effective coverage:
 The strategy aims to       Effective Access to Health     incentives for improvement of treatment.
 increase access to         Services
 health care for people                                    Implementation of specific models of
                            Quality of Health Services
 with NCD risk factors,                                    care.
 especially for patients                                   Training on prevention, detection and
                            Improvement of skills and
 with diabetes.                                            management of diabetes mellitus type 2,
                            quality of the public health
                                                           hypertension, metabolic syndrome,
                            workforce
                                                           chronic kidney disease and dyslipidemia.
                            Infrastructure       and       IT for prevention and education.
                            Technology
                            Warranty and monitoring        IT for improving the drug supply chain.
                            of drug supply chain and
                            lab tests
                            Diabetes      Center  for      Development of multidisciplinary care of
                            design and evaluation of       diabetes.
                            prevention programs and
                            care for patients

                                                                                                          10
                          Bariatric Surgery           Improved access to surgery.
                                                      Financing, management, incentives for
                          Scientific evidence   and
                                                      scientific research and development of
                          research
                                                      applied research.
III.       Regulatory                                 Uses best international practices;
Policy:                                               providing information on total energy
The strategy aims to:     Labeling                    content and proportion of recommended
(a) impose mandatory                                  daily intake; utilization of Pledge
front    labels      on                               classification.
products     indicating                               Development of a timetable for
calorie content; (b)                                  advertising bans. Main type of programs
pass laws limiting        Advertising                 are excluded: soap operas, news and
food     and      drink                               sport programs
advertisements
targeted for children;                                Fiscal policies are put in place to reduce
(c) impose taxes on                                   consumption of SSBs and high-calorie
high calorie foods and                                foods.
drinks                    Fiscal Policy




                                                                                                   11
III. WHY FISCAL POLICY TO PREVENT OVERWEIGHT AND OBESITY?
This section describes some of the reasons behind the Mexican Government decision to enact fiscal
policies to contribute to the fight against overweight and obesity. Some of these reasons were: (i) the food
and beverages subject to these taxes are calorie-dense but do not provide much nutritional value; (ii) there
is evidence linking their consumption with an increasing trend in overweight, obesity and other chronic
conditions; (iii) there is evidence showing that these taxes can have a negative impact on consumption; (iv)
other countries have recently enacted similar policies with preliminary positive results; (v) their consumption
had been growing fast in previous years; and (vi) Mexico is one of the countries in the world with the highest
consumption of SSBs.

Foods and Beverages Subject to Taxes

Energy-dense foods are foods containing high levels of energy or calories per serving. Some foods are
energy dense but are also dense in nutrients, such as vitamins, minerals and proteins. Meats and cheeses
for example have high energy content and also contain a lot of nutrients. Other foods have low energy
content but are nutrient dense. Examples of these foods are fruits and vegetables. But some foods have
high energy content and provide very little or no nutrient content. These are often processed foods such as
cookies and candies, as well as some “fast foods”. 10

High calorie intake is not only limited to foods. One of the highest sources of calories are beverages
containing high levels of sugar such as soft drinks (sodas) and flavored juice drinks which generally provide
low nutritious value. 11 The calories obtained from these are often referred to as “empty calories”, the word
“empty” referring to their lack of nutritious value.

Evidence of the Health Impact of Foods and Beverages Subject to Taxation

The majority of the literature points to an association between SSB intake and noncommunicable diseases,
specifically overweight and obesity, and diabetes, the chronic disease most directly linked with obesity.
Most meta analyses of randomized controlled trials and prospective cohort studies conducted on the
association both in adults and children suggest a link between intake of SSBs and the risk of becoming
overweight. 12,13,14,15,16,17 No studies so far have shown a negative association between consumption of
sugary drinks and unhealthy weight gain, and the number of studies showing a positive association between
the two is increasing. And although most studies have not inferred direct causalities between soda
consumption and weight gain (leading to the possible assumption that it is not the soft drink itself that is
contributing to body weight gain but soft drink consumption could instead simply be a marker for poorer diet
habits) most studies still recommend that soft drink consumption be reduced at the population level to help
prevent weight gain and reduce the prevalence of obesity. 18

High intake of refined carbohydrates such as sugar leads to elevation of triglycerides and blood pressure
and lowering of HDL cholesterol, all of which increases the risk of coronary heart disease. SSBs have a
high glycemic load, which causes insulin resistance, therefore increasing the risk for diabetes. In addition,
because intake of sugar in liquid form is not very satiating, researchers are finding that calorie compensation
for the energy consumed is less complete at subsequent meals than when ingesting solid food. 19


10 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK53528/.
11 Gaskin P. S., P. Lai, D. Guy, J. Knight, M. Jackson et al. 2012.
12 Bremer A.A and R. H. Lustig. 2012
13 Te Morenga L., S. Mallard, J. Mann. 2012.
14 Jiménez-Aguilar A., M. Flores, T. Shama-Levy. 2006.
15 Malik V. S et al. 2010.
16 Fung T. T., V. Malik, K. M. Rexrode, J. E. Manson, W. C. Willett, F. B. Hu. 2009.
17 Bremer A.A and R. H. Lustig. 2012
18 Hector D., A. Rangan, J. Louie, V. M. Flood, T. Gill. 2009.
19 Brownell K. D. 2009



                                                                                                           12
Soft drink consumption has also other health implications other than weight gain, including dental caries
and dental erosion, bone fractures, low bone density and osteoporosis, hypocalcaemia, disturbed sleep
patterns, bedwetting and anxiety, headache, fatigue, decrease alertness, depressed mood and irritability,
metabolic syndrome, high blood pressure, and possible adverse effects due to Benzene. 20

Intake of SSBs during childhood increases the chances of overweight and obesity. A study conducted
among schoolchildren over the course of 19 months found that for each additional serving of SSB
consumed, both Body Mass Index (BMI) and frequency of obesity increased. 21 Intake of SSBs among
children increases their chance of becoming obese by 60 percent and of predicting weight gain into
adulthood. Among adolescents, research shows evidence for greater risk of cardiovascular disease and
high blood pressure, dental caries and inadequate intake of critical nutrients like calcium, iron and vitamins
due to intake of SSBs. Among adults, research suggests an association between SSB consumption and
risk of weight gain and obesity, cardiovascular risk, higher risk of stroke, high blood pressure, type 2
diabetes, dental erosion, and pancreatic cancer. 22

Effect of Taxes on SSB Consumption and Health Outcomes

The evidence of the impact of these taxes although growing is still limited. Evidence of an association
between increased taxes and decreased SSB consumption can also be found in the majority of the scientific
literature, especially where both obesity levels and soft drink consumption are high. 23 , 24 Studies by
Andreyeva et al. (2010) find promising results on the effects of price increases on consumption. More
specifically, in an analysis conducted by these researchers to estimate the effects of price changes on
consumer demand of major commodity foods and drinks in the US, the highest price elasticity were found
on soft drinks, juice, meat, and fruit, with low-income populations showing more sensitivity to price changes.
The researchers estimate that a 10 percent tax on soft drinks could lead to an 8-10 percent decrease in the
purchase of such beverages. 25 Brownell and Frieden refer to a Rudd Center report estimating a 7.8 percent
consumption decrease for every 10 percent increase in the price of carbonated soft drinks and to an industry
trade publication estimating a 7.8 percent sales drop with a 6.8 percent price increase. 26

Some researchers also suggest a potential impact of such taxes on weight. The level of impact and the
estimated weight or Body Mass Index (BMI) 27 loss varies from study to study. But most agree that significant
effects on weight and BMI can only be achieved with equally significant tax increases. According to Fletcher
and Frisvold one percentage point increase in soft drinks could affect BMI but only by 0.03 points, and that
more significant population-level BMI changes would only be made possible with a higher tax increase. 28
Powell and Chriqui did not find significant associations between the existing state-level taxes in the US and
adolescent weight outcomes. These taxes are low though, on average represented a 5.2 percent of sales
prices. The researchers foresee a potential impact on weight with higher taxes. 29 Along similar lines, Clarke
and Rayner, based on natural experiments, controlled trials, and modeling studies conclude that taxes can
decrease consumption and improve public health outcomes significantly only if the tax is at least of 20
percent. 30

And although most agree that taxes below a certain level do little to change overall population consumption
and weight, some research suggests that even taxes as low as the sales price on sodas currently applied
in US states can have an effect on subgroups of at-risk children especially when sodas are available in

20 Hector D., A. Rangan, J. Louie, V. M. Flood, T. Gill. 2009.
21 Ludwig D.S., K. E. Peterson, S. L. Gortmaker. 2001
22 Friedman R. R and K. D Brownell. 2012. .
23 Jou J and W.Techakehakij. 2012.
24 Powell L. M et al. 2013.
25 Andreyeva T., M. W. Long, K. D. Brownell. 2010.
26 Brownell K and T. R. Frieden. 2009..
27 An index commonly used to identify obesity, overweight, and underweight among adults. It is defined as weight in

kilograms by the square of the height in meters.
28 Fletcher J. M., D. Frisvold, N. Tefft N. 2010.
29 Powell L. M., J. Chriqui, F. J. Chaloupka. 2009.
30 Mytton O., D. Clarke, M. Rayner. 2012.



                                                                                                                 13
schools. A study in the US examined combined data from elementary school students in the US from the
Early Childhood Longitudinal Study and from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation on state-level grocery
store soda taxes. The authors found that children that were heavier, in low-income families, African
American or watched a lot of TV were most affected by the taxes especially when SSBs were available at
school. 31

Others agree with the previous conclusions and add that taxes can only reach their intended goals if coupled
with effective nutrition education and substantial reductions in energy intake or energy expenditure. Lin
and Smith hypothesized a 20 percent tax increase and estimated a significant reduction in calorie intake
and obesity among adults and children (respectively 34 and 40 calories per day among adults and children
with consequent weight reductions of 3.6 and 4.2 pounds in adults and children respectively and a reduction
of obesity rate of 33.5 to 30.8 percent for adults and from 16.1 to 1.34 percent in children). However, they
added, these reductions (which came with an estimated tax revenue of US$5.8 billion in 2007) could only
be achieved with substantial reductions in energy intake and/or increases in energy expenditure as well as
effective nutrition education especially among children. 32

 There are some disagreeing voices on the issue mostly coming from the soda industry. Consumer groups
such as the Center for Consumer Freedom which are funded by and represent the interests of big soda
companies, fast food restaurants and other for-profit companies, 33 or its Mexican counterpart Central
Ciudadano y Consumidor, 34 contend that governments should not dictate on the population diets and rather
leave that to free choice. They claim that research has no solid evidence that taxes will have but modest
effects on purchasing behaviors and on weight gain. To support their statements, the groups often cite
scientific articles showing little if no link between taxes and consumption and between taxes and weight
gain. 35

International Experience in Imposing Taxes to SSBs and Foods of Low Nutritional Value

Mexico is not the first country to have implemented a soda tax or a tax on high-calorie foods (Table 1).
Whether or not the aim of the taxes is motivated primarily by health reasons or by the need to generate
additional government revenue does not seem to necessarily impact the outcome of the tax as much as
whether or not the general public is on board and aware of the health benefits of the taxes. In the case of
Denmark for example, a “fat tax” aimed primarily to raise government revenues, with the acknowledgement
of a potential decrease in fat and salt intake, was quickly lifted. The tax amounted to DKK 16 (US$2.84) per
Kg and was imposed on butter, milk, cheese, pizza, meat, oil and processed foods containing more than
2.3 percent saturated fat. 36




31 Sturm L. M et al. 2010.
32 Lin B. H., T. A. Smith. 2010.
33 Center for Consumer Freedom. 2013.

https://www.consumerfreedom.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/2013_SodaTaxReportFINAL.pdf
34 Carlos Martinez Velazques. 2013.
35 In one report, a study by Finkelstein et al. from the Duke University and the National University of Singapore was

cited. The article concluded that taxes on SSBs would most likely have effects on purchasing behaviors, especially
among the poorer households. Though the article admits that there is no certainty that taxes will have an impact on
behaviors and that further research is warranted, the consumer group report interpreted such results as weak and not
based on solid enough research35. Similar conclusions were made regarding other scientific articles (Pereira MA The
possible role of sugar-sweetened beverages in obesity etiology: a review of the evidence. International Journal of
Obesity Vol. 30 (2006):28-36; Conlantuoni F, Rojas C. Have soda tax effects changed over time? Scanner data
comparison analyses. Selected Paper prepared for presentation at the Agricultural & Applied Economics Association’s
2012 AAEA Annual Meeting, Seattle, Washington, August 12-14, 2012).
36 BBC News. 2011. http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-15137948.



                                                                                                                 14
                       Table 1: Examples of Taxes on Foods (as of October 2012)

      Country           Year     Foods Taxed                                 Tax Rate
      US                Vario    Sugar-sweetened soft drinks in 23           1-8%
                        us       states (SSSDs and other foods in 35
                                 states)
      Norway            1981     Sugar, chocolate, and sugary drinks         Variable
      Samoa             1984     Soft drinks                                 0.40 tala/L
                                                                             (£0.11; €0.14; $0.18)
      French            2002     Sweetened drinks, confectionery, and        60 francs/L
      Polynesia                  ice-cream                                   (£0.41; €0.55; $0.66) for
                                                                             imported drinks
      Fiji              2006     Soft drinks                                 5% on imported drinks
      Nauru             2007     Sugar,     confectionery,     carbonated    30% import levy
                                 drinks, cordial, and flavored milks
      Finland           2011     Soft drinks and confectionery               Soft drinks €0.075/L
                                                                             (£0.06;            $0.10);
                                                                             confectionery €0.75/kg
      Hungary           2011     Foods high in sugar, fat or salt, and       10 forint (£0.03; €0.04;
                                 sugary drinks                               $0.05) per item
      Denmark           2011     Products with more than 2.3% of             Kr16/kg (£1.76; €2.15;
                                 saturated fat: meat, dairy products,        $2.84) of saturated fat
                                 animal fats, and oils
Source: Landon 2012.

In general, industry tends to resist tax increases on products. In this case the industry did in fact resist it,
especially when it came to taxing meat containing high levels of saturated fat. But the consequence the tax
had on the public’s purchasing behavior was ultimately what determined the outcome of the law. Due to the
increase in prices, consumers began cross-border shopping, specifically to Germany and Sweden, to take
advantage of lower prices. The industry and the country’s Chamber of Commerce contended this was
negatively affecting the country’s labor market and overall economy. The government repealed the tax less
than a year after it was put in place.

In the case of Hungary on the other hand, the public was overall on board with the tax. The government
had imposed taxes on SSBs, energy drinks and high-calorie foods. 37 Although some complained that the
true goal of the tax was to generate revenue, public awareness about healthy food had risen due to the tax.
In a poll reported in a WHO report, 80 percent of respondents who were consuming less of the taxed
products reported doing so due to the higher prices and 20 percent of those reported having become aware
of the health implications of such products. 38 This made it easier for the government to maintain the taxes,
even with the backlash of the industry. In fact, one of the other reasons why the tax was successful from a
public health perspective was that the industry began reformulating its products, and either eliminating or
substantially lessening the taxed elements contained in the products. The taxes are expected to raise
revenues of EUR 70 million per year.

Although France’s 2012 tax on sugary drinks and artificially flavored drinks (a 0.02 EURO tax on a 33cl
can, almost 5 percent of the overall value) had the primary objective of increasing government revenue, the
public was overall on board with the measure. The tax lead to a 5 percent drop in the carbonated soft drink




37 In 2011 the government imposed a 5 HUF (US$0.01) per liter on sugar-sweetened beverages, HUF 250 (US$1.12)
per liter on energy drinks, HUF 200 (US$0.89) per Kg on salty snacks and condiments and HUF 100 (US$0.44) per
Kg. on confectionary, cookies, ice cream and chocolates.
38 WHO. 2015.

http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/273662/Using-price-policies-to-promote-healthier-diets.pdf.

                                                                                                            15
market. 39 The tax was expected to generate revenues of EUR 280 million per year. 40 Similarly, in Finland,
where a 2012 tax on confectionary products was imposed and excise taxes on soft drinks were raised from
4.5 cents to 7.5 cents per liter, the population was on board and reports suggest a decrease in sales and
consumption of taxed products. 41

In the US, 33 states have enacted taxes on soft drinks or passed laws stating that soft drinks are non-
exempt from state taxes. According to researchers however, their impact on purchasing behavior and
consumption in the general population are limited due to the fact that such taxes are very low (averaging
5.2 percent of sales prices). Moreover, the taxes do not have a primarily public health aim and their
revenues are not earmarked for programs related to health. 42

So far, only Hungary has conducted a formal evaluation of the outcomes of the tax and its findings are
promising. The tax generated approximately EURO 61.5 million in 2013 and the population reduced
consumption in concerned products and nutrients.

Consumption Patterns of Foods and Beverages Subject to Taxation in Mexico

Consumption of high-calorie drinks in Mexico is very high. Across all age groups, Mexico has one of the
highest levels of consumption of high energy drinks in the world for ages 1 and over, with the most
consumed being sodas (carbonated and non), juices (with or without added sugar), water and juices made
from 100 percent fruit with added sugar, and whole milk. Alcohol is the 4th most consumed drink with high
energy levels among men. 43

Our own analysis based on household survey data from Mexico, found an increase in SSB consumption in
Mexico in the last two decades (Figure 4). In 1989, 51 percent of the families in Mexico had purchased at
least one SSB in a week. In 2012 the figure had increased by 20 percentage points. Most households
consumed at least one soda during the reference week. This is likely an underestimation of total
consumption since this household survey only provides detailed information of foods and beverages
consumed in the household and not those consumed outside. These findings are in line with research
conducted by Barquera et al., who synthesized dietary intake, income, and food expenditure data from the
1999 Mexican Nutrition Survey and 2006 Mexican Health and Nutrition Survey, and found an increase in
the percentage of household soda consumption from 48 to 60 percent between 1989 and 2006. They also
found that the percentage of overall daily energy intake from energy-containing beverages in Mexican
adolescents and adults was 22.5 percent, higher than that in the US (21 percent). 44,45




39 Credit Suisse Research Institute. 2013.
http://wphna.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/13-09_Credit_Suisse_Sugar_crossroads.pdf., 2016.
40 OECD Obesity Update 2012. http://www.oecd.org/health/49716427.pdf
41 OECD Obesity Update 2012. http://www.oecd.org/health/49716427.pdf
42 Brownell K. D et al. 2009. N Engl J Med. 2009 Oct 15; 361(16): 1599–1605.
43 Barquera S et al. 2008.
44 The data used for the analysis only covered the household level consumption and not the consumption at the

individual level, and it did not capture purchasing information beyond the household level. Despite these limitations,
the authors found a definite increase in consumption of energy-containing beverages in the Mexican population over
the past decades
45 Barquera et al. 2008.



                                                                                                                  16
 Figure 4: Proportion of Households that Purchased one SSB during the Reference Week. Mexico,
                                           1989-2012

                                        0.8
                                                                                                    0.712     0.698
                                                                                     0.68                                0.692
                                                                        0.663
                                        0.7                     0.641

                                        0.6              0.56
             Proportion of Households




                                              0.505                                                 0.628     0.614
                                                                        0.609        0.605                               0.609
                                                                0.587
                                        0.5
                                                        0.512
                                              0.482
                                        0.4

                                        0.3
                                                                                      0.188          0.189    0.187      0.197
                                        0.2
                                                                0.119   0.117
                                                        0.083                                                            0.133
                                        0.1   0.041                                                   0.143      0.151
                                                                         0.103        0.123         0.015     0.016
                                                                0.104    0.016        0.019                              0.021
                                               0.042    0.083
                                         0
                                              1989      1994    2000    2004         2006           2008      2010       2012

                                                       Juices   Sodas    Other SSB            Juice powder      SSB


Source: Own elaboration using the National Survey on Household Incomes and Expenses (ENIGH) of the following
years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, and 2012.

Other studies had similar findings. According to data from the Coca-Cola Company presented by the
Mexican Health Secretariat, between 1991 and 2012 the per capita consumption of soft drinks in Mexico
increased by 157 percent, from 68.8 liters per capita in 1991 to 176.3 liters per capita in 2012. 46

Sodas are not the only SSB that Mexicans have increased consumption of (Figure 4). Mexican families
have also increased intake of juices, energy drinks and fermented beverages. For example, in the early
90’s less than 5 percent of families purchased juices. Over the next two decades that figure quadrupled.
By 2012 almost 20 percent of households reportedly consumed at least one juice. All of this suggests that
consumption of this type of product became more widespread among Mexican families.

The consumption of other beverages not subject to the tax and that could be substitutes for SSBs have
followed different patterns. The consumption of bottled water increased rapidly from 1989 to the early
2000s. This consumption stalled later in the period observed. In contrast, the consumption of milk has
been decreasing steadily since the late 1990s (Figure 5).




46   National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Overweight, Obesity and Diabetes. Health Secretariat. 2014.

                                                                                                                                 17
     Figure 5: Proportion of Households that Bought SSB and Possible Substitute Beverages
                         During the Reference Week. Mexico, 1989-2012

                                                       0.8
                                                                                           0.677
                                                       0.7                                         0.657         0.649
                                                                             0.638                                          0.636       0.637
                                                                 0.613
                                                                                                                                                      0.618
                                                       0.6
              Proportion of Households




                                                       0.5

                                                       0.4                                         0.349
                                                                                                                            0.326       0.309         0.324
                                                                                                                 0.294
                                                       0.3                                 0.257


                                                       0.2
                                                                              0.12

                                                       0.1       0.046

                                                        0
                                                                 1989         1994         2000     2004         2006       2008        2010          2012

                                                                                         Soda      Milk          Water         SSB

Source: Own elaboration using the National Survey on Household Incomes and Expenses (ENIGH) of the following
years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, and 2012.

Not only more families bought SSBs, but also the quantity consumed of these products increased slightly
during the period of analysis. The following graph presents the daily per capita consumption of SSBs (Figure
6). Even when the increase is not particularly high for overall SSB consumption, the per capita growth in
consumption is around 56 ml. During that period, consumption of sodas and juices also appear to have
increased by 43 ml and 14 ml respectively.

                                                        Figure 6: Per capita Daily Consumption of SSB. Mexico, 1989-2012

                                                       0.18
              Per capita daily consumption in liters




                                                       0.16

                                                       0.14

                                                       0.12

                                                        0.1

                                                       0.08

                                                       0.06

                                                       0.04

                                                       0.02

                                                             0
                                                                  1989            1994      2000     2004         2006       2008        2010          2012

                                                                         Juices           Sodas      Other SSB           Juice powder           SSB

Source: Own elaboration using the National Survey on Household Incomes and Expenses (ENIGH) of the following
years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, and 2012.

There are large differences in the consumption of SSBs and that of goods that might appear as possible
substitutes. Particularly interesting is the comparison between milk products and sodas. While per capita
consumption of milk decreases between 1989 and 2012, the opposite trend was taking place for sodas.
Since 2006, the consumption of sodas and in general SSBs has been higher than that of milk. Also
interesting is to look at the consumption of bottled water. Even though the percentage of households buying

                                                                                                                                                              18
water is much smaller than those buying sodas or any other type of beverages, the total amount of liters of
water consumed is much higher than that of any other type of beverage (Figure 7).

  Figure 7: Per capita Daily Consumption of SSB and Substitute Beverages. Mexico, 1989-2012

                                                0.45

                                                 0.4
       Per capita daily consumption in liters




                                                0.35

                                                 0.3

                                                0.25

                                                 0.2

                                                0.15

                                                 0.1

                                                0.05

                                                  0
                                                       1989      1994    2000        2004        2006         2008            2010           2012
                                                                         Soda        Milk       Water         SSB

Source: Own elaboration using the National Survey on Household Incomes and Expenses (ENIGH) of the following
years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, and 2012.

When examining the consumption of high-calorie foods during the same time period, the patterns observed
are similar to those of SSBs. The data suggest that, though there was a sudden short-lived drop in
consumption of such foods around 1994, there was an overall increase in consumption of high-calorie foods
between 1989 and 2012, with cookies and candies experiencing the greatest increase (Figure 8).

Figure 8: Proportion of Households that Bought High Calorie Goods During the Reference Week.
                                      Mexico, 1989-2012

                                                 0.7
                                                                                     0.599      0.599        0.613                        0.614
                                                                         0.583                                               0.593
                 Proportion of Households




                                                        0.568
                                                 0.6             0.539

                                                 0.5    0.44             0.446       0.455      0.454        0.451           0.439        0.443
                                                                 0.384
                                                 0.4

                                                 0.3                                                         0.249                        0.258
                                                                                                0.215                        0.231
                                                                                     0.208
                                                                         0.173
                                                 0.2    0.146    0.154
                                                                                     0.113      0.117                                      0.13
                                                                         0.112                               0.111           0.105
                                                        0.076    0.088
                                                 0.1

                                                   0
                                                        1989     1994    2000        2004       2006         2008            2010          2012
                                                       Cookies   Cakes   Chocolate      Candy       Pastry           Jelly      High calorie food
Source: Own elaboration using the National Survey on Household Incomes and Expenses (ENIGH) of the following
years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, and 2012.




                                                                                                                                                    19
Consumption in Mexico Compared to the Rest of the World

The levels of soda and SSB consumption seen in Mexico far exceed the average seen in other countries,
especially countries at the same levels of economic development. Based on a systematic review and pooled
analysis of dietary surveys, in 2010, global mean adult daily SSB consumption was estimated at 137 ml.
SSB consumption however varies considerably by geographic location, gender, age and socioeconomic
status and in general SSB consumption is higher in upper-middle income countries and lower-middle
income countries, where the mean adult daily consumption is respectively 189 ml and 140 ml, than in high-
income and low-income countries, where the mean adult daily consumption is respectively 121 and 83 ml. 47
Although consumption varies between regions, Mexico is a true outlier among middle-income countries.
Mexico and Argentina, two middle-income countries, have unexpectedly high rates of soda consumption,
compared to China or Malaysia, which, for example have similar GDP rates but experience significantly
less soda consumption. 48

According to a report developed by Credit Suisse Research Institute, world daily average consumption of
sugar and HFCS per person is now 70 grams (17 teaspoons) per day. The countries consuming the most
are the USA, Brazil, Argentina, Australia and Mexico, which are all at more than double the world average
(40 teaspoons at day in the USA and 35 teaspoons a day in Mexico). In China on the other hand,
consumption of HFCS is 7 teaspoons of sugar a day. 49




47 Singh G.M., R. Micha, S. Khatibzadeh, P. Shi, S. Lim, K. G. Andrews, et al. 2015.
48 Marion Nestle. 2015.
49 Credit Suisse Research Institute. T 2013. http://wphna.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/13-

09_Credit_Suisse_Sugar_crossroads.pdf. Last accessed January 15, 2016.

                                                                                                      20
                                        IV. THE TAX POLICY

Political Process towards the Taxation of SSBs and Energy-dense Foods of Low Nutritional Value

At the beginning of the administration of President Felipe Calderón (2006-2012), the Health Secretariat
recognized overweight and obesity as one of the principal risk factors faced by the Mexican population and
the health system. 50 Until then, civil society groups had been promoting discussions on the overweight and
obesity epidemic in the country as well as the idea of a tax on SSBs. In 2006, the Mexican National Institute
of Public Health published a breakthrough survey, the 2006 National Survey on Health and Nutrition, which
revealed the burden of overweight and obesity in the country and the growing risk across socio-economic
groups compared to previous years. 51

Between 2007 and 2009, the Health Secretariat started to stimulate knowledge production about the
problem, to discuss diet changes in school meals, to promote industry self-regulation on advertising and to
coordinate prevention projects with other government units. In 2010, these initial efforts led to an initiative
aimed to raise awareness and coordinate efforts among the public and private sectors to implement key
actions to reduce the growth of the epidemic: the National Agreement on Food Health. As part of this
initiative, two documents were produced: the Technical Bases of the National Agreement and, together with
the Secretariat of Public Education, the General Guidelines for the Sale or Distribution of Food and
Beverages in School Consumption Facilities in Basic Education Schools (Table 2). The activities of the
National agreement were undertaken only through 2012, but the regulations regarding foods and beverages
to be sold and distributed in schools is a legal document and represents one of the main achievements of
the agreements. 52 This regulation has since been enshrined in the Constitution.

Besides awareness of the problem and policy coordination within the government, those initiatives further
promoted knowledge and scientific production enriching policy-oriented discussions on obesity and
overweight problems in the country. The initiatives were also useful to promote awareness and greater
responsibility on the part of the industry. 53




50  As evidence of this concern, Bonilla- Chacin (2014) mentions the Sectoral Health Program 2007-2012 (PROSESA)
and the National Health Program 2007-2012 (PRONASA). Both documents recognize the growing burden of non-
communicable diseases in the Mexican population, such as Diabetes Mellitus and cerebrovascular ischemic heart
diseases, which are related to poor diet, overweight, high cholesterol levels, hypertension, smoking and a sedentary
life.
51 In 2012, the new wave of the National Health Survey (ENSANUT) reveals a slower growth of the epidemic.
52 Bonilla-Chacin, ed., 2014.
53 Idem.



                                                                                                                21
                     Table 2: Initiatives to Reduce Overweight and Obesity Before 2013


        Initiative        Date           Goals              Priority objectives/actions                         Actors
     National            January    Reverse               i) Promote physical activity; ii) increase      Federal agencies;
     Agreement on        2010       overweight and        availability of drinking water; iii)            the industry; and
     Food Health:                   obesity growth rate   decrease consumption of sugars and              social
     Strategy                       among those less      fats in drinks; iv) increase intake of fruits   organizations. Multi
     against                        than 5 years old;     and vegetables; v) improve nutrition            sectorial National
     Overweight and                 stop the growth       labeling; vi) promote breast-feeding until      Forum for the
     Obesity                        among 5 to 19         six months of age; vii) decrease the            Prevention of
                                    years old; and        consumption of sugar and other caloric          Overweight and
                                    slow the growth       sweeteners added to food; viii) provide         Obesity
                                    among adult           guidance on portion sizes; ix and x)
                                    population            reduce daily intake of saturate fats and
                                                          sodium.
     Technical           February   States the vision,    Describe the conceptual framework;              Health Secretariat
     Bases of the        2010       the goals for 2012    provides an extensive diagnosis of the          (SS) and the
     National                       and its objectives    problems; proposed 117 activities with          National Institute for
     Agreement on                   in a much more        249 actions, designating responsibilities       Public Health
     Food Health                    precise manner        by Secretariat and entity                       (INSP) prepared
                                    than the National                                                     "Bases for a Sate
                                    Agreement                                                             Policy to Prevent
                                                                                                          Obesity" and
                                                                                                          background
                                                                                                          materials for the
                                                                                                          Technical Bases
     General             August     Ensure that foods     i) Establish the nutrient criteria for food     Secretariat
     Guidelines for      2010 to    which are             and beverages recommended for                   agreement between
     the Sale or         be         prepared and sold     consumption and those that should not           the Secretariat of
     Distribution of     impleme    at schools            be distributed; ii) create a School Food        Health (SS) and the
     Food and            nted       contribute to a       Facility Committee to monitor the               Secretariat of Public
     Beverages in        starting   healthy diet          preparation, management, consumption            Education (SEP).
     School              in                               and sale of food and beverages within           Compulsory official
     Consumption         January                          the schools                                     regulation for all
     Facilities in       2011                                                                             public and private
     Basic                                                                                                basic schools
     Education
     Schools
Source: Bonilla-Chacin ed. (2014)

The initiatives described in Table 2 were a good foundation to move the process forward towards national
level actions to improve nutrition and health in the population. However, the initiatives lacked the social
mobilization and political support needed to translate into laws and concrete programs.

In December of 2012, Enrique Peña Nieto became President of Mexico promising major fiscal reforms that
would generate new tax revenues. The day after he took power, the President received backing from the
country’s three major political parties. 54 Those parties had formed a pact called Pacto Por México, the
objective of which was to support the President in passing widespread reforms. 55 Among the 95 initiatives
agreed upon by the pact was a tax on SSBs. Only days after the President took power, a major proposal
created by civil society groups and academic institutions was presented by Sen. Marcela Torres Peimbert,
who was sensitive to these issues, thanks to her previous work in the public health sector. The proposal
included a 20 percent ad valorem tax on sodas. The proposal was ultimately excluded from the initial 2013
Budget Reform Draft. But in May of 2013, the national development plan (Plan Nacional de Desarrollo) was
presented to Congress and in it was cited a book published by representatives of academic medical
institutions. The book, Obesity in Mexico: recommendations for a Government policy (Obesidad en México:
recomendaciones para una política de Estado) highlighted 2004 data indicating that 75 percent of all deaths

54 The Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), the National Action Party (PAN), and the Party of the Democratic

Revolution (PRD).
55 What is the Pacto por México? Council of the Americas. http://www.as-coa.org/articles/explainer-what-pacto-por-

m%C3%A9xico

                                                                                                                                   22
in the country were due to non-infectious chronic diseases related to nutrition problems, with major risk
factors being obesity and high sugar intake. Citing the 2012 national health survey (ENSANUT 2012), the
book showed how the epidemic was growing in the country, especially among children and the poor. It
called for government regulation, legislation, and fiscal measures. It also called for the creation of social
norms around improved nutrition and increased physical activity to be achieved through awareness-raising
campaigns and circulation of sound, scientifically based information. 56

During 2013, the tax increase on sugar-sweetened beverages produced an active discussion on forums
and events with the participation of members of the legislative, civil society organizations (such as
ContraPESO and Alianza por La Salud Alimentaria), the National Institute of Public Health and multilateral
organizations such as the WHO and its regional counterpart PAHO. In September of 2013, President Peña
Nieto presented the annual Budget inclusive of a 1-peso-per-liter tax on each liter of SSBs with the specific
goal of decreasing soaring levels of obesity and diabetes, especially among children. A proposal to double
that tax rate to 2 pesos for each SSB liter was discussed in plenary sessions but ultimately rejected.
Simultaneously, Senate members from the Partido de la Revolución, PRD, proposed an additional 20
percent tax on energy dense foods.

Ultimately, the Senate approved an 8 percent ad valorem tax on high-calorie foods. It excluded some
unprocessed foods and it included different kinds of snack, chocolates, ice cream, cookies, sugary cereals,
etc. Both taxes were approved on October 29 and came into effect on January 1, 2014.

The forces at play

The passage of the taxes in other words was the result of two parallel forces: the government need for
increased tax revenues and the need to put a stop to the alarming numbers of the obesity epidemic which
was threatening to weaken the country’s economic and social wellbeing.

As with any major political and economic decision, a lot of factors were involved in the successful passage
of the law. Several actors worked both alone and in partnerships to overcome major obstacles encountered
along the way, the most important one being the opposition created by the soda industry and its political
supporters.

The actors involved

The Health Secretariat and the National Institute of Public Health were not the only institutions that
advocated for the fiscal policy to fight against obesity. Civil society organizations and medical academic
institutions were the first to raise awareness and circulate knowledge about the public health emergency
that the country was facing. Groups like El Poder del Consumidor, Fundación Mídete, COA Nutrición,
REDIM, and others groups such as small farmers and water protection agencies created an alliance to
demand a government policy to fight the obesity epidemic and malnutrition in Mexico. 57 The Alianza por la
Salud Alimentaria was active in many ways, including drafting laws and proposals, raising awareness and
circulating educational information, lobbying representatives from the legislative and executive bodies and
delivering media campaigns to create public support. One of its trademarks was an ad depicting two young
children being offered a soda drink entitled “would you offer them 12 spoons full of sugar?” (Les darías 12
cucharadas de azúcar?). Specific mention needs to be given to the special nature of the Alliance. As
mentioned earlier, it brought together a wide range of organizations representing many different interests,
from children’s rights to water rights, from development issues to consumer rights, and more. But they all
shared the common goal of improving nutrition in Mexico. Even more importantly, though their initial agenda
comprised of several items, early on they prioritized and focused on their first battle: to advocate for
government taxes on sodas. This decision was reached thanks to a political calculation made by politically
savvy groups of the Alliance who had extensive advocacy and lobbying experience and who understood
the specific political climate in Mexico and the possibilities it offered. Mexico’s upcoming general elections

56 Obesidad en México: recomendaciones para una política de Estado. Síntesis Ejecutiva del Libro.

http://www.oda-alc.org/documentos/1365120227.pdf..
57   Alianzasalud.org

                                                                                                          23
represented a window of opportunity for the group and its advances, especially since the incoming party
had among its objective to lead a major tax overhaul.

Once the priority had been established, the Alliance began working heavily on two main fronts in order to
make change: initiating a media campaign and lobbying the country’s key decision makers.

The group posted ads in newspapers and magazines. Messages were aired on the radio and TV and
YouTube videos were blasted. These were all mainly aimed at educating the public on the negative health
consequences caused by SSBs. The Alliance’s PR efforts led to press conferences, newspaper articles
and the publication of opinion pieces that added strength to the ongoing educational and media efforts.
They organized public protests, in turn gaining more news coverage, and, together with lawyers and fiscal
experts, drafted proposals ultimately presented to Congress. Simultaneously, and counting on the roster of
connections that many of the Alliance’s organizations brought to the table, members met with decision
makers, wrote letters to legislators and conducted outreach events with the intent of persuading legislators
to support the tax.

Both the Alliance and the legislators who ultimately managed to pass the tax reforms gained credibility also
thanks to the vast scientific evidence that had been accumulating for years, both internationally and
domestically, on the health effects of SSB consumption and on the positive financial and health benefits of
a soda tax.

Public Institutes such as the Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública – INSP and the Instituto Nacional de
Ciencias Médicas were crucial in providing the academic grounding for groups and politicians to make the
case for a national strategy and to push for legislations and fiscal measures. As mentioned earlier a
multidisciplinary group focused on Obesity and headed by INSP authored a book, which influenced the
congressional discussions leading up to the passage of the soda tax and snack laws in October of 2013.

The Bloomberg Philanthropies also contributed to this effort. The foundation provided $16.5 million over
the course of three years “to support public health policies aimed at reducing obesity in Mexico.” 58 The
foundation provided support to the leader of the Alianza por La Salud Alimentaria, formerly El Poder, who
had played a crucial role in pushing the agenda forward on the soda tax and previously, in limiting junk food
in schools and junk food advertising on television. 59

International organizations such as the World Health Organization and the Pan American Health
Organization also played crucial roles in the process, participating in and organizing national and
international forums and discussions, and helping craft effective messages against opposing arguments. 60

But without the backing of specific legislators and senators, the Health Secretariat as well as the President
of the country, the passage of the laws and the development of messages would not have been possible.
As mentioned earlier, one of the legislators that took on the responsibility of moving the discussion ahead
was Sen. Marcela Torres Peimbert who presented the initial proposal of the soda tax to Congress but who
also organized fora and represented the interests of civil society groups in the legislative bodies.

Opponents

Unsurprisingly these groups faced strong opposition. The opposition came from the beverage and food
industry, sugar companies, bottling companies, and some allies in the executive and legislative branches
of government, as well as lobbyists and civil society organizations.

Just like the promoters, these groups organized themselves, developing alliances (the National Association
of Small Merchants – ANPEC and Mexico’s soft drink makers’ association, ANPRAC) and crafting clever

58    Supporting Strong Policies to Halt Rising Rates of Obesity.                Bloomberg     Philanthropies.
http://www.bloomberg.org/program/public-health/obesity-prevention/#overview.
59 Tina Rosenberg. The Guardian. 2015.
60 Elizabeth Donaldson. 2015.



                                                                                                          24
media campaigns (“Share a Coke” read one industry ad). Their major arguments included the lack of solid
scientific evidence linking SSBs to overweight and diabetes and promoting the value of freedom of
consumers. Some companies claimed that by imposing such fiscal measures the government was harming
their businesses and consequently the overall economy. 61,62 The companies also created so-called “front
groups” like the Central Ciudadano y Consumidor which circulated information putting forth the companies’
arguments and debunking the scientific literature’s findings on the health consequences of soda
consumption as well as on the impacts of soda taxes on purchasing and consumption behavior. The efforts
of the industry were heard again in the Fall of 2015 when companies like FEMSA, Coca-cola’s major bottling
company in Mexico, and ANPRAC, Mexico’s soda industry lobby, engaged in conversations with members
of the (Institutional Revolutionary Party) PRI, the majority party, to reduce the SSB tax to 5 percent for
drinks with 5 grams of added sugar per 100ml. The companies repeated arguments used during debates
that preceded the implementation of the law, mainly that the tax was costing jobs and was harming the
country’s economy. This time however, ANPRAC, had come out with numbers claiming that SSB sales had
only decreased by 1.9 percent and Mexicans were consuming only 6 calories less a day due to the soda
tax. Moreover, they claimed that the tax negatively impacted households, especially the poorer ones,
because purchasing power for the basic food basket fell by 3 percent in 2014, and this was reportedly due
to the increase in prices on drinks. 63

In October of 2015, the efforts of these groups led the Mexican Chamber of Deputies to vote for a cut in the
tax to SSBs. This produced an outcry from the very same organizations and institutions that had led the
original fight. The Nutritional Health Alliance and ContraPESO along with other national and international
groups mobilized a second wave of media campaigns, including a newspaper ad asking lawmakers to pick
sides between the public health interest and the soda industry interests. At this point the groups could
count on scientific evidence that the tax was in fact working. The Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública and
the University of North Carolina had come out with their results (later published in BMJ) that the purchase
of taxed beverages had decreased by 6 percent and that the greatest decreases had been experienced
among the households of low socioeconomic status. 64 The Senate ultimately overturned the amendment.

Designing an Effective Tax

The key public health rationale for using taxes on health-related commodities lies in: “their ability to change
people’s consumption behaviors.” 65 However, in order to produce that behavior change, a tax on health-
related commodities should increase relative prices of targeted products (that is, less healthy foods,
tobacco, alcohol), and then lead to an effective consumption reduction; otherwise there cannot be an
improvement in health outcomes. 66 It is possible to imagine a logical sequence for successful fiscal policies
on health related commodities, going from policy instruments to health outcomes, as shown in Table 3.




61 The Guardian, October 15, 2015. http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/19/mexico-soda-tax-
cut-pop-fizzy-drinks
62 Eric Martin and Nacha Cattan. 2013. http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-10-29/mexico-tackles-obesity-

epidemic-with-tax-on-junk-food.
63 ANPRAC< Industria Refresquera Mexicana. 2016. http://anprac.org.mx/el-impuesto-a-las-bebidas-bajo-el-consumo-

de-calorias/
64 Colchero et al. 2016.
65 Sassi et al. 2013.
66 It is also possible to use public subsidies instead of taxes to change relative prices, for example using them to reduce

the price of healthier foods and in that way to increase relative prices of less healthy foods. In the literature, it is
recognized that sometimes it is necessary to provide incentives for the supply of more healthy foods (so the reason of
subsidies). However, the implementation costs of tax and subsidy policies normally are not equivalent.

                                                                                                                       25
Table 3: Sequence for Successful Fiscal Policies on Health-related Commodities



     Taxes/Public subsidies => increase relative prices of unhealthy foods => reduce
     consumption and avoid substitution to equally harmful products => Positive health
     outcomes

This section provides a detailed explanation of the chain mechanism by which a fiscal policy, mainly a tax
policy, can affect health outcomes. 67 It is focused on three of the key links presented in Table 3, which are
relevant to analyze the Mexican case: (i) how taxes/subsidies could increase relative prices of less healthy
or selected-unhealthy foods; (ii) how relative price changes could alter consumption behavior of unhealthy
commodities; and (iii) how fiscal-policy design and implementation could avoid consumption substitution
from taxed to equally harmful but untaxed products. There is a fourth important link in this literature related
to how lower consumption produces better health outcomes, in terms of lower Body Mass Index. These
possible outcomes were discussed in a previous section that detailed important evidence in the US
regarding the case of sweetened beverages and reduce BMI among the most vulnerable groups.

While any level of consumption of tobacco products is considered harmful, in the case of alcohol and food
consumption, the harmful effects derive mostly from excessive or inappropriate consumption. Taxes
obviously hit all consumers, albeit to different degrees. As a result, it is more difficult to define an appropriate
tax rate for health purposes on the latter type of products.

To produce an effect on consumption, tax-rate increases on health-related commodities must raise their
consumer prices. If tax-rate increases are completely absorbed in the supply chain, they end up reducing
profits, consumer prices are not altered, and consumer demand remains unaffected. The degree to which
tax rate modifications translate into changes in consumer prices is often called “tax pass-through”.

The literature has focused more on non-alcoholic beverages, because of increasing consumption and policy
interest. There are a few experimental or empirical analyses of taxes on non-alcoholic beverages and their
impacts on prices. Bonnet and Réquillart (2012) simulate the soft drink industry behavior in France and
conclude that the assumption of passive pricing by this industry leads to a poor estimate of the impact of
an upstream cost shock, such as taxes. The authors assume that competition in the industry is horizontal
(between producers on the one hand, and between retailers on the other), as well as vertical (between
producers and retailers), and conclude that strategic pricing and the relationship between industry and
retailers are likely to lead to over pass the tax amount. They expect a different behavior according to the
type of tax: an over-shift of 7 to 33 percent for a specific duty, while an equivalent ad valorem tax would be
under-shifted by 10 to 40 percent (Bonnet and Réquillart, 2012). Bergman and Hansen (2013) evaluate the
impact of various excise tax variations on alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverage prices in Denmark. Based
on the analysis of micro price data used by the office of statistics in Denmark to compute the Danish
Consumer Price Index, they come to the conclusion that the two increases in the soft drink tax that occurred
in 1998 and 2001 were over-shifted to consumer prices.

Usually food and beverage manufacturers and retailers pass taxes onto consumers in excess of the amount
of the tax. 68 However, differences in tax pass–through across different types of retailers have been shown
after the introduction of a fat tax in Denmark. 69 A study after the introduction of the French soda tax in
January 2012, focusing on purchases of beverages ordered on the Internet, estimated that consumer prices
increased gradually. By May 2012, the tax was more than fully shifted to soda prices while about 85 percent



67 The literature about public subsidies on healthy food is less abundant and it will not be considered here.
68 Andreyeva et al., 2010.
69 Jensen and Smed, 2013.



                                                                                                                26
and 60 percent of the tax was passed through to consumers for flavored waters and fruit drinks respectively,
but with a high degree of heterogeneity across retailers and brands. 70

Relative price changes and consumption behavior of unhealthy foods

Once the price of the taxed commodities increases, the impact on their consumption is determined by the
price elasticity of the demand for such commodities, that is, by the responsiveness of consumers to price
changes. The elasticity of the demand for a commodity determines whether consumers will increase the
proportion of their own income they spend on that particular form of consumption (inelastic demand), or
decrease it (elastic demand), when a tax increases the price of that commodity.

Besides the change in demand of the taxed commodity, it is also important to consider the effects on the
consumption of complementary goods (whose demand changes in the same direction of the analyzed
product) and substitute goods (whose demand changes in the opposite direction). With an inelastic
demand, tax and price increases on a commodity will likely displace other forms of complementary
consumption, because the income available for other forms of consumption will shrink. Depending on the
nature of the consumption that is displaced, this displacement effect may strengthen or weaken the ability
of the tax to achieve its goals. If the tax is aimed at reducing the consumption of potentially unhealthy
commodities whose demand is inelastic, and consumers end up decreasing their consumption of healthier
commodities, as well as their consumption of the taxed commodities, the purpose of the tax could be largely
defeated. A further problem may arise when a close substitute for the taxed good is available, leading to
an elastic demand. Consumers may reduce, even substantially, their consumption of the taxed commodity
and replace this with an increased consumption of the substitute commodity. If the latter has similarly
negative consequences on consumers’ health as the former, the purpose of the tax is again largely
defeated.

The demand for most health-related commodities that are currently taxed or have been considered for
possible taxation tends to be inelastic. However, it is easier for people to find substitutes for certain
commodities (for example, specific types of food) than for others (such as cigarettes), therefore, the overall
impact of a tax will partly depend on whether the tax is suitably designed to cover possible substitute
commodities.

Studies undertaken in different countries provide a range of elasticity estimates for foods and non-alcoholic
beverages, partly dependent on the definitions and the degrees of aggregation of food categories.

Staple foods tend to have a less elastic demand than foods that are easier to substitute. The demand for
most foods is inelastic, and more so in higher income countries, as shown in Andreyeva et al. (2010).
However, if people are aware that a product was taxed for public health reasons, they may be more likely
to change their consumption. 71

Sugar-sweetened beverages, which have recently been viewed as a possible target of taxation (for
example, as in France and Mexico), have elasticity estimates in a relatively broad range, from inelastic to
elastic, as shown in Table 4. The potential for substitution across beverage categories is high; therefore
elasticity estimates may depend on the aggregation of categories for which the effects of price changes are
examined. 72 Low-income consumers and children are the most price-sensitive. 73 The impact of price
changes is stronger for consumers in poorer socioeconomic conditions, who have a more elastic demand
for a range of food products. 74




70 Berardi et al. 2012.
71 Thow et al., 2010.
72 Smith et al. 2010.
73 Faulkner et al. 2011.
74 Green et al. 2013.



                                                                                                          27
  Table 4: Own Price Elasticity of the Demand for Selected Foods and Non-alcoholic Beverages

                                  Systematic
                                   Review                                 Meta-analyses
      Food/Beverage
                                                                               Middle
          group                                           Low income                                 High Income
                                     USA1,2                                   Income
                                                           countries3                                 countries3
                                                                             countries3
                                      -0.48                    -0.6             -0.54                         -0.42
          Fats/oils                                                          (-0.60 to -                   (-0.48 to -
                                (-0.14 to -1.0)1         (-0.65 to -0.54)
                                                                                0.47)                         0.35)
                                                              -0.61             -0.55                         -0.43
          Cereals                       -                                    (-0.61 to -                   (-0.48 to -
                                                         (-0.66 to -0.56)
                                                                                0.49)                         0.36)
                                     -0.34
       Sweets/sugar
                                (-0.05 to -1.0)1
                                                               -0.74                  -0.68                   -0.56
      SSBs, sweets&
                                                                                   (-0.77 to -             (-0.65 to -
       confectionery                                     (-0.82 to -0.65)
                                                                                      0.59)                   0.48)
                                     -0.79
                              (-0.13 to -3.18) 1,a
        Soft Drinks                                               -                     -                       -
                                     -0.86
                              (-0.41 to -1.86) 2,b
      Isotonic, sport                -2.44
                                                                  -                     -                       -
           drink               (-1.01 to -3.87)2
                                     -0.76
                                                                  -                     -                       -
            Juice              (-0.33 to -1.77)1
                                     -0.59
                                                                  -                     -                       -
             Milk              (-0.02 to -1.68)1
     Source: Sassi et al. (2013) Table 1
     1Andreyeva et al. 2010.
     2 Powell et al. 2013.
     3 Green et al. 2013.

     a Different definitions of soft drinks are used in different studies. Fruit juices are not included

     b Soft drinks include both regular and diet versions of soft drinks.



Existent tobacco products can be defined with a high degree of precision and almost the same can be done
with the different segment of the alcohol industry – beer, wine, liquors, etc. Consequently, demand
elasticities can be estimated with a fair degree of precision and have shown convergence in cross-country
estimations. However, sugary drink and food definitions can vary according to data availability and market
characteristics. The international literature points to the fact that elasticity magnitudes depend on definition
and aggregation of the food and the group studied. As a result, a large interval of elasticity magnitudes has
been observed (column 1, Table 4).

Fuentes Castro and Zamudio Carrillo (2014) reviewed demand elasticity estimations of soft drinks,
industrialized juice and bottled water in Mexico. Using the National Households Income and Expenditures
Surveys (ENIGH), they showed that elasticity magnitudes depend on the product definition: the broader the
aggregation, the higher the elasticity magnitude (more elastic). They showed that soft drinks could become
inelastic if only some segments of the markets were considered.

Tax design and tax implementation to avoid substitution towards unhealthy foods

Tax policies and reforms with a public health purpose should cover all potential substitutes of the products
taxed. Within this context, the tax reform implemented in Mexico is appropriate as it covers all possible
SSBs, and a broad group of unhealthy foods are covered under the 275-calories-per-100-grams

                                                                                                                         28
classification. However, using excise taxes for a broad set of products with many producers requires
significant implementation and monitoring efforts (PRODECON, 2013).

In the case of SSBs, the most important relationship is between regular and low-calorie soft drinks. If regular
soft drinks have a high price differential due to the tax reform, consumers either increase their demand for
low-calorie drinks (substitute) or, alternatively, reduce their intake of low-calories drinks. According to Sassi
et al. (2013) the empirical evidence is not conclusive about the nature of this relationship, although the few
existent empirical studies show that they can be complementary goods. In France for example, substitution
towards low-calorie beverages took place (Bonnet and Requillart, 2012). There is evidence globally of a
growing market of low-calorie drinks due to consumers’ heightened concerns about overweight and obesity.
This could indicate that low-calorie drinks are indeed substitutes of SSBs.

Mexico’s tax reform covers a whole range of sugar-sweetened beverages including possible substitutes to
sodas. This is an important element of the tax because other soda tax experiences have shown consumers
tend to substitute sodas with other drinks containing added sugars, leaving calorie consumption rates
among the population unchanged. Limited evidence indicates that the current practice in the United States
leads to a moderate reduction in soft drink consumption in children and adolescents, but the reduction of
soda consumption is offset by increases in consumption of other high-calorie drinks (Fletcher et al., 2010).
However, a more recent study on the impact of a tax on SSBs in the United States concluded that no
significant substitutions to other sugary foods and beverages would take place, while a parallel reduction
in the consumption of complementary caloric products would further reduce energy intake. 75

Less is known about the substitution process that takes place after a tax on low nutritional-high calorie-
foods is imposed. The Mexican rate -8 percent of the pre-tax price- is low and most of those products do
not pay VAT rates. During the first year of the tax reform, foods considered as necessities, such as wheat
and corn tortilla, were exempted from the excise tax. Also, small establishments were given additional time
to adjust to the new taxes (SHCP, 2014).

The experience from liquor taxation, where the possibility of homemade production of certain types of
liquors is significant, indicates that whenever possible people tend to substitute manufactured low
nutritional-high-calorie foods for homemade foods. Substitution possibilities should be analyzed case-by-
case, but changes in the sales of sugar and fats should be observed as an indicator of homemade
preparation of high-calorie foods.

A Closer Look into the Mexican Taxes on SSBs and High-energy Foods

Given the wide range of SSBs in Mexico, the 2013 Reform of the IEPS law sought to levy the entire
spectrum of SSBs to avoid the pitfalls of increasing consumption of substitute SSBs not included in the tax.
The text of the law listed the different types of beverages covered by the tax. The common thread
throughout the list of products is the presence of added sugar:

      i.    Any flavored non-alcoholic beverages, concentrates, powders, syrups, essences or flavored
            extracts, which can be diluted to obtain flavored non-alcoholic beverages and syrups or
            concentrates for flavored non-alcoholic beverages as long as those goods contain added sugars.
     ii.    In the case of concentrates, powders, syrups, essences or flavored extracts, the tax rate is
            calculated considering the number of liters of flavored non-alcoholic beverages that is possible to
            produce with those elements, according to producer technical specifications.
     iii.   The energy drinks with added sugars are taxed with the IEPS of sugar-sweetened drinks on top of
            the 25 percent IEPS rate for energy drinks 76.

The following sugar-sweetened beverages were exempted from the tax:
  i.     Those registered as medicines (for example, cough syrups)

75Finkelstein et al., 2013.
76 In
    order to avoid interpretation challenges, the 2013 reform of the IEPS Law establishes a definition of flavored non-
alcoholic beverages, concentrates, powders, syrups, essence, flavored extracts and energetic drinks.

                                                                                                                   29
  ii.          Oral rehydration solutions
 iii.          Milk in any presentation
 iv.           Beverages prepared in restaurants and other places such as bars and cinemas (as these cases
               are considered as a service provision and not a sale and thus are not regulated by the IEPS).

In the case of non-basic food items of more than 275 calories per 100 grams, considered as low-nutritional-
high-calorie foods, the law listed a set of non-basic food products:
         i.  Snacks
        ii.  Candy store products
       iii.  Chocolate and other cocoa derivative products
       iv.   Crème caramel and pudding
        v.   Fruit and vegetable sweets
       vi.   Peanut and hazelnut cream
      vii.   Caramel
     viii.   Sugary cereals
       ix.   Ice creams

The law delegated the Tax Administration Service to establish those high-density foods considered basic
foods. So, the following list of basic and high density foods was created:

         i.       Wheat-based products:
                  a. Wheat flour tortilla, including whole wheat
                  b. Non-sweet breads: bolillo, telera, baguette, chapata, birote and similar, white and whole
                     grain, including pan de caja
                  c. Foods based on wheat cereals without added sugars, including whole wheat
        ii.       Corn-based products:
                  d. Corn tortilla, even when toasted
                  e. Foods based on corn cereals without added sugars
        iii.      Other cereal-based products:
                  f. Foods that are cereal based for babies and young children.
                  g. Foods that are cereal based without sugars, including whole grains.
                  h. Non-sweet breads from other cereals, whole grain or not, including pan de caja.

The 2013 reform of the IEPS law established the categories of high-density non-basic foods (> 275 calories
per 100 grams) and meant to cover the main products consumed by the Mexican population. However,
during 2014, the Tax Administration Service needed to produce additional specifications for certain products
defined in the law, such as snacks, chocolate and cocoa derivative products, raw cereal preparations. In
May 2015, the Tax Administration Service established that the application of the tax rate would consider
the calories defined in the product labeling in conformity with la Norma Oficial Mexicana (NOM-061-
SCFI/SSA 1-2010).

The Mexican tax reform aimed to cover all possible substitutes of its aimed objectives (sugar beverages
and low nutritional-high-calorie non basic foods). However, differently from taxes on SSBs, taxes on low
nutritional-high-calorie foods are more difficult to enforce and administer. First, there is artisanal and
homemade production of many types of those industrialized products covered by taxation. To reduce the
homemade and artisanal production, the government taxes corn and wheat flour, nixtamal and corn dough.
Second, given the vast set of products, even without ready substitutes it would be difficult to tax and control
each one of them. The question is to focus on the products that are most relevant in terms of high-calorie
consumption.




                                                                                                           30
                        V. AGGREGATE IMPACT OF THE TAXES AND MONITORING
                                   FRAMEWORK OF THIS IMPACT

Impact of the Taxes on Revenue Collection

The two taxes were part not only of the National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Overweight,
Obesity and Diabetes but they were also part of a comprehensive fiscal reform. As such, one of the main
objectives of the reform was precisely to increase government revenue. Figure 9 shows the revenue
collected from the two new taxes on SSBs and calorie-dense foods of low nutritional value. As can be
observed in the graph, revenues from the tax on SSBs were greater than the revenues collected from the
tax on high-calorie foods.

                                   Figure 9: Seasonal Comparison of IEPS Revenue between 2014 and 2015

                        1,000
                                                                                                                           101
                         900                                                                                         142
                                                                                                                           113
                         800
                                                                             89                                      120                                                104
   Million US dollars




                         700                                                                       88          100                                                 97
                                                                                   102     93                                                          90
                                                              86        95                               94                                                             136
                         600                                                 148                   140                                        93
                                                                                   142 139                     121                                             137
                                                     83                                                                              91               138
                         500                                 110 125                                     128                                 124
                                    96       79     124                                                                             107
                         400                 98
                                    72
                         300
                         200
                         100
                            0


                         Tobacco                                              Alcohol                                      Beer
                         Gambling                                             Telecommunications                           Non-alcoholic drinks with added sugars
                         Non-essential food with high caloric density         Pesticides                                   Fossil fuels (except petrol & diesel)
                         Others

*Excludes IEPS revenue on petrol and diesel: Total revenue: USD$9.154 billion)
Average exchange rate: MXP$13.31 – USD$1.00.
Source: Health Secretariat – Economic Analysis Unit using data from the Secretary of Finance and Public Credit.
Opportune Statistics of Public Finance. 2014. INEGI. CPI and Banco de Mexico for Exchange rates.

There is currently a debate on whether the revenue collected from these taxes should be earmarked for
health and particularly for activities aimed at the prevention and control of overweight, obesity and diabetes.
At the moment, the revenue collected from these taxes is not set aside for any particular type of expenditure.
Box 2 below provides an overview of international examples in earmarking “sin taxes” for health and some
of the arguments in favor and against this.




                                                                                                                                                                              31
                        Box 2: Earmarking Revenues from “Sin Taxes” for Health

       Taxes on products known to be harmful to health such as alcohol, tobacco, and also SSBs and
       foods of low nutritional value (sometimes known as “sin taxes”) are widely applied and
       sometimes are earmarked, at least in part, for health. While sin taxes do not raise significant
       resources to fund general health coverage, earmarked taxes overall have been successfully
       used to partially or totally finance different types of health expenditures such as:
           i) Health promotion funds (e.g. Australia, Thailand, Taiwan, and Mongolia) and specific
                health activities such as tobacco control (e.g. Panama, Taiwan, Laos, and Vietnam) or
                alcohol reduction programs (e.g. New Zealand);
           ii) Treatment of certain diseases or specific health expenditures such as cancer (e.g.
                Nepal) or AIDS treatment (e.g. Zambia); and
           iii) General health coverage extension for either health insurance based systems (e.g.
                France, Taiwan, Ghana, and Gabon), tax financed systems (e.g. Guatemala, Djibouti,
                Mongolia, and Qatar), or the poor (e.g. Philippines and Chile).

       There is considerable debate about whether hypothecation of tax revenues for health is desirable
       or not. In general, ministries of finance prefer not to have their hands tied by hypothecation while
       frequently health ministries and advocates prefer hypothecation on the grounds that these
       monies cannot, at least in theory, be taken for other purposes. There is also some evidence that
       it is more feasible to get populations to agree to the introduction of a new “health tax” than to a
       new tax that would be used for an unspecified purpose.

       Sources: Adapted from World Bank (2016): Earmarking for Health. Working Paper.
       Forthcoming. Washington DC.

Using Available Public Data to Analyze the Aggregate Impact of the Taxes

Governments and non-governmental organizations in middle and low-income countries have several
challenges when analyzing the effects of increased taxes on unhealthy foods and beverages (that is,
alcohol products, SSBs and high calorie foods). 77

First, the public sector does not release information on prices and sales of taxed products to the public on
a regular basis. 78,79 Second, it is also difficult to track and follow consumers’ reactions and producers’
strategies to deal with the taxes. This is because governments do not normally produce or publish regular
data on consumers’ shifts between unhealthy and healthy products or, alternatively, between unhealthy
products and less taxed but equally risky products. Along the same lines, authorities do not collect
information on producers’ strategies, such as changes in product content, modifications in product
packaging, and pricing strategies to interfere in consumers' expected responses.

Finally, due to this lack of public and consistent information, public and legislative discussions on the
economic and health impacts of those reforms are not as effective as they could be. It is often the
companies whose products are being taxed that collect more detailed information on the impact, market


77An  analysis of those challenges in the case of Philippine Sin (tobacco and beer) Tax reform could be found in Kaiser
et al. (forthcoming). The authors proposed a monitoring framework with several impact indicators in order to assist the
Philippine government in the legislative discussion about the Sin Tax reform progress.
78 Traditional public statistics in Lower and Middle- Income countries normally display more aggregated information

about prices and industrial production/sales, according to a large family of similar products (that is, beverages instead
of beer; or combining SSB and bottled water) or a standardized statistical category. Also, countries do not normally
have public disaggregated data on retail sales of those products.
79Tax administration authorities could also produce statistical information about average prices and sales of the taxed

products, because producers and taxpayers may inform those variables on tax forms. This is the case, for example, of
tobacco products after the awareness of tobacco harm. Tax authorities of several countries produce public information
of duty-paid sales, import, export and detailed and average prices of tobacco products.

                                                                                                                     32
trends, and consumer responses to the taxes. Governments conduct limited impact analyses while the
producers and sellers that have a vested interest in the effects of taxes, tend to interpret and use their own
data and information on the outcomes of the tax reform to their advantage.

Consumption trend analyses are also fundamental to evaluating the impact of a tax policy with a public
health aim. The impact of this policy continues to be controversial. Supporters and foes debate about its
capacity to improve health outcomes. In Mexico, one of the main controversies surrounding the impact of
the taxes is around the extent of reduction of consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages. Despite the
importance of this issue for the sustainability of the reform, very little measurement has been done so far
on the impact of the tax reform on sales. The National Institute of Public Health has done a rigorous
evaluation of the impact of the taxes, using a special survey; this evaluation was published in the British
Medical Journal. However, the Government has not published any official statistics on the impact of the
taxes on SSBs and high-calorie foods sales. The evidence that is available comes from private sources or
academic studies, which are based on privately funded surveys.

This section has several aims. First, to show what type of aggregate data is needed to monitor on a regular
basis price and consumption reactions to the tax change in Mexico, and how such data could be obtained
from official data sources. It also discusses some price and consumption impact of the recent reform in
Mexico, based on academic studies and some examples of public data. Finally, the section proposes
options to organize public data to monitor the reform.

Gathering and Processing Public Data to Monitor the Effects of Taxes on Sugar-sweetened
Beverages and Energy-dense Foods of Low Nutritional Value

Mexico’s National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Overweight, Obesity and Diabetes has a matrix
of indicators to monitor and evaluate its results. This monitoring would be carried out by the Mexican
Observatory of Noncommunicable Diseases (OMENT). 80 In support to the Health Secretariat and the
OMENT, this section proposes a subset of price and volume of sales indicators/indexes to contribute to the
monitoring of the effect of the Strategy’s fiscal measures on prices, consumption, and substitution of the
products being taxed. These proposed indicators are based on publicly available data.

A Simple Monitoring Framework of Aggregate Impacts of the Taxes

Table 5 presents the first step of the impact chain of a tax: the price effect. Producers can pass the full
extent of the tax to consumers – a likely reaction in concentrated markets – or adopt several softer actions
to reduce the impact on prices, seeking to keep consumers in the product market. The last two reactions –
craft and non-duty paid production - imply different degrees of tax evasion allowing existing or new
producers to sell their products at a lower price, while still maintaining profitability. 81

In Mexico, as is common in most countries, consumer price information is only publicly available at an
aggregate level, such is the case of “refreshments” (refrescos). The refreshment category is broad and
combines detailed price information on carbonated soft drinks, flavored carbonated and non-carbonated
drinks, water and other beverages. Sometimes the publicly available price information may coincide with
the aggregation level of the taxed product. When the price information of the product of interest is under a
higher level of aggregation, there is a need for an additional step, which is to construct a price index for a
subset of the aggregated category. In that case, individual price information would need to be processed
to generate a price index that is as close as possible to that of the taxed product.




80 The Observatory is based in the University of Nueva Leon and is part of a network of academic and commercial

institutions cooperating with the National Strategy against Overweight and Obesity.
81 Before the tax increase, lower prices of tax duty products may not create financial incentives for craft production and

non-duty manufactured production of the taxed products.

                                                                                                                      33
                                               Table 5: Price Effect

                                       Individual price
                   Policy                                               Aggregate price effect
                                           reaction
                                         Fully passed                    Increase as expected

                                   More than fully passed           Increased more than expected

                                       Partially passed
               Tax increase
                                      Cheaper Package
                                                                      Increase less than expected
                                       Craft production

                                  Non duty paid production


The increase in price of the taxed product quantified by the index to be processed may depend on the
particular sample of product variants and package sizes that the national statistical office (NSO) usually
collects. NSOs do not normally capture well handmade or craft production and may not capture trends
related to non-duty paying production, particularly in tobacco and alcohol products. Also, after the tax
implementation, new packaging trends -seeking to reduce the cost per quantity of the product- may not be
well captured by the sample of product variants of the NSO. Moreover, the consumer price basket may not
have detailed information on certain taxed products – that is, large package size of diet cola in Mexico -
making it impossible to have a price indicator for this specific product or product category.

Table 6 displays the consumption effect and its components: type of individual consumer reactions, impact
on health, effects on aggregate sales of the taxed product and on sales of substitute products. When taxes
cause an unhealthy product to become more expensive, consumers can reduce the intake of the product,
and receive the consequent health benefits of such decision, or they can select an alternative, cheaper
option, such as purchasing packages in bulk with lower price per quantity (common in SSBs). They can
also simply select cheaper price brands as substitutes. The indicators to be processed in this stage are
sale volumes of the taxed product and of some substitutes.

                                          Table 6: Consumption Effect

                                                                   Aggregate effect         Aggregate effect
           Individual Consumer
                                               Health Effect         on targeted              on sales of
        reactions Targeted product
                                                                    product sales             substitutes
               Quit consumption                    Positive
         Reduce consumption of the                                      Decrease               May increase
                                                   Positive
              same product
       Switch to cheaper presentation
                                                    None
            of the same product                                         Increase                 No effect
         Switch to lower-price brand                None

NSOs normally have industrial statistics of production and sales, 82 but they do not have detailed information
on volume of retail sales. Under normal business conditions, industrial sales may be a good proxy of
consumer purchases within a certain period, a year for example, since retailers do not normally want to
maintain unwanted stocks of any product. Available information of industrial sales is normally classified

82 At industrial level, NSOs can capture directly the sales volume or arrive to that figure adding production volume plus

stock variations.

                                                                                                                     34
according to an industrial product classification. 83 Consequently, to have a good indicator of industrial sales
of a taxed product, it may be necessary to further process sales data of the desired product, if it is not
contemplated in published aggregate information. In case of differentiated products such as SSBs and
high-calorie foods, the production of sale indicators of as many as possible product variants may be useful.
The precise definition of sale indicators of taxed product should balance the actual configuration of
consumption and data availability in the statistical office.

The definition of substitute products and the construction of sale indicators of those products are important,
as they may help to identify and track the consumer substitution process. Table 7 shows an example of the
substitution effect in the case of SSBs. Bottled water and milk are conventional candidates in the
substitution process, but the precise configuration of the substitution in a specific situation may depend on
relative prices and availability of beverages without added sugar.

                                       Table 7: Substitution Effect – SSBs

                                                                                              Aggregate effect
            Individual Consumer Substitution                        Health Effect               on sales of
                                                                                                substitutes
                          Bottled Water                                 Positive
                               Milk                                    Depends
                                                                                                   Increase
                  Non sugary flavored drinks                            Positive
             Light or diet carbonated soft drinks                       Positive

Table 8 presents an example of the substitution effect in the case of energy-dense foods of low nutritional
value. In this case, based on the knowledge of food availability and relative prices, substitute products can
be defined. Further, it is possible that consumers instead of buying the taxed products might decide to
prepare them at home. This behavior could be monitored by keeping track of the ingredients that go into
the preparation of these foods, such as sugar, wheat, etc. The analysis of the substitution effect should
take this possibility into account.

                               Table 8: Substitution Effect – High-calorie Foods

                                                                                               Aggregate effect
             Individual Consumer Substitution                         Health Effect              on sales of
                                                                                                 substitutes
                  Less caloric food (?)                                  Positive
       Sugar purchases to prepare sugary and high-
                                                                        Negative
                    calorie products                                                                Increase
           Wheat to prepare high-calorie foods                          Negative
                          Fats                                          Negative
          Other equally caloric food preparation (?)                    Negative


Elements of a Monitoring Framework for Mexico

The monitoring framework of the aggregate impacts of taxes on unhealthy products described above has
been used in tobacco and alcohol tax reforms. It could be adapted to the Mexican situation and be used to
analyze aggregate impacts on prices and sales of taxed products and their substitutes. However, as the

83 Mexico uses the North America Industrial Classification System, an industrial classification for Canada, USA and

Mexico. The NAIC classification, as others used elsewhere, are variants of the Standard International Industrial
Classification. Industrial classifications have different levels of product aggregation, and countries publish detailed data
in different degrees.

                                                                                                                        35
Mexican reform is broad and novel, special care is warranted. First, the efforts should be focused
specifically on SSBs and high-calorie foods consumed by Mexicans. 84 Second, to understand the
consumption effect in both types of products, it is necessary to analyze all product variants and commercial
presentations to evaluate if consumers could substitute them with cheaper alternatives of the same taxed
products. Third, to understand the substitution effect, it is important to identify the main healthier
consumption alternatives for each taxed product and to consider the relative price of these alternatives vis-
à-vis the taxed product, the production capacity for these products, and their distribution network.

In Mexico, the National Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI) has a database of individual prices
that are collected to generate the Consumer Price Index. 85 The available information in the database allows
the processing of detailed price indicators for SSBs since the available price data on individual items of cola
and flavored sodas, flavored waters, industrialized juices, and concentrated powder for flavored waters and
juices is relatively abundant and closer to the taxed products; similarly for substitute non-taxed beverages
such as bottled water and milk. However, there is not as much data on light or diet soft drink prices,
reflecting previous shares of these beverages in Mexican consumption. In the case of energy dense foods
of low nutritional value, the analysis conducted for this report indicates that the price coverage of these
products is more varied, with good coverage for some, such as snacks (botanas), sweet breads (pan dulce),
pancakes and pastries, breakfast cereals (cereales para el desayuno), cookies, and for some substitute
products, such as milk, yogurt, and fruits.

For this analysis a set of prices for substitute products is also used with the idea that higher demand towards
those products, due to substitution from taxed products after the reform, would be reflected in higher
prices. 86 Table 9 presents the set of consumer products for which simple average prices were calculated
for the period between January 2011 and December 2015. Annex I presents price definitions, average
annual values for the whole set of taxed products for which detailed information was available, and average
prices for some substitute products.

   Table 9: Taxed Products and Selected substitutes for Which Average Prices were Calculated

                                              Product Definition
                                      Snacks (average of the whole family)
                                                  Potato Chips
                                                  Corn Fritters
                                                  Fruit Popsicle
                                               Goat milk caramel
                                           Fruit and Vegetable Jams
                                                     Caramel
                                             Corn flakes with Sugar
                                                     Cookies
                                             Sweet Bread (in bulk)
                                          Industrialized Sweet Bread
                                           Pancakes, cakes, pastries
                                              Juices and Nectars
                                            Soft drinks concentrates
                                          Orange Juice concentrates
                                          Flavored Powder Drink Mix

84 In other words, the universe of taxed food product is broad and the Mexicans consume those food products with

different intensity. Health authorities should select a set of high-calorie foods to be monitored according to their
importance on overweight and obesity.
85 This database can be found at http://www3.inegi.org.mx/sistemas/inp/preciospromedio/
86 Grogger, 2015.



                                                                                                                       36
                                                      Cola sodas
                                                   Flavored sodas
                                                   Flavored waters
                                                     Bottled water
                                                   Light cola sodas
                                                      Whole milk
                                                    Skimmed milk
                                                       Yoghourt
                                               Yoghourt in varied forms
                                                 Whole Powder Milk
                                                Skimmed Powder Milk
                                                 Whole Wheat Bread
                                                   Standard sugar
                                                    Refined Sugar
                                                      Fresh Fruit

The price database also allows estimating the average price of different types of packages of the same
product and thus it allows a better understanding of business strategies and substitution possibilities. This
is particularly important in regular and light cola sodas, and other sweetened soft drinks.

To analyze consumption and substitution effects, it is necessary to obtain detailed sale indicators of taxed
and potential substitute products from public data. The present analysis uses volume of sales of the Monthly
Survey on Manufacturing Industry. 87 Table 10 presents the selected taxed and substitute products for which
sale volumes were available. The data from INEGI does not separate domestic sales from exports. Detailed
data on sale indicators are presented in Annex II.

                                              Table 10: Sales Indicators

                                                    Products
                                                   Snack Foods
                                                   Potato Chips
                                                   Corn Fritters
                             Candies, Chewing Gum and non-Chocolate Confectionery
                                                     Products
                                                  Fruit Popsicles
                                                Goat Milk Caramel
                                            Fruit and Vegetable Jams
                                                     Caramel
                                                Sweet Corn Flakes
                                          Cookies (with filling or cover)
                                           Industrialized Sweet Bread
                                         Pancakes, Cakes and Pastries
                                             Juices and Fruit Nectars
                                            Soft Drinks Concentrates
                                          Orange Juice Concentrates
                                           Flavored Powder Drink Mix


87   The figures of the Monthly Survey of Manufacturing Industry are available at http://www.inegi.org.mx/sistemas/bie/

                                                                                                                     37
                                                 Colas sodas
                                               Flavored Sodas
                                            Energy or sport drinks
                                                Bottled Water
                                                 Whole Milk
                                                Skimmed milk
                                                  Yoghourt
                                           Yoghourt in varied forms
                                             Whole Powder Milk
                                            Skimmed Powder Milk
                                             Whole wheat bread
                                               Standard sugar
                                                Refined sugar

The industrial sales data do not distinguish between regular and diet products and between small and large
packaging, generating some limitations in the analysis. It is also difficult to capture the substitution effect in
the case of taxed energy-dense foods, because there are no sale indicators of alternative products such as
fruits or industrialized low calories products. Box 3 explains in detail the limitations of using the INEGI
databases on prices and volume of sales for monitoring the effect of these taxes.




                                                                                                              38
         Box 3: Using INEGI Databases for Monitoring the Effects of these Taxes

The use of INEGI’ s CPI and manufacturing industry databases for the analysis of the impact of
the taxes on SSBs and foods of low nutritional value presents some limitations. Some of the
publicly available data do not fully reflect the types of goods under taxation; in some cases it is
possible to disaggregate the data further to better reflect the goods, in other cases, such as light
soda versions, these data do not exist. Additionally, the data on volume of goods do not
differentiate between goods for internal consumption and those for export. As a result, for INEGI
databases to be used to construct effective indicators to continuously monitor the impact of this
fiscal policy on prices and volumes some changes in the data would be needed.

Some specific examples of the limitations linked to the use of INEGI data are detailed in the table
below. The table focuses on the limitations related to price data. The second column of the
table presents INEGI’s available data and the third the actual data needed to effectively monitor
the fiscal policy.

                              Available data          Necessary data                Notes
                                   SSB                       SSB                     SSB
                           Bottled Juices and
                           Nectars                  Juices and Nectars
                           Other foods- Soft        Soft drinks
                           drink concentrates       concentrates
                           Other foods- Soft        Flavored Powder
                           drink concentrates       Drink Mix
                                                    Regular carbonated
                                                                            Very aggregated level
                                                    soft drinks
                                                    Flavored Carbonated
                           Bottled refreshments
                                                    drinks
                                                    Flavored non-
                                                    carbonated drinks
                                Substitutes              Substitutes             Substitutes
                           Bottled water            Bottled water
            Price of the                            Non sugary flavored
               taxed       Bottled refreshments     drinks                  Larger sample of diet
             products                               Light or diet           and non-sugary
                                                    carbonated soft         drinks
                           Bottled refreshments     drinks
                            High calorie foods       High calorie foods      High calorie foods

                           Less coverage of
                           taxed products in the
                           CPI. Not enough data
                                                                            The number of taxed
                           on some products, for
                                                                            products is large. The
                           example: chocolate
                                                                            most consumed high
                           and other cocoa
                                                    Identification of key   calorie products
                           derivate products,
                                                    products to monitor     should be selected.
                           crème caramel and
                                                                            The prices of those
                           pudding, fruit and
                                                                            products should be
                           vegetable sweets,
                                                                            monitored.
                           peanut and hazelnut
                           cream, etc.


                                                                            Sales volumes add
                                                    Domestic sales of the   export and domestic
                           Volume of sales of the
              Sales of                              main taxed products     sales. Need to
                           Monthly Survey on
                taxed                                                       disaggregate
                           Manufacturing
              products                                                      It is not possible to
                           Industry
                                                    Light or diet drinks    construct an indicator
                                                                            of diet drinks sales




                                                                                                       39
Analysis of Price, Consumption and Substitution Effects of the Tax Reform

This subsection discusses the available evidence on the price, consumption and substitution effects of the
tax reform using the findings of academic studies and the evidence gathered from price and sale indicators
constructed for this study using publicly available data.

Sugar-sweetened beverages

Mexico has a large and diversified supply of SSBs. According to the Household Income and Expenditure
Survey (ENIGH, 2014), household consumption is highly concentrated on sodas (cola, flavored, and light),
representing 82 percent of total SSBs consumption; juices contribute 13 percent; and concentrates and
flavored powders contribute only 4 percent of total household consumption of SSBs. 88 Before the
implementation of the tax reform, there were large price differentials between the main types of SSBs in
the country. Table 11 shows averages prices for main types of SSBs, light sodas, and bottled water during
2013.

     Table 11: Average Prices of SSBs, Light Sodas, and Bottled Water – Annual Average (MXN)

                          Product                                     Unit                      2013
                     Juices and Nectars                                liter                    16.8
                                                            1 liter of concentrate
                  Soft drinks concentrates              produces 5.6 liter of flavored           4.5
                                                                      drink
                                                          1Kg produces 25 liters of
                Flavored Powder Drink Mix                                                        6.6
                                                                      juice
                         Cola sodas                                    liter                    12.5
                      Light cola sodas                                liter                     15.4
                       Flavored sodas                                 liter                     11.1
                       Flavored waters                                liter                     11.5
                        Bottled water                                 liter                      6.3
       Source: CPI – Average prices (http://www3.inegi.org.mx/sistemas/inp/preciospromedio)

There are, at least, two important features of the relative price structure of SSBs and light sodas presented
in Table 11. First, cola sodas were cheaper than their light versions and the price differential was almost
MXN 3. 89 Second, concentrates and flavored powders seemed to represent a substantially cheaper
alternative. However, after adding the price of bottled water or soda water (around MXN 6.3), the flavored
powder drink price becomes MXN 12.9 and concentrate soft drink price becomes MXN 10.8, similar to cola
sodas and flavored sodas, respectively. This could explain why, despite lower prices per liter equivalent,
those products maintain a low participation in the Mexican market.

The high price differentials between light and regular soda, and the similar price of industrialized flavored
soda drinks with those produced by concentrates and powders hinted that the substitution away from
regular soda and flavored soda would be difficult after the reform. A closer look at average prices per brand
and package size of different types of sodas could further illustrate this difficulty of the Mexican reform
(Table 12). Price differentials between regular and diet soda average prices of the same package size
appear smaller than in Table 11 (aggregate averages), nevertheless they were substantial in the case of 1
liter bottles (MXN 1.5).



88Universidad Autónoma de Nueva León.2015.
89This comparison involves different composition of package size for the samples of regular and light sodas. Light
sodas were represented with smaller packages, which are more expensive. Nevertheless, the differences for the
same package were substantial in 2013, as shown in Table 12.

                                                                                                                     40
                                 Table 12: Average Pper Liter of Sodas (MXN)

                                         Products                              December 2013
                                             Coke
                                   Can 335 up to 6 pcs.                             21.0
                                            600 ml                                  14.9
                                        600 ml light                                15.7
                                         1 liter light                              13.7
                                       1 liter regular                              12.2
                                      2 liters regular                              9.73
                                            Pepsi                              December 2013
                                        2 L regular                                  7.6
                                     Flavored sodas                            December 2013
                                        Jarritos 2 L                                 5.4
                                          Fanta 2L                                   7.0
                                        Mirinda 2L                                   7.7
                       Price difference between 2L presentation                December 2013
                                       Coke - Pepsi                                 2.13
                                       Coke - Fanta                                 2.68
                                      Pepsi- Mirinda                               -0.15
                                      Fanta - Jarritos                              1.62
                            Source: CPI – Average prices

The two-liter packages in Table 12 seem to better reflect the consumption pattern of households.
Consumers of 2 liter packages might have had some substitution options among regular and flavored sodas
at the reform implementation. The price difference between Coke and Pepsi was more than MXN 2 and
between Coke and its flavored soda, Fanta, was MXN 2.68, making it possible to switch to those cheaper
options after the reform implementation.

What have the academic studies concluded about the price effects of the reform? Up to now, price response
of the SSBs has been the most studied effect of this reform. Grogger (2015) used the CPI database of
individual prices to estimate average prices of taxed products - regular sodas and other drinks with added
sugar (juice drinks and flavored waters) - and four untaxed substitutes – diet soda, bottled water without
sugar, milk and pure juice. Price changes of substitute products might provide indirect evidence on
consumer substitution patterns. Grogger controlled for inflation using real prices and analyzed other non-
beverage product prices. Grogger’s main conclusions were: (i) regular soda prices increased more than
MXN 1 relatively to December 2013; (ii) other SSBs augmented less than 1 peso and may have fallen again
by the end of the period analyzed (March 2015); (iii) there was some substitution towards diet soda; (iv)
there was no evidence of substitution towards water, milk and pure juice; and (v) real prices of control
products (butter, cheese, chicken, dried beans and bread) were not significantly different from the pre-tax
situation (December 2013), so he could not find that “real prices in Mexico were rising generally in such a
way that could explain the real price increases for regular sodas, other SSBs, and diet sodas that began
immediately upon the imposition of the tax” (Grogger, 2015, page 16).

Colchero et al. (2015b) also gathered prices of beverages from the CPI database to measure the price
impact of the soda tax. They created two categories: aggregated carbonated SSBs such as soft drinks, and
non-carbonated SSBs such as juices and flavored waters. They assessed the impact of taxes regressing
real prices of those two price categories on monthly dummies and other variables affecting prices, and
comparing the post-reform monthly situation with the 2013 average. They found that price increase for all
SSBs was close to one peso per liter after January 2014, but, as seen by Grogger, the price increase was
greater for carbonated SSBs (over-shifting), and much lower than one peso per liter (under-shifting) for
non-carbonated SSBs. 90 They also found heterogeneity in the regional responses, with over-shifting in

90 They attributed this result to the fact that non-carbonated soft drinks have higher prices, lower market share in

consumption and higher price elasticity.

                                                                                                                       41
Mexico City, Central North, North Border and the Northwest, but under-shifting in the rest of the country,
particularly in the poorer South. The results, stratified by package size for carbonated sweetened beverages
and noncarbonated sweetened beverages, showed that price changes were higher among the beverages
with smaller package sizes (600ml), which is consistent with the fact that larger package sizes have higher
demand elasticity and are likely to be consumed by lower income families. Finally, their descriptive analyses
showed that prices of untaxed beverages did not changed after the SSB tax was implemented (except for
sparkling water). This is the case of still plain water and diet soft drinks whose prices were increasing long
before the tax.

It is possible to summarize those findings as follows: (i) the prices of soda drinks tended to increase at the
same rate as the tax or more; (ii) prices of smaller packages increased more than 1 peso per liter and larger
packages increased around 1 peso; (iii) prices of other SSBs (flavored waters and industrialized juices)
increased less than 1 peso; (iv) it is not clear if diet soda prices were affected; and (v) there were regional
differences on price setting. Grogger and Colchero et al. worked with aggregate values for regular soda
drinks, adding cola and flavored soda drinks, but it is possible to further disaggregate both products to
observe whether consumers may move from cola towards flavored sodas, which are cheaper options
compared to other sugar sweetened beverages. The authors aggregate the non-carbonated sweetened
drinks for estimation purposes, but this strategy could also conceal substitution movements of regular cola
consumers.




                                                                                                           42
   Table 13: Real Average Prices of SSBs and Light Sodas, Bottled Water and Milk 2013 Prices

                                                           2013         December
            Product                     Unit                                           2014       2015
                                                          average         2013
      Juices and Nectars                   liter            16.8          17.0         17.0       16.8
                                1 liter of concentrate
           Soft drinks
                                produces 5.6 liter of        4.5            4.6         5.6        6.9
          concentrates
                                     flavored drink
       Flavored Powder         1Kg produces 25 liters
                                                             6.6            6.3         6.2        6.1
           Drink Mix                     of juice
          Cola sodas                       liter             12.5          12.9        13.7       13.7
        Light cola sodas                liter                15.4          15.9        16.0       16.1
        Flavored sodas                  liter                11.1          11.2        12.2       12.3
        Flavored waters                 liter                11.5          11.9        12.1       11.5
          Bottled water                 liter                6.3            6.3         6.1        6.0
           Whole Milk                   liter                13.1          14.1        13.1       13.3
         Skimmed Milk                   liter                14.5          15.2        14.4       14.3
Source: CPI – Average prices


Table 13 presents the price behavior of real average prices for SSBs and four substitutes, calculated using
the CPI database. Comparing average 2013 values with 2014 and 2015 values, it is possible to reach
conclusions similar to those found in the academic studies. Cola and flavored sodas passed more than the
tax amount to consumers and kept the new real value of both types of products in 2015. Juices and nectars
and flavored powders were not able to pass the tax amount to prices and reduced the real value of their
products in 2015. Soft drink concentrates were able to pass more than the tax amount and increased real
prices in 2015. This could be a sign of consumers switching to this product from flavored sodas and waters.
Flavored waters tried to partially pass the tax to their consumers in 2014, but prices returned to their 2013
values in 2015. As in Grogger, there is no price indication that SSB consumers are substituting SSBs with
bottled water or milk.

A closer look at the price behavior across brands and package sizes could shed some light on producers’
strategies to keep consumers faithful to the soda market. Table 14 presents average prices of different
brands and package sizes for cola and flavored sodas. Coke passed more than one peso on packages of
over one liter, which are its economic presentations directed to families and lower income population. For
less than one-liter packages, Coke passed between two and two and a half pesos, representing an over-
shifting of tax to prices. For smaller presentations, the liter equivalent is more expensive, and, according to
Fuentes Castro and Zamudio Carrillo (2014), demand elasticity lower (inelastic). The price of light Coke
versions were increased around 1 peso in the 600 ml and the liter presentations. In 2015, nominal prices
were almost maintained for packages of less than one liter, but the pricing strategy for 2 liters of regular
soda appeared as more aggressive, which could be a signal of higher demand for this presentation. Table
14 also shows that the reform managed to eliminate the high price differential between light and regular
versions of the same presentation, which was an undesirable feature of the Mexican market.




                                                                                                           43
      Table 14: Nominal Average Prices per Liter of Different Soda Brands and Package Sizes

                                                       Absolute    Relative               Absolute    Relative
                                                       Variation   variation              Variation   variation
                             December   December                               December
             Products                                    Dec         Dec                    Dec         Dec
                               2013       2014                                   2015
                                                       2014/Dec    2014/Dec               2015/Dec    2015/Dec
                                                         2013        2013                   2014        2014
     Coke
      Can 335 up to 6 pcs.     21.0       23.5            2.5       12.0%
              600 ml           14.9       16.9            2.0       13.2%         17.1      0.19        1.1%
          600 ml light         15.7       16.8            1.2        7.5%         16.8      -0.01       0.0%

            1 liter light      13.7       13.4           -0.3       -2.2%         14.1      0.70        5.2%

         1 liter regular       12.2       13.5            1.3       10.8%         14.0      0.50        3.7%
        2 liters regular       9.73       11.1            1.3       13.6%         11.9      0.86        7.8%
                                                       Absolute    Relative               Absolute    Relative
                                                       Variation   variation              Variation   variation
                             December   December                               December
     Pepsi                                               Dec         Dec                    Dec         Dec
                               2013       2014                                   2015
                                                       2014/Dec    2014/Dec               2015/Dec    2015/Dec
                                                         2013        2013                   2014        2014
             2l regular         7.6       9.4             1.8       23.7%         9.6       0.23        2.4%
                                                       Absolute    Relative               Absolute    Relative
                                                       Variation   variation              Variation   variation
                             December   December                               December
     Flavored sodas                                      Dec         Dec                    Dec         Dec
                               2013       2014                                   2015
                                                       2014/Dec    2014/Dec               2015/Dec    2015/Dec
                                                         2013        2013                   2014        2014
            Jarritos 2 L        5.4       6.7             1.3       23.4%         6.8       0.14        2.2%

             Fanta 2L           7.0       8.8             1.7       24.2%         9.0       0.29        3.3%

           Mirinda 2L           7.7       8.8             1.1       13.6%         10.2      1.44       16.4%
     Price difference
                             December   December                               December
     between 2L
                               2013       2014                                   2015
     presentation
         Coke - Pepsi          2.13       1.66                                    2.29

         Coke - Fanta          2.68       2.30                                    2.88

         Pepsi- Mirinda        -0.15      0.59                                   -0.62

        Fanta - Jarritos       1.62       2.06                                    2.20
     Relative Prices in 2L
         presentation
          Coke/Pepsi          28.1%         17.7%                              23.8%
          Coke/Fanta          38.1%         26.3%                              31.9%
         Pepsi/Mirinda         -1.9%            6.7%                           -6.1%
         Fanta/Jarritos       29.9%         30.7%                              32.2%
Source: CPI – Average prices

Table 14 also gives us some indication of potential consumption substitutions among different types of
sodas. The first potential substitution is from smaller presentations to larger presentations with a cheaper
value per 1 liter of the product. Both Coke and Pepsi increased the price of the 2 litter presentation in more
than the amount of the tax, anticipating higher demand from consumers seeking to buy the cheapest
package of sodas. Pepsi increased more than Coke, since with the price differential previous to the reform
(2.13 pesos), they could capture Coke consumers seeking to find a cheaper 2 liter soda bottle. The second
potential substitution is between cola and flavored sodas. The price of Fanta was 1.7 pesos higher in
December 2014, reducing its price differential with Coke and increasing its differential to Jarritos (a popular
version of flavored soda). This could be the result of higher demand towards flavored sodas, which is also
observed in the price increase of Jarritos (more than 1 peso).

Colchero et al. (2016) found that the post-tax purchases of SSBs during the first year were 6 percent lower
on average than the pre-tax trend, or in other words “compared with expected purchases with the tax
absent” (page 5). They also found that purchases of untaxed beverages were 4 percent higher than the
similar counterfactual, mainly related to bottled water. They found that the reduction in purchases of non-
carbonated taxed beverages was larger than the reduction in carbonated taxed beverages. This could be


                                                                                                                  44
due to higher prices and high price elasticities of non-carbonated beverages; and consumers shifting to
lower priced versions of taxed carbonated beverages given the large variation in prices.

 Table 15: Indexes of Industrial Sale Volumes of SSBs and Possible Substitutes (volume of sales
                                           of 2013=1)


                  Juice     Soft     Orange    Flavored                                                                  Total
                                                                  Flavor   Bottle   Energe                     Skim
                  s and    drinks     Juice    Powder      Cola                              Other    Whole            Manufact
                                                                    ed       d        tic                      med
                  Necta   concentr   Concent     Drink    sodas                              juices    Milk              uring
                                                                  Sodas    Water    drinks                     Milk
                    rs      ates      rates       Mix                                                                  Industry


        2007      0.88      1.09      0.48       2.28     0.81     0.98    0.82      0.86    0.64      1.07    1.01      0.92

        2008      0.94      1.26      0.66       2.31     0.82     0.91    0.84      0.86    1.23      1.11    1.05      0.91

        2009      1.04      1.12      0.74       2.16     0.83     0.99    0.88      0.73    1.30      1.10    1.06      0.84

        2010      0.89      1.01      0.63       1.28     0.88     0.99    0.91      0.72    0.97      1.05    1.01      0.91

        2011      0.93      1.05      0.85       0.56     0.96     1.03    0.96      0.90    1.10      0.99    0.99      0.95

        2012      0.96      1.00      0.67       1.16     0.98     1.02    1.00      1.14    1.04      0.84    0.99      0.99

        2013      1.00      1.00      1.00       1.00     1.00     1.00    1.00      1.00    1.00      1.00    1.00      1.00

        2014      1.01      1.03      0.96       1.08     0.99     0.97    1.05      1.31    1.14      0.91    0.96      1.04

      2015 (10
                  1.02      0.86      0.86       0.94     0.98     0.97    1.24      1.26    1.37      0.80    0.98      1.07
      months)
       Annual
      Variation
        rates
     2011/2013    5.9%     -0.6%      28.8%    -10.9%     7.1%    0.7%     4.9%     19.7%    1.5%     -2.6%    -0.3%    5.1%

     2014/2013    0.6%     3.1%       -4.5%     7.6%      -1.4%   -3.0%    5.2%     30.8%    14.2%    -9.2%    -4.1%    3.9%

     2015/2014    1.8%    -16.7%      -9.8%    -12.6%     -0.3%   -0.3%    17.7%    -3.9%    19.7%    -12.4%   1.7%     3.3%

Source: authors’ elaboration based on the Monthly Survey of Manufacturing Industry (EMIM)

Table 15 presents physical sales indexes generated with data on volume of sales (quantities) from the
Monthly Survey of Manufacturing Industry (EMIM). 91 They were prepared for the available SSBs and for
some potential substitutes, such as bottled water, whole and skimmed milk. Also, a total manufacturing
index of physical production is presented as a proxy for the trend in industrial activity in Mexico. As
mentioned, these indexes include domestic and export sale volumes. Given the high volatility of some
indexes between 2007 and 2010 due to the economic crisis of 2009, previous annual growth rates were
estimated only for the period 2011-2013 and annual rates were presented for 2014 and 2015. The behavior
of cola and flavored sodas are aligned with the Colchero’s et al. results: there was a contraction in the
volume of sales of carbonated beverages. However, 2014 growth rates of sales of non-carbonated
sweetened beverages were positive, except for orange juice concentrates. Although, these indexes need
to improve, it is possible to state that the positive association between total manufacturing growth and
growth rates of juices and nectars, cola and flavored sodas previous to the reform was not present in 2014.
The 2015 figures represent only 10 months and are preliminary, but the lack of positive association remains
between the general industrial growth rate and the soda growth rates. In terms of evidence of substitution,
the growth rate of the volume of sales of bottled water increased. The milk sales indexes do not indicate a
growth in the demand of these products.

Energy-dense Foods of Low Nutritional Value

Table 16 presents the average price behavior for selected taxed foods – snacks (potato chips and corn
fritters), fruit popsicles, corn flakes with sugar, sweet breads (handcrafted and industrialized), pancakes,
cakes and pastries – and a potential substitute –whole wheat bread. The table also displays growth rates


91 To construct those indexes sales volumes for each product were taken. The volume of sales of 2013 was

considered as 1.

                                                                                                                                  45
of those prices for the first and second year of the reform, and annual average growth rates, before the
reform. The last row shows the average annual inflation rate for the same years.

 Table 16: Nominal Average Prices and Growth Rates of Selected Taxed Foods and Whole Wheat
                                           Bread

                                  2013     December
          Product        Unit                         2014    2015             Annual Variation Rates
                                 average     2013

                                                                      2014/2013     2015/2014      2013/2011
      Snacks (average
      of the whole set    KG      144.8     148.1     160.0   166.7    10.5%           4.2%             6.8%
         of snacks)
       Potato Chips       KG      165.0     170.0     184.2   193.6    11.6%           5.1%             6.8%
       Corn Fritters      KG      112.6     115.6     129.8   133.6    15.2%           3.0%             5.3%

       Fruit Popsicle     KG      95.7       99.3     117.2   120.3    22.6%           2.6%             11.5%
      Corn flakes with
                          KG      63.0       62.8     67.5    66.7      7.2%          -1.2%             5.9%
          Sugar
       Sweet Bread       Piece     4.8       4.8       5.2     5.2      9.9%          -1.4%             8.3%
      Industrialized
                          KG      87.6       90.7     101.8   106.4    16.3%           4.4%             5.4%
       Sweet Bread
     Pancakes, cakes,
                          KG      116.7     120.9     134.0   137.7    14.9%           2.7%             9.5%
         pastries
       Whole Wheat
                          KG      41.8       43.2     44.2    45.9      5.6%           4.0%             3.4%
          Bread

         Total CPI                                                     4.02%          2.72%             4.04%

Source: CPI – Average prices

The growth rates of the prices of selected taxed foods were above the total inflation rate before the reform
(Table 16, last column). This could be reflecting existing demand pressures but more research on
consumption trends, product innovations, and product supply developments in those sectors is needed to
better understand the causes of these high rates. In contrast, industrialized whole wheat bread prices were
growing below overall inflation rates. The table also shows that the growth rate of the prices of all taxed
products increased in the first year of the reform. If a producer adjusted the price of its product by the
expected inflation (around 4 percent) and the tax increase on high-calorie foods (8 percent), he/she would
have increased his/her prices by about 12 percent. The table shows that except for corn flakes and
handcrafted sweet breads, the rest of the taxed products increased their prices near 12 percent or more.
Interestingly, the growth rate of the price of whole wheat bread in 2014 was higher than overall inflation,
indicating a higher demand pressure over this product.

The price behavior of the second year of the reform was mixed. Lower demand towards those products
should be reflected on price growth rates below total inflation rates. However, the table shows price
reductions –corn flakes and handcrafted sweet breads-; price growth rates near the overall inflation – corn
fritters, fruit popsicles and pancakes and pastries-; and growth rates clearly over overall inflation – potato
chips and industrialized sweet breads. A look to industrial sales could elucidate what happened with
demand and supply after the reform.




                                                                                                                46
  Table 17: Indexes of Industrial Sales of Selected High-calorie Foods and a Potential Substitute
                                              (2013=1)

                   Snacks                                      Corn    Industrial-
                                                                                     Pancakes,   Whole       Total
                 (average of   Potato    Corn       Fruit     flakes      ized
                                                                                       cakes,    Wheat   Manufacturing
                  the whole    Chips    Fritters   Popsicle    with      Sweet
                                                                                      pastries   Bread     Industry
                   product)                                   Sugar      Bread
       2007         0.86        0.97     0.76        0.92     0.86        0.96         0.93      0.85        0.92

       2008         0.85        0.84     0.83        1.04     0.91        0.90         0.93      0.82        0.91

       2009         0.86        0.84     0.84        1.07     1.02        0.88         0.97      0.75        0.84
       2010         0.91        0.84     0.91        1.06     1.06        0.88         0.98      0.80        0.91
       2011         0.93        0.90     0.92        1.04     1.06        0.88         1.00      0.90        0.95
       2012         0.99        0.94     0.99        1.09     1.03        0.97         1.03      0.96        0.99
       2013         1.00        1.00     1.00        1.00     1.00        1.00         1.00      1.00        1.00
       2014         0.97        0.91     0.98        0.90     0.91        0.94         0.99      1.04        1.04
     2015 (10
                    1.02        1.02     1.02        0.94      n.d        0.89         1.02      1.03        1.07
     months)
      Annual
     Variation
       rates

     2011/2013      5.1%       9.5%      5.0%       -2.9%     -2.8%      6.7%          0.9%      12.2%       5.1%

     2014/2013      -2.8%      -8.7%     -1.6%     -10.5%     -8.7%      -6.2%         -1.3%     4.3%        3.9%
     2015/2014      5.4%       11.6%     3.9%       4.5%       n.d       -5.0%         3.8%      -1.2%       3.3%
Source: authors’ elaboration based on the Monthly Survey of Manufacturing Industry (EMIM)

Table 17 shows the indexes of sale volumes of the selected taxed foods and industrialized whole wheat
bread. The table also shows an index of industrial production to compare the annual behavior of the
selected products with the overall behavior of the industry. There is no sale index of handcrafted sweet
breads. The table also displays the annual growth rates of sale volumes before the reform (2011-2013) and
the yearly response after it.

Table 17 gives us important elements of what was the situation of the sectors before the reform and
formulates some questions about the post–reform sales behavior. The hypothesis that some of those taxed
products were facing demand pressures is confirmed by higher growth rates of the volume of sales of these
products than the overall industry rate. For example, snacks were augmenting their prices above total
inflation and were growing above the overall industry. Industrialized sweet breads present a similar price
and sale volume behavior. However, not all product price increases were related to demand pressures.
Three sectors had contraction or lower-than-average growth in the pre-reform period – popsicles, corn
flakes and pancakes and pastries -, but they increased their prices above overall inflation rates.

The most interesting result after the reform is the generalized contraction in the first year, a year of overall
industrial growth (3.9 percent) in Mexico. However, the hypothesis that whole-wheat bread could be a
substitute was not confirmed, since the sector grew below the overall industry, after years of good speeder
growth. The second year of the reform was rather disappointing, because several sectors experienced a
recovery, leading in some cases to higher levels of sales when compared to 2013 – i.e. snacks and
pancakes –. As a positive impact of the reform, sales volumes of fruit popsicles and sweet bread remained
below the 2013 levels.

Comparing Prices of Taxed Products in Mexico with other Countries and Implications of these
Differences

Soft drinks in Mexico, even after the tax reform, are cheaper than in comparator countries like Argentina
and Brazil. Table 18 presents the price per liter in packages of 2 liters of different sodas and the ratio of
the price of 200 liters to GDP per capita. The table also shows the price per liter of the Coke and Fanta sale


                                                                                                                         47
promotion made in Brazil and Mexico and the Coke and Sprite sale promotion in Argentina. 92 To buy 200
liters of coke (in 100 packages of 2 liters), Argentinians have to spend 2.6 percent of their income, Brazilians
1.9 percent, while Mexicans need to spend only 1.5 percent. To buy the same quantity of Fanta, Brazilians
have to spend 2.06 percent of their per capita income, Argentinians 2.4 percent, while Mexicans spend less
than half of that (1.1 percent). In Mexico, Coke Zero is relatively cheaper than in Brazil and Argentina and
availability of light sodas of 2 liters in internet shopping seems to be higher in Mexico and Argentina. Finally,
attention should be paid to sales promotion. The combo of 2 Coke and 2 Fantas of 2 liters package is in
Mexico and Brazil, but the price per liter is one third in Mexico vis-à-vis Brazil.

Table 18: Price per Liter and the Ratio of 200 Liters Price to GDP Per capita: Brazil, Argentina and
                                            Mexico 2016

                                                                        Coke
                                                    Coke                            Coke     Pepsi    Pepsi
                    BRAZIL                  Coke            Fanta    (4l)+Fanta
                                                    light                           Zero    regular   light
                                                                      (4L) =8L
       Price per liter of 2 liter package
                                            2.68     n.d    2.95        2.70        2.70     2.50      n.d
       (LCU) - Source: Pao de Acucar
       Price in Dollars (LCU/Dollar:        0.74            0.81        0.74        0.74     0.69
       3.64; April 9,2016)
       Ratio of 200 L/ GDP per Capita
       2015- Source: WEO- IMF               1.9%            2.06%      1.89%        1.89%   1.75%
       database
                                                                        Coke
                                                    Coke                            Coke     Pepsi    Pepsi
                    MEXICO                  Coke            Fanta    (4l)+Fanta
                                                    light                           Zero    regular   light
                                                                      (4L) =8L
       Price per liter of 2 liter package
                                            11.25   11.50    8.2       4.375         9.5     9.65       10
       (LCU) - Source: Superama
       Price in Dollars (LCU/Dollar:
                                            0.65    0.66    0.47        0.25        0.55     0.55      0.57
       17.4; April 8,2016)
       Ratio of 200 L/ GDP per Capita
                                            1.5%    1.5%    1.1%       0.6%         1.3%     1.3%      1.3%
       2015- Source: WEO-IMF data
                                                                        Coke
                                                    Coke                            Coke     Pepsi    Pepsi
                  ARGENTINA                 Coke            Fanta   (2.2l)+Sprite
                                                    light                           Zero    regular   light
                                                                    (2.2L) =4.4L
       Price per liter of 2.2 Liter
       package (LCU) - Source Disco         15.63   15.49   14.68      13.63        15.49    14.68    14.40
       Supermarket
       Price in Dollars
       (LCU/Dollar:14.6913; April 6,        1.06    1.05    0.99        0.93        1.05     0.99      0.98
       2016
       Ratio of 200 L/ GDP per Capita
                                            2.6%    2.6%    2.4%       2.2%         2.6%     2.4%      2.4%
       2015- Source: WEO-IMF data
Sources: Prices: Pão de Açúcar – Brazil (http://www.paodeacucar.com.br/secoes/C4215/sucos-e-
refrescos?&ftr=facetSubShelf_ss:4215_Sucos%20e%20Refrescosazil ) and Superama – Mexico
(http://www.superama.com.mx/superama/Categoria.aspx?Departamento=d_jugos_y_bebidas). Exchanges rates:
Banco de Mexico and Banco Central do Brasil. GDP per capita in LCU World Economic Outlook – International
Monetary Fund database

Table 18 also shows that regular sodas prices are lower in terms of GDP per capita in Mexico, which means
that it is more affordable for Mexicans to buy sodas than for Brazilians or Argentineans. Moreover, sales
promotions are still facilitating the purchase, reducing in more than a half the normal price of 2 liters sodas.
Consequently, there is space to consider further increases of the tax per liter and to regulate the discount
made in sales promotions.




92 These prices were collected on March 2016, more than two years after the implementation of the reform in Mexico.

GDP per capita of 2015 were used because those estimations are more robust than 2016 and because retail prices
were closer to the end of 2015.

                                                                                                                48
Next Steps

Fiscal policy for health promotion is still a controversial issue. Governments and advocates of higher taxes
to reduce risky consumption need to show the potential of the measure to effectively induce a consumption
reduction and substitution towards healthier products. This is the case since first, these reforms are new
and need to be tested, particularly in the case of soda or high-calorie foods. Second, they affect a selected
group of producers in the economy. Special tax changes are not accepted as generalized taxation and thus
they are more likely to generate opposition from the affected businesses. Third, these reforms lead to higher
prices and reduced sales. Therefore, they may represent a negative shock for businesses and profit
strategies of those affected producers. Fourth, these reforms may have small consumption reduction effect
– people simply substituting for cheaper taxed products or for non-duty paying equally unhealthy products.
Without a reduction in consumption, there will not be health benefits. Given the importance of monitoring
the reduction in consumption after the reform for political and health reasons, consumption indicators of
taxed products and substitutes (healthy and unhealthy) are important to construct and may become tools
for the necessary debate about effectiveness of the reform design and implementation.

For all those reasons, governments implementing these reforms should process public data to develop
indicators of impacts on prices, consumption reduction and substitution behavior to infer economic and
health gains. This report presented a simple monitoring framework and used publicly available data to
produce average prices (table 11-14 and 16) to present price reactions, and industrial sale indexes (table
15 and 17), to discuss the consumption and substitution effects, to build a picture of the post reform
situation. With indicators of this type, authorities and supporters of the reform have the tools to discuss the
effects and to show positive impacts and questions to be researched.

The proposed methodology and indicators estimation should be further developed. A joint effort of health,
statistical and tax authorities could improve the precision and quality of the processed and published
information. For example, in price averages, such kind of cooperation between authorities could refine and
standardize product definition, making aggregation closer to the taxed products. In the sale indicators,
domestic and export sales could be separated for a standardized taxed product. This is a first and necessary
step. But, sale indicators could be improved in several directions in order to capture healthier substitution,
for example, differentiating light or non-added sugar production from sugar sweetened versions in
beverages.

Finally, since the impact of this fiscal policy on health outcomes is the expected result from a public health
stand point, it is key to also monitor the health impact of this and other policies included in the National
Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Overweight, Obesity and Diabetes. Thus the need to monitor
closely not only prices and volumes of the goods subject to taxation, but also BMI across gender and age
groups. However, there is no readily available data to do this on a country level, beyond the data collected
every six years in the ENSANUT surveys and thus there is a need to generate this information on a more
continuous basis.




                                                                                                           49
       VI. CONSUMPTION PATTERNS ACROSS POPULATION GROUPS
             LINKED TO THE TAXED FOODS AND BEVERAGES

Data and Limitations

This section is based on an analysis of a series of Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH).
It uses data from 9 years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, and 2014.

There are important limitations in the use of these surveys to analyze the consumption patterns linked to
the foods and beverages subject to the taxes, let alone to analyze the impact of the taxes. Thus the results
presented in this section should be interpreted with caution.

The surveys report consumption at the household level and not at the individual level. They report
consumption during a reference week though it is not possible to determine whether the product basket
consumed during that week was that of a typical week. In addition, the analysis is only based on
consumption of goods purchased by the family (the survey also provides information on products given to
the family in kind). That said, the results only change slightly when consumption of goods provided in kind
are included in the analysis.

One of the main limitations of the data for this analysis is that the surveys report consumption of aggregate
categories of products and often these categories do not correspond to the goods taxed. For instance, it is
not possible to differentiate between regular and light sodas in the survey data. However, since the market
of light beverages in Mexico is relatively small, for the purpose of this analysis we will assume that all sodas,
juices and powder juices are subject to the tax.

       Table 19: Proportion of Households that Report Consuming at least one Meal Outside the
                     Household during the Reference Week per Income Quintile

                                          2008         2010          2012          2014
                           Poorest       0.267         0.226        0.293          0.252
                             II          0.364         0.33         0.395          0.351
                             III          0.46         0.421        0.469          0.44
                             IV          0.527         0.52          0.57          0.491
                           Richest       0.655         0.684        0.718          0.681
                            Total        0.455         0.437        0.489          0.443
                     Source: Own elaboration based on ENIGH survey data

Finally, it is not possible to account for consumption outside the house. This limitation could also affect the
estimates since eating outside the household is quite common in Mexico across all income levels (Table
19). In this case, our estimates could be affected since the literature suggests that individuals tend to
consume more calories per meal when they consume food outside the house. 93 All this said, the IEPS
does not apply to foods and beverages served at restaurants, lessening this potential limitations of the data
in the analysis.

In recent years the surveys incorporated new products, however to allow for a better comparison during the
25-year period, a more limited set of products was analyzed. More specifically, the analysis considers all
consumption of sodas, juices and powder juices as being SSBs. The analysis considers water and milk
consumption as potential substitute goods. For the analysis of the second tax, the following products were


93   An. R. 2016..




                                                                                                             50
classified as energy-dense foods of low nutritional value: cookies, pastries, chocolates, candy, cake and
jelly. Vegetables, fruits and bread were considered as possible substitute goods.

Consumption Levels within the Mexican Population before the Fiscal Policy

A closer look into the 1989-2012 period (Figure 10) indicates that although high-income families are
consistently more likely to consume SSBs than low-income families, it is the low-income families (in quintiles
I and II) that experienced the steepest increase in consumption over the years. After 2008 the trend
changes, likely due to the financial and economic crisis of 2008. Indeed, since 2008, the percentage of
households that consumed SSBs during the reference week stalled.

  Figure 10: Proportion of Households that Bought SSB during the Reference Week, by Income
                                 Quintiles. Mexico, 1989-2012

                                     0.9

                                     0.8

                                     0.7
          Proportion of Households




                                     0.6

                                     0.5

                                     0.4

                                     0.3

                                     0.2

                                     0.1

                                      0
                                           1989   1994         2000        2004         2006        2008         2010   2012
                                                         Poorest      II          III          IV      Richest
Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, and 2012.

The increase in SSB consumption across all population groups is evident when comparing it to the
consumption of possible substitute goods like milk or water. Figure 5 (section III) shows that the proportion
of families that purchased milk decreased during the period, while the consumption of SSBs experienced
the opposite trend. From 2006 on, the proportion of families consuming SSBs during the reference week
was greater than the proportion of households consuming milk and “ceteris paribus” (conditions remaining
the same), the tendency suggests that this difference will continue to widen in the future. In the case of
bottled water, the percentage of households that consumed bottled water remains more or less stable since
2004.




                                                                                                                               51
  Figure 11: Proportion of Households that bought Bottled Water during the Reference Week, by
                              Income Quintile. Mexico, 1989-2012

                                                     0.5
                                           0.45
                                                     0.4
             Proportion of Households


                                           0.35
                                                     0.3
                                           0.25
                                                     0.2
                                           0.15
                                                     0.1
                                           0.05
                                                      0
                                                           1989   1994         2000        2004         2006        2008             2010    2012

                                                                     Poorest          II          III          IV          Richest

Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, and 2012.

However, the patterns of consumption of milk and bottled water across income quintiles show different
consumption patterns. Since 2006, the consumption of bottled water increased among households in the
two richest quintiles of the income distribution, while its consumption stalled in the other quintiles (Figure
11). In the case of milk, households across all income quintiles except the poorest, decreased its
consumption during the majority of the period analyzed (Figure 12). Milk consumption increased only
among the poorest households, at least until the year 2010. Nevertheless, the poorest households
consumed, on average, less milk and bottled water than the wealthier households.

  Figure 12: Proportion of Households that Bought Milk during the Reference Week, by Income
                                 Quintile. Mexico, 1989-2012

                                                     0.9

                                                     0.8

                                                     0.7
                          Proportion of Households




                                                     0.6

                                                     0.5

                                                     0.4

                                                     0.3

                                                     0.2

                                                     0.1

                                                       0
                                                           1989   1994         2000        2004         2006        2008         2010       2012
                                                                     Poorest          II          III          IV          Richest

Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, and 2012.

What Happened after the Implementation of the Taxes?

A number of studies have been conducted on the impact of the taxes on consumption. However, the results
of these studies are sometimes contradictory. One of the main studies conducted so far was led by a

                                                                                                                                                    52
team of researchers at the National Institute of Public Health jointly with the Carolina Population Center at
the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. The researchers examined data –Nielsen Mexico Consumer
Panel Services– on the purchases of the taxed products among households in 53 Mexican cities from
January 2012 and December 2014. Results from the study, published in the British Medical Journal, show
that purchases of taxed beverages decreased by an average of 6 percent and decreased at an increasing
rate of up to a 12 percent decline a year after the taxes came into effect. The reductions were highest
among the lower-SES households. 94

The same team of researchers (Colchero et al. 2015 a) studied own and cross price elasticities of soft
drinks and for all SSBs (fruit juices, fruit drinks, flavored water and energy drinks) and estimated expected
direct and substitution reactions. They found unitary own price elasticities for soft drinks (-1.06) and SSBs
(-1.16). The authors found that a price increase in all SSBs would be associated with a greater consumption
of water, milk and a decrease consumption of candies, snacks and traditional snacks. They found higher
elasticities among households living in rural areas (for soft drinks), in more marginalized areas and with
lower income, so they expected that implementation of a tax to SSBs could decrease consumption
particularly among the poor. They concluded that substitutions and complementarities with other food and
beverages should be evaluated to assess the potential impact on total calories consumed.

Another study produced by researchers from the Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México, ITAM, 95 found
little impact of the taxes on purchases and consumption. 96 The ITAM study looked at the effects of the
taxes on the price, the consumption, and the estimated price elasticity of the taxed products. The measures
used for the first two were total household calorie intake and the BMI of the household head one year before
and one year after the taxes came into effect.

The study found that the taxed products are overall inelastic (price elasticity of SSBs was estimated to be
-0.5) which if anything predicts high revenues resulting from the taxes. Regarding SSBs, the researchers
found that the tax appeared to have incentivized moderate reduction in consumption of SSBs. The effect
of the tax on SSBs appears to have had a greater effect among households in the higher income levels. As
per the taxes on high-calorie foods, in order to control for potential product substitution resulting from the
taxes, the researchers studied the total calories consumed (taxed and untaxed foods). They found a 1
percent decrease in calorie consumption per week. In their measures of BMI, the researchers found no
discernible difference across the years under examination.

Finally, a study from Colmex on the impact of the taxes on SSBs finds that the own price elasticities of
demand of sodas is lower than that of other beverages (i.e. juices, nectars, milk, and water) and that this
price elasticity increases with the level of income of the household (-0.75 among the poorest, -0.92 for
income strata 2, -1.01 for income strata 3, and -1.08 among the richest). This study though does not use
individual data but consumer price data from INEGI and data on the global index of accumulated economic
activity as a proxy for household available income.

The following paragraphs use data from the National Income and Expenditure Surveys to describe any
discernable change in consumption of the taxed foods and beverages (and possible substitutes) bought
and consumed within the households. As mentioned before, these data have limitations but they can
provide some indications on the direction of changes brought about by the taxes, at least concerning
consumption within households.




94 Colchero M. A et al. 2016.
95 This study received the support of the Mexican Consumer Industry Association ConMéxico.
96 Arturo Aguilar., Emilio Gutierrez, Enrique Seira. 2016.



                                                                                                          53
 Figure 13: Proportion of Households that Bought SSB during the Reference Week. Mexico, 2012-
                                             2014


                                                                                                                               0.675
                                             0.109
                   2014        0.016
                                                                                                                0.595
                                                       0.194


                                                                                                                                0.692
                                               0.133
                   2012        0.021
                                                                                                                     0.609
                                                           0.197

                          0            0.1           0.2             0.3         0.4        0.5            0.6                0.7             0.8
                                                                   Proportion of Households
                                             SSB           Juice powder              Other SSB         Sodas           Juices
Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 2012 and 2014.

Between 2012 and 2014 there was a significant decrease in the proportion of households that purchased
SSBs and a concurrent increase in the proportion of households that purchased water (Figure 13 and Figure
14). Overall, water consumption continued to grow at a constant rate during the two years (see Annex III
for tables showing t-test for the statistical significance of all descriptive results shown in this section).

   Figure 14: Proportion of Households that bought SSB and Substitute Beverages during the
                              Reference Week. Mexico, 2012-2014


                                                                                                                                    0.675
                                                                           0.355
        2014
                                                                                                                      0.612
                                                                                                                 0.595



                                                                                                                                      0.692
                                                                       0.324
        2012
                                                                                                                       0.618
                                                                                                                      0.609


               0              0.1             0.2              0.3             0.4               0.5           0.6               0.7               0.8
                                                                   Proportion of Households                           SSB     Water Milk        Soda

Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 2012 and 2014.

Figure 15 shows the trends in consumption of SSBs across income quintiles. Between 2012 and 2014
among the three poorest income quintiles, the percentage of households that reported consuming these
beverages decreased. This contrasts with the previous increasing trends in the percentage of households
buying SSBs in these quintiles, particularly until 2008. This was not the case among households in the
richest quintile whose consumption slightly increased during this time frame (Annex III).




                                                                                                                                                         54
Figure 15: Proportion of Households that Consumed SSBs during the Week of Reference Across
                             Income Quintiles. Mexico 1989-2014.

                                     0.9

                                     0.8

                                     0.7
          Proportion of Households




                                     0.6

                                     0.5

                                     0.4

                                     0.3

                                     0.2

                                     0.1

                                      0
                                               1989   1994     2000    2004   2006   2008   2010      2012   2014
                                                             Poorest     II    III   IV     Richest

Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, and 2014.

In contrast to the consumption pattern of SSBs, the consumption of bottled water increased, particularly
among the poorest quintiles of the income distribution, which saw a sharp decrease in SSB consumption
(Figure 16). This would also suggest a positive impact of the tax policy, since the population, at least those
in the poorest end of the income distribution, substituted soda consumption – a calorie-dense product with
no nutritional value – with water.

 Figure 16: Proportion of Households that bought Bottled Water during the Reference Week, by
                             Income Quintile. Mexico, 1989-2014

                                      0.5

                                     0.45

                                      0.4
          Proportion of Households




                                     0.35

                                      0.3

                                     0.25

                                      0.2

                                     0.15

                                      0.1

                                     0.05

                                           0
                                               1989   1994      2000   2004   2006   2008   2010      2012   2014
                                                             Poorest    II    III    IV     Richest

Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, and 2014.

The proportion of households that purchased milk had been decreasing overall in Mexico since 2000. There
was a slight increase between 2012 and 2014 only among households in the 1st quintile. A slight increase
was also seen among households in the 5th quintiles but the increase was not statistically significant (Figure
17).


                                                                                                                    55
  Figure 17: Proportion of Households that bought Milk during the Reference Week, by Income
                                 Quintile. Mexico, 1989-2014

                                      0.9

                                      0.8

                                      0.7
           Proportion of Households




                                      0.6

                                      0.5

                                      0.4

                                      0.3

                                      0.2

                                      0.1

                                       0
                                               1989           1994        2000       2004         2006         2008        2010         2012            2014
                                                                        Poorest        II          III         IV          Richest
Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, and 2014.

Though per capita daily consumption of SSBs remained basically the same between 2010 and 2012, this
changed afterwards. By 2014, daily per capita consumption of SSBs had decreased, especially due to a
decrease in consumption of sodas.

                                            Figure 18: Per capita Daily Consumption of SSB. Mexico, 2012-2014


                                                                                                                                        0.145
                                            0.001
          2014                              0.001
                                                                                                                             0.128
                                                      0.017



                                                                                                                                               0.153
                                            0.001
          2012                              0.002
                                                                                                                                0.134
                                                      0.017
                                                                                                         SSB    Juice powder    Other SSB       Sodas     Juices

                                       0            0.02         0.04         0.06         0.08        0.1          0.12        0.14           0.16            0.18
                                                                                Per capita daily consumption in liters
Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 2012 and 2014.


Per capita daily water consumption increased during that time frame. The small decrease in milk
consumption was not statistically significant overall (see Annex III with t-tests for statistical significance).




                                                                                                                                                                      56
    Figure 19: Per capita daily Consumption of SSB and Substitute Goods. Mexico, 2012-2014



                                                                                     0.145
                                                                                                                                                            0.482
          2014
                                                                             0.105
                                                                                   0.128



                                                                                       0.153
                                                                                                                                               0.42
          2012
                                                                             0.109
                                                                                                                                                  SSB     Water      Milk   Soda
                                                                                    0.134


                 0                                                     0.1                   0.2               0.3               0.4                       0.5                 0.6
                                                                                             Per capita daily consumption in liters
Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 2012 and 2014.


These changes in consumption that occurred in 2014 after the taxes to SSBs were enacted varied across
income quintiles. Figure 20 shows the trends in per capita consumption of SSBs in Mexico. As can be
seen, between 1989 and 2006 there was a fast increase in per capita consumption, particularly among the
poorest quintiles of the income distribution. Between 2006 and 2012, the trends in per capita consumption
stalled. In 2014, per capita consumption of SSBs decreased among the poorest two quintiles and also
among the richest quintile; remaining mostly the same among the other two quintiles (Figure 20).

    Figure 20: Per capita Consumption of SSBs in Mexico across Income Quintiles: 1989-2014

                                                                 0.2
                     Per capita household consumption of SSBs




                                                                0.18
                                                                0.16
                                                                0.14
                                                                0.12
                                                                 0.1
                                                                0.08
                                                                0.06
                                                                0.04
                                                                0.02
                                                                  0
                                                                         1989        1994       2000     2004       2006    2008        2010      2012        2014
                                                                       Quintil 1             Quintil 2          Quintil 3          Quintil 4            Quintil 5

Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, and 2014.

Similarly, the poorest three quintiles experienced the largest increases in per capita water consumption in
2014; while the richest quintile decreased consumption and the fourth maintained it. In the case of milk,
the first and third quintiles also slightly increased consumption, while households in the other quintiles
continued the previous decreasing trends in consumption (Figure 21 and Figure 22).




                                                                                                                                                                                     57
    Figure 21: Mexico per capita Water                                                                                 Figure 22:   Mexico per capita Milk
    Consumption per Income Quintile: 1989-                                                                             Consumption per Income Quintile: 1989-
    2014                                                                                                               2014

                                   0.7                                                                                                                0.3

                                   0.6




                                                                                                                    Per capita consumption of milk
                                                                                                                                                     0.25
 Per capita consumption of water




                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                   0.4
                                                                                                                                                     0.15
                                   0.3
                                                                                                                                                      0.1
                                   0.2

                                                                                                                                                     0.05
                                   0.1

                                    0                                                                                                                  0
                                         1989   1994    2000      2004     2006    2008   2010    2012       2014                                            1989 1994 2000 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014

                                                   Quintil 1               Quintil 2             Quintil 3                                                          Quintil 1             Quintil 2               Quintil 3

                                                   Quintil 4               Quintil 5                                                                                Quintil 4             Quintil 5

Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 1989, 1994, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, and 2014.

In terms of consumption of foods of low nutritional value, with the exception of jelly, Mexican households
purchased overall less high-calorie goods between 2012 and 2014. Products with high-calorie content such
as candy, cakes and pastries were purchased at a lower frequency during this time frame (Figure 23). This
represents a change in trends given the increase observed between 2010 and 2012.

Figure 23: Proportion of Households that Bought High Calorie Goods during the Reference Week.
                                      Mexico, 2012-2014


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.027

                                                                                                                                                                         0.017
                                            2014                         0.003
                                                               0.001
                                                               0.001
                                                                                  0.005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.028

                                                                                                                                                                         0.017
                                            2012                            0.004
                                                               0.001
                                                               0.001
                                                                                       0.006         High calorie food                                      Jelly      Pastry     Candy     Chocolate         Cakes      Cookies

                                                   0                       0.005                   0.01                                               0.015                      0.02                 0.025                   0.03
                                                                                                   Per capita daily consumption in Kilograms

     Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
                                                 years: 2012 and 2014.


At the same time, the proportion of households that purchased potential substitute goods such as fruits and
vegetables increased significantly. Purchase of bread products stayed the same (Figure 24).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     58
 Figure 24: Proportion of Households that Purchased High Calorie Goods and Substitute Goods
                         during the Reference Week. Mexico, 2008-2014


                                                                                                                   0.242
                            0.027
                        0.017
         2014
                     0.01
                                                    0.089
                                                                         0.143

                                                                                                                0.232
                           0.028
                       0.017
         2012                                           Substitute goods High calorie food          Pastry   Bread       Fruits    Vegetables
                     0.011
                                                    0.089
                                                                     0.133

                 0              0.05                 0.1                0.15                  0.2                 0.25                    0.3
                                                    Per capita daily consumption in Kilograms

Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 2008, 2010, 2012, and 2014.

Per capita daily consumption of high-calorie foods saw a slight decrease between 2012 and 2014, mainly
due to a decreased consumption of cookies and candies, but the decrease was not statistically significant.
Instead, what was significant was an increase in the per capita daily consumption of fruits and vegetables.

        Figure 25: Per capita Daily Consumption of High Calorie Goods. Mexico, 2012-2014


                                                                                                                                  0.027

                                                                                      0.017
          2014               0.003
                     0.001
                     0.001
                                       0.005

                                                                                                                                      0.028

                                                                                      0.017
          2012                      0.004
                     0.001
                     0.001                          High calorie food   Jelly    Pastry   Candy     Chocolate     Cakes     Cookies
                                            0.006

                 0              0.005                0.01              0.015             0.02                     0.025                   0.03
                                                    Per capita daily consumption in Kilograms
Source: Own elaboration using the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (ENIGH) of the following
years: 2012 and 2014.

Regression Results for the Demand of SSBs and Foods of Low Nutritional Value

Since the estimation of the demand for sodas and high-calorie foods using micro-data is censored, this
analysis uses Heckman two-step estimation for the demand for sodas and high calorie foods following
Parks and Capps (1997). This section first estimates the probability of households buying sweetened
beverages/high calorie foods and in a second step estimates the demand for these two goods. In addition,
the cross sectional household surveys used for this analysis provide information on expenditure in a food
item and the quantity of the item; thus prices are estimated. These prices however are prices of a bundle
of goods, they can varied in brand name, packaging or in other quality characteristics that are not
observable. Thus to avoid a bias estimation, prices also need to be adjusted by quality. Following the work
of Cox and Wohlgenant (1985), Park and Capps (1997), and Kuchler et al (2004), this section estimates
the quality-adjusted prices (Annex IV describes the methodology used in detail).


                                                                                                                                                 59
The results of the quality adjusted price regressions are presented on Table 20 below. These regressions
used data from the National Household Income and Expenditure Surveys of 2012 and 2014. The table
indicates the variables that affect the price households pay for the goods subject to the taxes and some
goods that might be substitutes to them such as milk, water, fruits and vegetables. Household size, income,
characteristics of the household head, type of store where the items were bought and the location of the
household have a significant effect on the prices paid and thus on the type of foods and beverages
consumed.

     Table 20: Regression Results for Price/quality Functions for SSB, High Calorie Food and
                                   Complementary Products

                                                      Dependent variable (price)
                              (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)
                                                                                                    High calorie
                             SSB        Sodas      Vegetables    Fruits       Milk       Water
                                                                                                        food
                            2.651***   -0.536***   -0.582***    -0.612***   -0.243***   -0.611***    -1.091***
       Household Size
                            (0.386)      (0.041)    (0.103)      (0.130)     (0.034)     (0.073)      (0.327)
       Household size      -0.128***   0.024***     0.034***     0.026**     0.011***    0.036***     0.054**
          squared           (0.027)      (0.004)    (0.008)      (0.011)     (0.003)     (0.006)      (0.027)
                           -0.000***   0.000***     0.000***     0.000***    0.000***    0.000***     0.000***
           Income
                            (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)
                            0.000***    -0.000**   -0.000***    -0.000***   -0.000***   -0.000***    -0.000***
       Income squared
                            (0.000)      (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)
       Age of household    -0.153***   0.005***      -0.004       0.002      0.004***   -0.021***    -0.038***
             head           (0.019)      (0.001)    (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.001)     (0.003)      (0.012)
         Item bought in    -6.795***   -0.563***    3.056***      0.058      0.665***    1.570***     2.490***
      tienda de abarrote
                            (0.642)     (0.050)     (0.133)      (0.145)     (0.041)    (0.099)       (0.352)
               (d)
                           -1.492**    -0.417***      0.062      -0.125       0.005     -0.440***     -1.030**
         Married (d)
                            (0.649)     (0.047)      (0.130)     (0.153)     (0.039)     (0.079)       (0.403)
                           4.875***     -0.068      -0.279**    -0.536***    -0.041      0.199**     -2.027***
         Poverty (d)
                            (0.635)     (0.044)      (0.129)     (0.152)     (0.043)     (0.086)       (0.413)
     Kids 6 years old or    -0.819     -0.351***      0.174      -0.229      -0.025      -0.123       0.966**
           more(d)          (0.716)     (0.055)      (0.153)     (0.179)     (0.047)     (0.104)       (0.483)
      Household head
       with secondary      -2.991***   0.132***     0.617***    0.653***    0.239***     0.047       2.169***
     education or more
             (d)            (0.661)     (0.043)     (0.121)      (0.136)      (0.037)    (0.078)      (0.374)
                             -0.664    0.393***    -0.560***    -0.451***   0.442***       0.135     -2.367***
          Rural (d)
                            (0.653)     (0.045)     (0.123)      (0.137)      (0.043)    (0.085)      (0.364)
      Region=Noroeste        0.947      0.496***     0.155        0.151      0.297***   -1.172***      0.526
             (d)            (0.620)     (0.053)     (0.235)      (0.247)      (0.049)    (0.160)      (0.769)
      Region=Occidente       1.078      0.149**    -2.603***    -0.706***   -1.796***   -1.342***    -6.747***
             (d)            (0.849)     (0.065)     (0.243)      (0.263)      (0.057)    (0.164)      (0.745)
                           3.704***    -0.315***   -1.807***    -1.163***   -0.730***   -1.387***   -12.015***
     Region=Oriente (d)
                            (1.165)     (0.087)     (0.241)      (0.268)      (0.064)    (0.167)      (0.724)
     Region=Centronorte      0.578       -0.028    -3.092***    -0.997***   -1.486***     -0.244     -7.369***
             (d)            (0.739)     (0.060)     (0.236)      (0.248)      (0.056)    (0.201)      (0.704)
      Region=CentroSur     3.728***    -1.173***   -2.462***    -0.837***    -0.136**   -1.222***    -3.903***
             (d)            (1.082)     (0.073)     (0.235)      (0.246)      (0.057)    (0.166)      (0.739)
                           6.650***      -0.086     1.906***     -0.108      0.325***   -1.281***    -7.103***
     Region=Sureste (d)
                            (0.815)     (0.056)     (0.252)      (0.281)      (0.088)    (0.157)      (0.704)
      Region=Suroeste      6.138***       0.032    -1.279***     -0.019      0.598***   -1.309***   -15.900***
            (d)             (1.502)     (0.078)     (0.253)      (0.287)      (0.078)    (0.176)      (0.755)
                           27.823***   12.475***   20.374***    15.187***   12.780***    5.097***    61.134***
          Constant
                            (1.523)     (0.133)     (0.386)      (0.465)      (0.114)    (0.299)      (1.225)
        Observations         57080       41481      116660        35407        38363      12990        39669
         R-squared           0.021        0.126      0.026        0.054        0.135      0.167        0.081
     Note: OLS. (d) indicates dummy variables. Standard errors in parentheses. "* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 21 presents the regression results for the demands for foods and beverages subject to the taxes as
well as some products that might behave as substitutes. As can be seen in the table, the own-price elasticity
of demand for SSBs is negative, as expected, but inelastic. This might be due to the definition used for

                                                                                                                   60
SSBs in this study. As mentioned before, it was not possible to differentiate sodas, juices, concentrates
and other flavored beverages from their counterparts with no added sugar, which are likely to be substitute
beverages to the ones subject to the tax. Contrary to what was expected, the cross-price elasticities of
demand of water and milk are not significant. The income elasticity of demand is positive, as expected, but
also inelastic.

                            Table 21: Regression Results for Product Demands

                                                    Dependent Variables (ln [quantities])
                               (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)
                                                       High
                              SSB        Sodas                    Fruits      Vegetables     Water        Milk
                                                    calorie food
            2nd Step
                            -0.292***                                                       -0.182***   -0.077***
         Ln(SSB price)
                             (0.032)                                                         (0.065)     (0.025)
                              0.035      0.307***                                            -0.125     -0.609***
         Ln(Milk price)
                             (0.101)     (0.118)                                             (0.166)     (0.081)
                              0.036      0.116***                                           -1.088***    -0.028
         Ln(Water price)
                             (0.046)     (0.039)                                             (0.212)     (0.068)
                             -0.031      0.086***     -0.010      -0.092***     -0.009       -0.040      -0.005
         Year=2014 (d)
                             (0.060)     (0.033)      (0.034)      (0.022)      (0.014)      (0.083)     (0.077)
                                        -1.462***                                             0.039       0.088
         Ln (Soda price)
                                         (0.098)                                             (0.084)     (0.107)
        Ln (High calorie                             -0.653***    0.095***       -0.019
             food)                                    (0.035)      (0.027)      (0.030)
                                                      0.119***     -0.017      -0.244***
         Ln(Vegetables)
                                                      (0.023)      (0.044)      (0.036)
                                                      0.152***    -0.170***      -0.009
           Ln(Fruits)
                                                      (0.052)      (0.061)      (0.020)
                            3.282***    4.651***      2.291***    2.099***      2.604***    7.114***    3.684***
            Constant
                            (0.350)     (0.456)       (0.152)      (0.174)      (0.168)     (0.594)     (0.283)
            1st Step
                            0.317***    0.298***     0.165***     0.301***     0.073***     0.245***    0.371***
           Ln(income)
                             (0.060)    (0.073)      (0.026)      (0.033)      (0.013)      (0.060)     (0.056)
         Meal planner=        0.028       0.003       0.036        0.004        0.034       -0.034*      0.021
          female (d)         (0.043)    (0.072)      (0.022)      (0.019)      (0.028)      (0.019)     (0.036)
                            -0.002**     -0.001       0.001       0.003**      0.005***     0.003**      0.000
        Meal planner age
                             (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.002)
           Meal planner     0.125***    0.166***     0.125***     0.170***      0.087       0.128**     0.253***
             secondary
       education or more    (0.034)     (0.060)       (0.037)      (0.045)      (0.057)     (0.053)     (0.046)
                 (d)
           Meal planner     -0.049      -0.047        0.050*      -0.074**     -0.110**     -0.067**    -0.087**
              works (d)     (0.033)     (0.036)      (0.026)       (0.031)      (0.046)      (0.029)     (0.038)
         Household has      0.081*       0.015       0.116**        0.016        0.094        0.011       0.029
             bicycle (d)    (0.047)     (0.054)      (0.047)       (0.052)      (0.066)      (0.055)     (0.084)
       Number of children   0.043**      0.035       0.132***     0.050***     0.109***      0.031**    0.071***
           in household
                            (0.022)     (0.021)       (0.015)      (0.009)      (0.023)     (0.012)     (0.026)
             (under 12)
       Number of people     0.067***    0.102***     0.042***      0.030**     0.223***     0.061***    0.051***
           in household
                            (0.025)     (0.030)       (0.009)      (0.014)      (0.039)     (0.016)     (0.017)
       between 12 and 64
       Number of people      -0.032      -0.055       0.009         0.027      0.172***      0.002       0.011
         in the house 65
                            (0.041)     (0.046)       (0.027)      (0.028)      (0.028)     (0.039)     (0.055)
              and more
                            -3.878***   -4.070***    -2.201***    -3.610***    -1.281***    -3.806***   -4.782***
            Constant
                             (0.668)     (0.760)      (0.244)      (0.321)      (0.132)      (0.628)     (0.613)
          Observations        12882       14759        19369        22551        13444        22307       15177
Note: Heckman selection model. Inflation adjusted prices. (d) indicates dummy variables. We assume that the meal
planner is the household head if it is a single headed household and the female of the household a two-headed
household or household with a married head. Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Regarding the demographic variables used to explain variations in consumption, the higher the number of
children and adults, the higher the number of beverages consumed; however, the number of older adults

                                                                                                                    61
in the family does not affect the quantities of SSBs consumed. The characteristics of the meal planner not
always have the expected impact on consumption. For instance, while those meal planners that are
currently employed tend to buy less SSBs; contrary to expectations, those with secondary education or
more and younger meal planners tend to buy more SSBs than their less educated and older counterparts.
Similarly, the ones that own a bicycle, used as a proxy for a health conscious meal planner, tend to buy
more, not less SSBs.

In contrast to the sample of combined SSBs, when looking only at sodas (carbonated soft-drinks), the own-
price elasticity of demand becomes elastic. Although in this case we could not either differentiate the diet
or light versions from the regular sodas, the market for the low calorie products remains small in Mexico;
thus this elasticity is likely to mainly reflect that of the regular versions of the sodas. In this case, the cross-
price elasticities of demand of milk and water are positive and significant, indicating that when the prices of
milk and water increase, the quantities of sodas also increase.

When looking at the demand equations for water and milk, both have negative own-price elasticities of
demand. But contrary to what was expected, in the case of the demand for milk, the cross-price elasticity
for SSBs is not significant and in the case of water it has a negative sign, indicating that water is a
complement and not a substitute of SSBs. This again, could be the result of a not very precise definition
of the SSBs used in this study. In the case of the cross-price elasticity for sodas only, all have the expected
sign (positive, indicating consumption substitutes) but none are significant.

In the case of foods of low nutritional value subject to the 8 percent ad valorem tax, we can also observe
that the own-price elasticity of demand is negative and inelastic. The definition used in this analysis as
foods subject to this second tax is imprecise, including only those goods classified in the survey as: cookies,
cakes, pastries, chocolates, jellies and candies. The cross-price elasticities of demand for fruits and
vegetables are positive and significant, indicating that when the price of these foods increase, the quantities
consumed of high calorie foods also increase. When looking at the demands for fruits and vegetables, only
in the case of fruits, when the price of foods subject to the tax increase, there is a significant increase in the
quantities of fruits consumed. In other words, fruits are substitute for foods of low nutritional value.

Regression Results for the Demand of SSBs and Foods of Low Nutritional Value Across Income
Quintiles

To assess whether there is any differential impact of prices on consumption across socioeconomic levels,
Table 22 presents the results of regressions for the demand of SSBs within each income quintile. In
general, the own-price elasticity of demand decreases with income quintile, although it remains inelastic
across the income distribution. The cross-price elasticities of milk is only significant among the poorest 20
percent of the population, confirming that among this group milk is a substitute product for SSBs. In the
case of water, the cross-price elasticity of demand of SSBs is only significantly positive among the richest
20 percent of the population.




                                                                                                                62
                    Table 22: Regression Results for SSBs Across Income Quintiles

                                                                SSB (ln [quantities])
                                                  (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)         (5)
                                                Quintil 1    Quintil 2   Quintil 3      Quintil 4   Quintil 5
                     2nd Step
                                                -0.707***    -0.507***   -0.127***      -0.231***   -0.285**
                   Ln(SSB price)
                                                 (0.229)      (0.078)     (0.045)        (0.067)     (0.119)
                                                  0.260*       0.361       -0.038        -0.256       0.285
                   Ln(Milk price)
                                                 (0.146)      (0.295)     (0.226)        (0.307)     (0.243)
                                                  0.083       -0.055        0.031         0.018      0.084*
                  Ln(Water price)
                                                 (0.079)      (0.105)     (0.076)        (0.033)     (0.051)
                                                  -0.142      -0.131       -0.057         0.074      -0.005
                   Year=2014 (d)
                                                 (0.106)      (0.102)     (0.075)        (0.097)     (0.045)
                                                 2.514***      1.390      3.203***      3.759***    2.392***
                     Constant
                                                 (0.858)      (0.874)     (0.709)        (0.965)     (0.554)
                      1st Step
                                                 0.587***     0.897***      0.236         0.138       0.058
                    Ln(income)
                                                  (0.075)     (0.276)     (0.166)        (0.145)    (0.055)
                                                  -0.002       -0.009       0.093        -0.037      -0.048
             Meal planner= female (d)
                                                  (0.113)     (0.107)     (0.081)        (0.056)    (0.074)
                                                  -0.002       -0.002      -0.002        -0.001      -0.001
                 Meal planner age
                                                  (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.001)    (0.002)
        Meal planner secondary education or      0.475***     0.262**     0.097**         0.015       0.059
                      more (d)                    (0.102)     (0.104)     (0.042)        (0.047)    (0.057)
                                                  -0.037     -0.159***     -0.002        -0.026       0.024
              Meal planner works (d)
                                                  (0.113)     (0.059)     (0.062)        (0.058)    (0.035)
                                                   0.183       0.062      0.127**         0.012      -0.130
             Household has bicycle (d)
                                                  (0.140)     (0.113)     (0.051)        (0.076)    (0.086)
       Number of children in household (under     -0.019       0.028      0.065***       0.048*     0.112***
                        12)                       (0.053)     (0.030)     (0.015)        (0.026)    (0.030)
          Number of people in household          -0.088**      -0.025       0.018       0.060***    0.142***
               between 12 and 64                  (0.041)     (0.036)     (0.024)        (0.019)    (0.025)
       Number of people in the house 65 and      -0.198**    -0.300***     -0.024       -0.092***     0.025
                        more                      (0.084)     (0.075)     (0.054)        (0.030)    (0.080)
                                                -6.322***    -9.264***    -2.952*        -1.731      -1.187
                     Constant
                                                  (0.568)     (2.554)     (1.741)        (1.571)    (0.724)
                   Observations                    3052         2541        2459          2369        2461
Note: Heckman selection model. Inflation adjusted prices. (d) indicates dummy variables. We assume that the meal
planner is the household head if it is a single headed household and the female of the household a two-headed
household or household with a married head. Standard errors in parentheses. *p<0.1 **p<0.05 ***p<0.01

When looking at sodas only, the own-price elasticity of demand of sodas is elastic in all income quintiles,
but it is the third quintile the one with the highest elasticity of demand. When looking at the cross-price
elasticities of demand, the table shows that when the price of water increases, the quantity consumed of
sodas increases for households at the two extreme of the income distribution (quintiles 1 and 5). Similarly,
when the price of milk increases the quantity consumed of sodas increases significantly for quintiles 2 and
5.




                                                                                                                63
          Table 23: Regression Results for the Demand of Sodas Across Income Quintiles

                                                                            Sodas (ln [quantities])
                                                         (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)
                                                       Quintil 1   Quintil 2   Quintil 3     Quintil 4   Quintil 5
                        2nd Step
                                                                       -
                                                      -1.090***                -1.719***     -1.384***   -1.433***
                     Ln(Soda price)                                1.501***
                                                       (0.319)     (0.234)     (0.198)       (0.209)     (0.124)
                                                         0.323     0.637***     0.135         0.097       0.494*
                     Ln(Milk price)
                                                       (0.248)     (0.232)     (0.198)       (0.185)     (0.268)
                                                       0.306***     -0.006      0.052         0.078      0.152***
                     Ln(Water price)
                                                       (0.100)     (0.082)     (0.094)       (0.062)     (0.050)
                                                        -0.053       0.067     0.201***       0.084      0.076**
                     Year=2014 (d)
                                                       (0.124)     (0.074)     (0.074)       (0.073)     (0.037)
                                                       2.467**     3.289***    5.769***      5.169***    4.113***
                        Constant
                                                       (1.167)     (0.673)     (0.884)       (0.759)     (0.707)
                        1st Step
                                                       0.562***    0.940***     0.588**        0.221     -0.155***
                       Ln(income)
                                                       (0.100)      (0.341)     (0.273)      (0.195)      (0.034)
                                                         0.097      -0.066       0.134         0.024      -0.128
                Meal planner= female (d)
                                                       (0.134)      (0.137)     (0.127)      (0.080)      (0.099)
                                                        -0.001       0.000      -0.001         0.000       0.000
                    Meal planner age
                                                       (0.003)      (0.002)     (0.003)      (0.001)      (0.002)
                                                       0.441***    0.255***      0.101         0.088       0.110
      Meal planner secondary education or more (d)
                                                       (0.121)      (0.074)     (0.071)      (0.059)      (0.099)
                                                        -0.034     -0.124**     -0.070        -0.068       0.058
                 Meal planner works (d)
                                                       (0.104)      (0.060)     (0.120)      (0.061)      (0.050)
                                                         0.118      -0.038       0.087         0.004      -0.117
                Household has bicycle (d)
                                                       (0.143)      (0.085)     (0.128)      (0.098)      (0.116)
                                                        -0.048       0.017      0.057*         0.030      0.083**
          Number of kid in household (under 12)
                                                       (0.044)      (0.038)     (0.034)      (0.026)      (0.035)
                                                       -0.085*      -0.005       0.028       0.092***    0.184***
    Number of people in household between 12 and 64
                                                       (0.049)      (0.037)     (0.029)      (0.026)      (0.033)
                                                                       -
                                                      -0.207***                 -0.069       -0.107**     0.018
       Number of people in the house 65 and more                   0.288***
                                                       (0.077)      (0.075)     (0.122)       (0.050)    (0.081)
                                                                       -
                                                      -6.388***                -6.828**       -3.085      0.788*
                        Constant                                   9.984***
                                                       (0.889)      (3.242)     (2.793)       (2.048)    (0.458)
                      Observations                      3566         3006        2797          2681       2709
Note: Heckman selection model. Inflation adjusted prices. (d) indicates dummy variables. We assume that the meal
planner is the household head if it is a single headed household and the female of the household a two-headed
household or household with a married head. Standard errors in parentheses. *p<0.1 **p<0.05 ***p<0.01

Similar to the case of SSBs, the own-price elasticity of demand of foods subject to the 8 percent ad valorem
tax also decrease with income quintile. The demand of the poorest end of the income distribution is more
elastic to the changes in prices of these goods (Table 24).




                                                                                                                     64
   Table 24: Regression Results for the Demand of High Calorie Foods Across Income Quintiles

                                                                   High calorie food (ln [quantities])
                                                        (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)
                                                      Quintil 1   Quintil 2    Quintil 3    Quintil 4    Quintil 5
                         nd
                        2        Step
                                                         -
                                                                  -0.638***   -0.686***     -0.594***    -0.586***
               Ln(High calorie food price)            0.930***
                                                      (0.143)     (0.081)      (0.060)       (0.045)     (0.084)
                                                       0.141       -0.058      0.212**        0.089      0.188***
                  Ln(Vegetables price)
                                                      (0.090)     (0.114)      (0.098)       (0.065)     (0.072)
                                                       0.140      0.353***      0.129*        0.120       0.095
                    Ln(Fruits price)
                                                      (0.090)     (0.077)      (0.067)       (0.074)     (0.064)
                                                       0.095       0.020        0.010        -0.033       -0.087
                     Year=2014 (d)
                                                      (0.062)     (0.046)      (0.074)       (0.038)     (0.053)
                                                      3.306***    1.820***     2.129***     2.203***     2.174***
                       Constant
                                                      (0.501)     (0.493)      (0.482)       (0.303)     (0.424)
                            st
                        1 Step
                                                      0.221**      0.395        0.081         0.083      0.107**
                      Ln(income)
                                                      (0.087)     (0.273)      (0.154)       (0.204)     (0.049)
                                                       0.011       0.145*      0.287***      -0.046      -0.208***
                Meal planner= female (d)
                                                      (0.072)     (0.081)      (0.090)       (0.107)     (0.034)
                                                       0.001       -0.001       -0.002       0.003**      0.003
                   Meal planner age
                                                      (0.002)     (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.001)     (0.002)
                                                      0.201*      0.094**      0.109**       0.096**     0.177**
      Meal planner secondary education or more (d)
                                                      (0.119)     (0.041)      (0.043)       (0.038)     (0.081)
                                                      0.100*       0.081        0.078         0.054       -0.015
                 Meal planner works (d)
                                                      (0.057)     (0.098)      (0.048)       (0.034)     (0.040)
                                                       0.073       0.080       0.214**        0.105       0.081*
               Household has bicycle (d)
                                                      (0.085)     (0.074)      (0.089)       (0.107)     (0.042)
                                                      0.168***    0.165***     0.109***     0.107***     0.104***
         Number of kid in household (under 12)
                                                      (0.032)     (0.027)      (0.034)       (0.007)     (0.036)
                                                       0.032       -0.001       0.018        0.034*      0.064***
    Number of people in household between 12 and 64
                                                      (0.022)     (0.033)      (0.029)       (0.019)     (0.012)
                                                       0.014      -0.124**      0.037        -0.004       0.075
       Number of people in the house 65 and more
                                                      (0.078)     (0.055)      (0.043)       (0.036)     (0.052)
                                                         -
                                                                   -4.297       -1.368       -1.224      -1.597***
                       Constant                       2.821***
                                                      (0.738)     (2.616)      (1.565)       (2.144)     (0.543)
                     Observations                      3902         3876        3825          3877         3889
Note: Heckman selection model. Inflation adjusted prices. (d) indicates dummy variables. We assume that the meal
planner is the household head if it is a single headed household and the female of the household a two-headed
household or household with a married head. Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                                                                                     65
                                       VII. CONCLUSIONS
Faced with a large and increasing obesity epidemic, the Mexican Government in the last years has
increased efforts in the prevention and control of obesity. Among these efforts, in October 2013, Mexico’s
Congress passed legislation imposing taxes on SSBs and calorie-dense foods of low nutritional value. This
fiscal reform was discussed in the early days of the current Government administration, which ensured a
higher probability of enactment. Specifically, both taxes were part of a reform of the Law on the Special
Tax on Production and Services (Impuesto Especial sobre Productos y Servicios -IEPS).

These taxes were not enacted in isolation, but were part of a comprehensive strategy to prevent and control
obesity, overweight and diabetes. In addition to fiscal policy and regulation, this strategy included other
health promotion and prevention interventions as well as measures to ensure better access to effective
health care services.

There were several reasons behind the Mexican Government decision to enact fiscal policies to contribute
to the prevention and control obesity. First, the food and beverages subject to these taxes are calorie-
dense but do not provide much nutritional value. There is increasing evidence linking their consumption
with an increasing trend in overweight, obesity and other chronic conditions. The consumption of these
foods and beverages have been growing fast in previous years. Indeed, Mexico is one of the countries in
the world with the highest consumption of SSBs. Finally, there is limited but increasing evidence showing
that these taxes can decrease consumption and improve health outcomes.

The process that resulted in the enactment of these taxes was a long and challenging one. The discussions
to develop taxes on SSBs and low nutritional value foods started years before 2013 as part of an overall
discussion in the country of what was needed to stop, and if possible revert, the increasing trend of adults
and children overweight and obese. The success of this effort was not due to a single stakeholder within
the executive or legislative branch of Government. It was the collective and persistent efforts of several
civil society organizations that for a long time lobbied for the inclusion of these taxes and implemented a
strong communication campaign. This effort would also not have been possible without the academic
grounding and evidence generated by the National Institute of Public Health and others such as the National
Institute of Medical Sciences. The actors favoring this policy had to counteract much opposition from strong
stakeholders, including food and beverage industry, bottling companies, and others. The latter also
implemented a large media campaign opposing these taxes. Even after the enactment of the taxes, this
opposition has continued and it almost resulted in a partial reversal of the policy in 2015.

The design of the taxes on SSBs and foods of low nutritional value is complex. Not only do policymakers
have to ensure that the taxes are passed to the prices of the goods under consideration, but also ensure
that this increase in prices results in a decrease in consumption of the foods and beverages taxed and does
not increase consumption of other unhealthy foods and beverages that are not subject to taxation. In
Mexico, several of these issues were taken into account in the design of the fiscal policy. For instance, the
tax to SSBs included all beverages with added sugar; this would include not just sodas but also juices and
concentrates with added sugar. It also included a broad definition of sugar to include, among others, table
sugar as well as high-fructose corn syrup 97. In addition, to avoid substitution of sugary-drinks with sugary-
foods, there were taxes not just to SSBs, but also to foods of low nutritional value, which include foods with
added sugar.

These taxes have been successful in increasing fiscal revenues. They have also been successful in
increasing the price of the products taxed. There is also evidence that they produced a decrease in
consumption, particularly of SSBs. However, there is still a debate about how large this impact was and
whether there is an impact on health outcomes.

A review of the studies conducted so far on the impact of the reform on prices, including our analysis,
highlight the following: (i) the prices of soda drinks tended to increase by the amount of the tax or more;

97   PRODECON. 2013.

                                                                                                          66
(ii) prices of smaller packages of the taxed products increased more than 1 peso per liter and larger
packages increased around 1 peso; (iii) other SSBs (flavored waters and industrialized juices) increased
by less than 1 peso; (iv) it is not clear whether diet soda prices were affected by the tax; and (v) there were
regional differences on price setting.

When comparing the prices of SSBs in Mexico after the tax reform with comparison countries like Argentina
and Brazil, the prices in Mexico remain relatively low, which make these goods more affordable in Mexico
than in Argentina or Brazil. This suggests there may be additional room to increase prices and possibly
achieve a larger impact on reducing consumption.

Our own analysis of the price structure of SSBs in Mexico before and after the tax shows that the price
differences between competing brands (that is, among cola soft-drinks) and types of sodas (between cola
and flavored sodas) were high before the fiscal policy was enacted, and that the tax increase was not large
enough to move the entire price structure up. It was reasonable to expect that consumers could purchase
cheaper versions of the taxed product at almost pre-tax levels. For example, in December 2013, before
the taxes came into effect, the 2 liter Coke bottle was on average MXN 19.5 while that of Pepsi was MXN
15.6. Also, the price of the 2 liter Fanta bottle was almost 4 pesos cheaper than that of Coke. In December
2015, two years after the reform, the 2 liter Pepsi bottle was MXN 19.8, similar to the price of the 2 liter
Coke bottle before the reform, while the 2 liter Fanta bottle was cheaper (about MXN 18).

In addition, before the reform, the liter of the cheapest presentation of Coke averaged MXN 9.3 to the
Mexican consumer. After more than two years of the reform, it is possible to buy, through large sale
promotions, one liter of cola and flavored sodas by MXN 4.4 in the Mexican supermarkets. For those
consumers able to buy at these sale promotion prices, the tax reform has not drastically changed the
financial incentives to reduce the consumption of regular sodas.

In terms of volumes purchased, existing studies, for instance Colchero et al. (2016) found that the post-tax
purchases of SSBs during the first year were 6 percent lower on average than the pre-tax trend. They also
found that purchases of untaxed beverages (mainly bottled water) were 4 percent higher. They found that
the reduction in purchases of non-carbonated taxed beverages was larger than the reduction in carbonated
taxed beverages. This could be due to higher prices and high price elasticities of non-carbonated
beverages; and consumers shifting to lower priced versions of taxed carbonated beverages given the large
variation in prices. They also found that the largest impact on consumption was among households of low
socioeconomic level.

Another study published by ITAM (Aguilar et al., 2016) found that the tax appeared to have incentivized
moderate reductions in consumption of SSBs. The effect of the tax on SSBs, contrary to what was found
by the previous study, appears to have had a greater effect among households in the higher income level.
As per the taxes on high-calorie foods, in order to control for potential product substitution resulting from
the taxes, the researchers studied the total calories consumed (taxed and untaxed foods). They found a
weekly decrease in calorie consumption of 1 percent. In their measures of BMI, the researchers found no
discernible difference across the years under examination, which is in line with the small impact seen for
calories consumed.

Our analysis also used a series of the National Household Income and Expenditure surveys to observe the
behavior of consumption before and after the tax. These data have limitations to study the impact of the
taxes; however, they can provide some insight on the possible direction of the changes and who could have
been more affected by the tax.

The descriptive analysis of the data shows a reduction in the percentage of households that purchased and
consumed SSBs within the household between 2012 and 2014; this is particularly the case among
households in the poorest income quintiles. It also showed a significant increase in the percentage of
households that purchased bottled water and, among the poorest 20 percent of households, there was also
a significant increase in the percentage of families that bought milk. The data also shows a significant
decrease in the per capita consumption of SSBs and an increase in per capita consumption of bottled water,
particularly among the three poorest quintiles of the income distribution.

                                                                                                           67
Regarding the second tax, the percentage of households that purchased energy-dense foods of low
nutritional value, such as cookies, jellies and candies slightly decreased from 2012 to 2014. The decrease
in per capita consumption however was not statistically significant.

Regression analysis of the demand for foods and beverages subject to the taxes show that the own-price
elasticity of demand of SSBs is inelastic. This could be due to the imprecise definition for SSBs used in
this study since it was not possible to distinguish sodas, juices and other flavored beverages with and
without added sugars. However, when we look at the demand of sodas, which are more likely to have
added sugar (the market for light or low calorie versions is small in Mexico), the own-price elasticity of
demand becomes elastic. Across income quintiles, the own-price elasticity of demand of SSBs decreases
with income quintile; while the own-price elasticity of demand of sodas is highest among people in the
middle of the income distribution.

People in the poorest end of the income distribution seem to have had the largest changes in consumption.
They have the largest price elasticity of demand of SSBs and thus any price increase would result in a
larger decrease in consumption than among people in the highest end of the income distribution. The
poorest also seem to have had the largest increase in water consumption. Similarly for the case of high-
calorie dense foods, the poorest seem to have had the largest decrease in consumption. Thus in principle,
they should also have the largest improvements in health outcomes, although this is something that would
need to be confirmed. These results across income quintiles are similar to those found by a study from a
team from the National Institute of Public Health but different from those of a study from ITAM and another
from Colmex, although this latter one does not use individual data.

It is important to continuously monitor the reduction in consumption and consumption substitution (to
healthy or unhealthy substitutes). Fiscal policy used for health promotion purposes is still a controversial
issue. These reforms face major risks. They tend to affect a relatively small group of powerful and
concentrated businesses with the capacity to fight back. In addition, if the tax is small and there is potential
for consumption substitution within the taxed products (that is, cheaper brands, cheaper packages within
the same brand, or through promotions) the impact of the tax on the consumption of the unhealthy good
could be small. Policymakers should then be aware of the possible resistance and producers’ and
consumers’ strategies that could reduce the expected impact of the tax. Thus the need to monitor on a
continued basis the impact on prices and consumption, which is possible to do through the development of
price and volume indicators based on publicly available data as was shown in this document. These
indicators are important and easy-to-generate tools for the political debate about effectiveness of the reform
design and implementation. Although to make these indicators more effective, there is also a need to
improve the publicly available data that INEGI collects on prices and volumes of sales.

There are still several questions that have not been fully addressed related to the impact of these taxes.
The first one is whether the tax has an impact on health outcomes; in other words, whether it will decrease
BMI. A perceptible impact on BMI might take time to be achieved and it is not clear if the available data will
allow this type of impact to be assessed. Related to this, there is also an issue of whether there is a different
long term impact of these taxes. For instance, the taxes could lead to a reformulation of the goods taxed
or might change the norm of what is considered healthy. This could result in a higher impact of the taxes
in the long term.

Finally, since the impact of this fiscal policy on health outcomes is the expected result from a public health
stand point, it is key to also monitor the health impact of this and other policies included in the National
Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Overweight, Obesity and Diabetes on a continuous basis. Thus
the need to monitor closely not only prices and volumes of the goods subject to taxation, but also BMI
across gender and age groups. However, there is no readily available data to do this on a country level,
beyond the data collected every six years in the ENSANUT surveys and thus there is a need to generate
this information on a more continuous basis.




                                                                                                             68
                                       VII. REFERENCES
Aguilar, A., E Gutierrez, and E. Seira. 2016. Taxing Calories in Mexico, Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de
         México (ITAM). CIE. Preliminary Draft.

An R. 2016. “Fast-food and Full-service Restaurant Consumption and Daily Energy and Nutrient Intakes in
        US Adults.” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, vol. 70: 97–103.

Anderson, S.P., A. de Palma and B. Kreider. 2001. "Tax Incidence in Differentiated Product Oligopoly."
       Journal of Public Economics, No. 81, pp. 173–192

Andreyeva T., M. W. Long, K. D. Brownell. 2010. “The Impact of Food Prices on Consumption: A Systematic
       Review of Research on the Price Elasticity of Demand for Food. Government, Politics, and Law.”
       American       Journal      of      Public     Health.,     Vol.     100,    no.2:      216-222.
       http://www.uconnruddcenter.org/resources/upload/docs/what/economics/FoodPricesElasticity_AJ
       PH_2.10.pdf last accessed January 14, 2016.

Andreyeva, T., F. J. Chaloupka and K. D. Brownell. 2011. "Estimating the Potential of Taxes on Sugar-
       sweetened Beverages to Reduce Consumption and Generate Revenue." Preventive Medicine, No.
       52, pp. 413–416

Arturo Aguilar., Emilio Gutierrez, Enrique Seira. 2016, “Taxing Calories in Mexico”, Preliminary and
        incomplete Draft. ITAM

Barquera S et al. 2008. “Energy Intake from Beverages Is Increasing Among Mexican Adolescents and
       Adults.” The Journal of Nutrition 2008. Vol. 138. No. 12:2454-2461.

Barquera, S., I. Campos-Nonato, L. Hernández-Barrera, A. Pedroza-Tobías and J. Rivera-Dommarco.
       2013. “Prevalencia de Obesidad en Adultos Mexicanos.” ENSANUT 2012, Salud Pública de
       México, vol. 55(supl2)

BBC    News. 2011.         “Denmark Introduces World’s First Food Tax.” 1                        October.
       http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-15137948. Last accessed February 25, 2016.

Berardi N., P. Sevestre, M. Tepaut and A. Vigneron. 2012. “The Impact of a ‘Soda tax’ on Prices. Evidence
        from French Micro Data.” Banque de France, Working paper 415, December

Bergman, U. M. and N. L. Hansen. 2013. "Are Excise Taxes on Beverages Fully Passed Through to Prices?
      The Danish Experience." Working paper, University of Copenhagen, retrieved at
      http://www.econ.ku.dk/okombe.

Bloomberg Philanthropies. 2016. “Supporting Strong Policies to Halt Rising Rates of Obesity.”
      http://www.bloomberg.org/program/public-health/obesity-prevention/#overview. Last accessed
      February 24, 2016.

Bonnet, C. and V. Requillart. 2012. "Sugar Policy Reform, Tax Policy and Price Transmission in the Soft
        Drink Industry." Working Paper No. 4, Transparency of Food Pricing, TRANSFOP

Bremer A. A and R. H. Lustig. 2012. “Effects of Sugar-sweetened Beverages on Children.” Pediatric
       Annals, vol. 41, no. 1.

Brownell K and T. R. Frieden. 2009. “Ounces of Prevention – The Public Policy Case for Taxes on Sugared
       Beverages.” The New England Journal of Medicine 2009; vol. 360:1805-1808.




                                                                                                      69
Brownell K. D et al. 2009. “The Public Health and Economic Benefits of Taxing Sugar-Sweetened
       Beverages”, N Engl J Med, vol. 361, no. 16: 1599–1605.

Brug J., N. Lien, K. I. Klepp, F. J. van Lenthe. 2010. “Exploring Overweight, Obesity and their Behavioural
         Correlates Among Children and Adolescents: Results from the Health-promotion through Obesity
         Prevention across Europe Project.” Public Health Nutr.;13:1676–1679.

Butland B., S. Jebb, P. Kopelman, K. Mcpherson, S. Thomas, J. Mardell and V. Parry. 2007. “Foresight.
        Tackling Obesities: Future Choices – Project Report.” Whitehall: Government Office for Science.

Carlos Martinez Velazques. 2013. “Hacia un Consumidor Responsable contra el Sobrepeso y la Obesidad.
        Diagnostic, Analisis y Propuestas”, Central Ciudadano y Consumidor, September 2013.

Colchero, M. A., J. C. Salgado, M. Unar- Munguía, M. Hernandez-Avila, J.A. Rivera-Dommarco. 2015a.
       “Price Elasticity of the dDemand for Sugar Sweetened Beverages and Soft Drinks in Mexico.”
       Economics and Human Biology, 19, pp.129:137

Colchero, M. A., B. Popkin, J. A. Rivera-Dommarco, S. Wen Ng. 2016. “Beverage Purchases from Stores
       in Mexico under the Excise Tax on Sugar Sweetened Beverages: Observational Study.” British
       Medical Journal; 352:h6704 http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.h6704

Colchero, M. A., J. C. Salgado, M. Unar-Munguía, M. Molina, S. Ng, and J. A. Rivera-Dommarco. 2015b.
       “Changes in Prices After an Excise Tax to Sweetened Sugar Beverages Was Implemented in
       Mexico:      Evidence     from    Urban    Areas”,     PLoS      ONE      10(12):  e0144408.
       doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0144408.

Conlantuoni F and C. Rojas. 2012. “Have Soda Tax Effects Changed Over Time? Scanner Data
       Comparison Analyses.” Selected Paper Prepared for Presentation at the Agricultural & Applied
       Economics Association’s 2012 AAEA Annual Meeting, Seattle, Washington, August 12-14, 2012)

Credit Suisse Research Institute. 2013. “Sugar Consumption at Crossroads. Thought leadership from
        Credit Suisse Research and the World’s Foremost Experts.” September 2013. http://wphna.org/wp-
        content/uploads/2014/01/13-09_Credit_Suisse_Sugar_crossroads.pdf. Last accessed January 15,
        2016.

COLMEX (El Colegio de México). 2015. Estudio de los Efectos Sobre el Bienestar de la Política de
     Impuestos Sobre Alimentos y Bebidas con Alto Contenido Calórico. Reporte de resultados,
     Noviembre

Cox, T. L., and M. K. Wohlgenant. 1986. “Prices and Quality Effects in Cross-Sectional Demand Analysis.”
        American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 68:908–18.

El Colegio de México. 2015. Estudio de los Efectos sobre el bienestar de la Política de Impuestos Sobre
        Alimentos        y   Bebidas     con     alto   Contenido       Calórico.      Disponible   en:
        http://difusion.colmex.mx/images/PDF/refrescos2.pdf

Delipalla, S., O. O’Donnell. 2001. “Estimating Tax Incidence, Market Power and Market Conduct: The
         European Cigarette Industry.” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 19, pp. 885–908

Dommarco et al. 2012., “Obesidad en México: Recomendaciones para una Política de Estado”.

Elizabeth Donaldson. 2015. “Incidencia en el Impuesto a las Bebidas Azucaradas. Un Estudio de caso de
        México.” Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. Baltimore.

Encuesta Nacional de Salud y Nutrición. 2012. Evidencia Para la Política Pública en Salud.” Mexico.
       http://ensanut.insp.mx/doctos/analiticos/ObesidadAdultos.pdf. Last accessed January 22, 2016.

                                                                                                       70
Eric Martin and Nacha Cattan. 2013).“Mexico Tackles Obesity Epidemic With Tax on Junk Food.”
       Bloomberg News. October 29, 2013. http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-10-29/mexico-
       tackles-obesity-epidemic-with-tax-on-junk-food. Last accessed February 24, 2016.

Faulkner, G. E. J., et al. 2011. "Economic Instruments for Obesity Prevention: Result of a Scoping Review
       and Modified Delphi Survey." International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, No.
       8, pp. 109.

Finkelstein, E. A., C. Zhen, M. Bilger, J. Nonnemaker, A. Farooqui, and J. Todd. 2013. "Implications of a
        Sugar-sweetened Beverage (SSB) Tax when Substitutions to Non-beverage Items are
        Considered." Journal of Health Economics, No. 32, pp. 219 – 239

Fletcher J. M., D. Frisvold, N. Tefft. 2010. “Can Soft Drink Taxes Reduce Population Weight?”, Contemp
        Econ Policy, vol. 28, No.1: 23–35.

Fletcher, J., D. Frisvol.d, and N. Tefft. 2010. “The Effect of Soft Drink Taxes on Child and Adolescent
        Consumption and Weight Outcomes.” Journal of Public Economics 94: 967–74.

Friedman R. R and K. D. Brownell. 2012. “Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Taxes. An Updated Policy Brief”,
       Rudd Report,        October 2012, The Yale Rudd Center for Food & Obesity.
       http://www.uconnruddcenter.org/files/Pdfs/Rudd_Policy_Brief_Sugar_Sweetened_Beverage_Tax
       es.pdf. Last accessed January 22, 2016.

Fuentes Castro., H. J and A. Zamudio Carrillo. 2014. “Estimación y Análisis de la Elasticidad Precio de la
       Demanda para Diferentes Tipos de Bebidas en México.” Estudios Económicos, vol. 29, No. 2: 301-
       316.

Fung T. T., V. Malik, K. M. Rexrode, J. E. Manson, W. C. Willett, F. B. Hu FB. 2009., “Sweetened Beverage
        Consumption and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease in Women.” Am J Clin Nutr, vol. 89:1037-42.

Gaskin P. S., P. Lai, D. Guy, J. Knight, M. Jackson et al. 2012. “Physical Activity, Weight Status, and
       Culture in a Sample of Children from the Developing World.” J Nutr Metab, 2012:242875.

Green R, et al. 2013. “The Effect of Rising Food Prices on Food Consumption: Systematic Review with
       Meta-regression.” British Medical Journal, 346:f3703 doi: 10.1136/bmj.f3703

Grogger, J. 2015. “Soda Taxes and the Prices of Sodas and other Drinks: Evidence from Mexico.” Working
       Paper 21197; National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), USA
_____. 2014. “National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Overweight, Obesity and Diabetes.”
       Mexico. November, 2014.

Hector D., A. Rangan, J. Louie, V. M. Flood & T. Gill. 2009. “Soft Drinks, Weight Status and Health: A
       Review.” NSW Centre for Public Health Nutrition, Sydney, Australia.

Heckman, J. J. 1979. "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error." Econometrica 47 (January 1979):
      153-61.

Hernandez-Licona, G.; E. Minor Campa, and R. Aranda Balcazar. 2012. Determinantes Económicos:
       Evol.ución del costo de las Calorías en México, in Rivera

IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2015. Global Nutrition Report. Actions and
       Accountability to Advance Nutrition and Sustainable Development. Washington, DC.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.2499/9780896298835



                                                                                                        71
IHME (Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation), Human Development Network, The World Bank. 2013.
       The Global Burden of Disease: Generating Evidence, Guiding Policy – Latin America and
       Caribbean Regional Edition. Seattle, WA: IHME.

James, J., Thomas P., Cavan D., Kerr D. 2004., “Preventing Childhood Obesity by Reducing Consumption
       of Carbonated Drinks: Cluster Randomized Control Trial.” BMJ 328: 1237

Jensen J. D. and S. Smed. 2013. “The Danish Tax on Saturated Fat – Short Run Effects on Consumption,
       Substitution Patterns and Consumer Prices of Fats.” Food Policy, 2013, vol. 42, issue C:18-31.

Jiménez-Aguilar A., M. Flores, T. Shama-Levy. 2009. “Sugar-sweetened Beverages Consumption and BIM
       in Mexican Adolescentes.” Mexican National Health and Nutrition Survey 2006. Salud Pública Mex,
       vol. 51, no. 4:S604-S612.

Jou J, Techakehakij W. 2012. “International Application of Sugar-sweetened Beverage (SSB) Taxation in
        Obesity Reduction: Factors that may Influence Policy Effectiveness in Country-specific Contexts.”
        Health Policy. Vol. 107, no. 1:83-90.

Juan Angel Rivera Dommarco., Mauricio Hernández Ávila, A. Carlos Aguilar Salinas, Felipe Vadillo Ortega,
       Ciro Murayama Rendón (eds). “Obesidad en México: Recomendaciones Para una Política de
       Estado. Sintesis Ejecutiva del Libro.” http://www.oda-alc.org/documentos/1365120227.pdf. Last
       accessed February 10, 2016.

Kaiser, K., C. Bredenkamp and R. Iglesias. (forthcoming). Overview, Sin Tax Reform in Philippines:
        Transforming Public Finance, Health, and Governance for More Inclusive Developmen., Directions
        in Development Series, World Bank.

Kroker-Lobos M. F et al. 2004. “The Double Burden of Undernutrition and Excess Body Weight in Mexico.”
        Am J Clin Nutr, Vol. 100(suppl):1652S-8S.

Kuchler, F., A. Tenege and J.M. Harris. 2004. “Taxing Snack Foods: Manipulating Diet Quality or Financing
        Information Programs?” Review of Agricultural Economics 27:1.

Landon J, and H. Graff. 2013., “What is the Role of Health-related Food Duties? A Report of a National
       Heart Forum Meeting held 29th June 2012”, London: National Heart Forum; 2012
       http://nhfshare.heartforum.org.uk/RMAssets/NHFMediaReleases/2012/Health-
       related%20food%20duties%20meeting%20report%20FINAL.pdf, accessed 4 June 2015.

Leung C. W., B. A. Laraia, B. L. Needham, D. H. Rehkoph et al. 2014. “Soda and Cell Aging: Associations
       Between Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Consumption and Leukocyte Telomere Length in Health
       Adults From the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys.” American Journal of Public
       Health 2014: e1-e7.

Lin B. H, T. A. Smith. 2010., “The Effects of a Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Tax: Consumption, Calorie
        Intake, Obesity, and Tax Burden by Income.” Selected Paper for Presentation at the Agricultural &
        Applied Economics Association 2010 AAEC, CAES, & WAEA Joint Annual Meeting, Denver, CO,
        July 25-27, 2010.

Ludwig D. S., K. E. Peterson, S. L. Gortmaker. 2001. “Relation Between Consumption of Sugar-sweetened
       Drinks and Childhood Obesity: A Prospective, Observational Analysis.” Lancet., vol. 357, no.
       9255:505-8.

Malik V. S et al. 2010. “Sugar-sweetened Beverages and Risk of Metabolic Syndrome and Type 2 Diabetes:
        A Meta-analysis.” Diabetes Care, Vol. 33, no. 11: 2477-83.

Marion Nestle. 2015. “Soda Politics: Taking on Big Soda (and Winning).” Oxford University Press.

                                                                                                      72
Mexico Health Secretariat. 2013. National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Overweight and
       Obesity. Quoting: Gutierrez Delgado, Cristina; Verónica Guajardo Barrón y Fernando Álvarez del
       Río. Costo de la obesidad: las fallas del mercado y las políticas públicas de prevención y control
       de la obesidad en México. En Obesidad en México: recomendaciones para una política de Estado,
       Rivera Dommarco, Juan Ángel, et. al. (2012).

Mytton O., D. Clarke, M. Rayner. 2012. “Taxing Unhealthy Food and Drinks to Improve Heath.” BMK 2012;
       344. May 2012.

OECD. 2011. Health at a Glance OECD Indicators. http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/49105858.pdf

_____. 2012. Obesity Update. http://www.oecd.org/health/49716427.pdf last accessed January 14, 2016.


_____. 2013. . https://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/Health-at-a-Glance-2013.pdf

_____. 2014. Health Statistics. http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/oecd-health-statistics-2014-
       frequently-requested-data.htm

_____. 2016. “OECD Reviews of Health Systems: Mexico.” http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-
       Management/oecd/social-issues-migration-health/oecd-reviews-of-health-systems-mexico-
       2016_9789264230491-en#page155, last accessed January 19, 2016.

Palmer J. R., D. A Boggs, S. Krishnan, F.B. Hu, M. Singer, and L. Rosenberg. 2008. “Sugar-sweetened
       Beverages and Incidence of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in African American Women.” Arch Intern
       Med, vol. 168, no. 14:1487-92

Pate R. R., J. R. O’Neill, A. D. Liese, K. F. Janz, E. M. Granberg, N. Colabianchi, D. W. Harsha, M. M.
        Condrasky, P. M. O’Neil, E. Y. Lau et al 2013. “Factors Associated with Development of Excessive
        Fatness in Children and Adolescents: A Review of Prospective Studies.” Obes. Rev. 2013;14:645–
        658.

Pereira M. A. 2006. “The Possible Role of Sugar-sweetened Beverages in Obesity Etiology: A Review of
        the Evidence.” International Journal of Obesity Vol. 30: 28-36.

Powell L. M et al. 2013., “Assessing the Potential Effectiveness of Food and Beverage Taxes and Subsidies
        for Improving Public Health: A Systematic Review of Prices, Demand and Body Weight Outcomes.”
        Obes Rev., Vol. 14, no. 2:110-128.

Powell L. M., J. Chriqui, F. J. Chaloupka. 2009. “Associations Between State-Level Soda Taxes and
       Adolescent Body Mass Index.” J Adolesc Health, vol. 45(3 Suppl):S57-63. doi:
       10.1016/j.jadohealth.2009.03.003. Epub 2009 Jun 16.

PRODECON (Procuraduría de la Defensa del Contribuyente). 2013. Impuesto a Bebidas Saborizadas con
     Azucares Añadidas y Alimentos con alta Densidad Calórica –Ley del Impuesto Especial sobre
     Producción y Servicios-, Documento Técnico, Subprocuraduría de Análisis Sistémico y Estudios
     Normativos, Dirección General de Estudios Jurídicos e Interpretación Normativa. Ciudad de
     México, México.

Rivera Dommarco, J., M. Hernández Ávila, C. Aguilar Salinas, F. Vadillo Ortega, and C. Murayama
       Rendón, (eds.). 2012. “Obesidad en México: Recomendaciones para una Política de Estado.”
       UNAM, Dirección General de Publicaciones y Fomento Editorial, México, DF.

Rosenberg, Tina. 2016. “How One of the Most Obese Countries on Earth Took on the Soda Giants.” The
      Guardian. November 3.

                                                                                                      73
Sassi, F., A. Belloni and C. Capobianco. 2013. “The Role of Fiscal Policies in Health Promotion”, OECD
        Health Working Papers, No. 66, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k3twr94kvzx-en

Schulze M. B., J. E. Manson, D.S. Ludwig, G.A. Colditz, M.J. Stampfer, W.C. Willett, and F.B. Hu. 2004.
       “Sugar-sweetened Beverages, Weight Gain, and Incidence of Type 2 Diabetes in Young and
       Middle-Aged Women.” JAMA, vol. 292, no. 8:927-934.

SHCP (Secretaria de Hacienda y Crédito Publico). 2014. Resolución Miscelánea Fiscal 2014, Servicio de
      Administración                               Tributaria,                           compilación.
      (http://www.sat.gob.mx/informacion_fiscal/normatividad/Paginas/resolucion_miscelanea_fiscal_2
      014.aspx, June 2015)

Singh G. M., R. Micha, S. Khatibzadeh, P. Shi, S. Lim, K. G. Andrews, et al. 2015. “Global, Regional, and
       National Consumption of Sugar-Sweetened Beverages, Fruit Juices, and Milk: A Systematic
       Assessment of Beverage Intake in 187 Countries.” PLoS ONE 10(8): e0124845.
       doi:10.1371/journal. pone.0124845.

Smith, T. A., B. H. Lin, J. Y Lee. 2010. "Taxing Caloric Sweetened Beverages: Potential Effects on
       Beverage Consumption, Calorie Intake and Obesity.0" ERR-100, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
       Economic Research Service

Sturm, R., L. M. Powell, J. F. Chriqui, and F. J. Chaloupka. 2010. “Soda Taxes, Soft Drink Consumption,
       and Children’s Body Mass Index.” Health Affairs, vol. 29, no. 5: 1052–58.

Swinburn, B and G. Egger. 2004. “The Runaway Weight Gain Train: Too Many Accelerators, not Enough
       Brakes.” British Medical Journal; 329:736

Te Morenga L., S. Mallard, J. Mann. 2012. “Dietary Sugars and Body Weight: Systematic Review and Meta-
       analyses of Randomised Controlled Trials and Cohort Studies.” BMJ 2012 Jan 15.

Tenorio-Antiga, X.G. 2014. “Medidas Fiscales (impuestos) en Bebidas Azucaradas (refrescos) Como
        Política Pública para Disminuir el Sobrepeso y la Obesidad en México.” Masters thesis in
        Comparative Public Policies, FLACSO.

The Guardian. 2015. “Mexico's Congress Accused of Caving to Soda Pop Industry in Tax Cut Plan.”
      October 15. http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/19/mexico-soda-tax-cut-
      pop-fizzy-drinks, last accessed February 11, 2016.

The Center for Consumer Freedom. 2013. “The Case Against Regulating or Taxing Soda”,
      https://www.consumerfreedom.com/wpcontent/uploads/2013/03/2013_SodaTaxReportFINAL.pdf.
      last seen January 15, 2016.

Thow, A. M., S. Jan, S. Leeder and B. Swinburn. 2010. “The Effect of Fiscal Policy on Diet, Obesity and
       Chronic Diseases: A Systematic Review.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization

Tina Rosenberg. 2016. “How One of the Most Obese Countries on Earth Took on the Soda Giants.” The
       Guardian. November 3.

UANL (Universidad Autónoma de Nueva León). 2016. “La Industria de Bebidas No Alcohólicas en México.”
       Centro de Investigaciones Económicas, Septiembre.

Uauy R and C. A. Monteiro. 2004. “The Challenge of Improving Food and Nutrition in Latin America.” Food
       Nutr Bull, vol. 25:175-82.



                                                                                                      74
Vartanian, L. R., M. B. Schwartz, K. D. Brownell. 2007. “Effects of Soft Drink Consumption on Nutrition and
        Health: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.” American Journal of Public Health, vol. 97, no.
        4: 667-75.

WHO. 2002. “Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases.” Report of the Joint WHO/FAO Expert
      Consultation.       WHO       Technical      Report      Series,   No.      916     (TRS    916).
      http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/publications/trs916/summary/en/. Last accessed January
      15, 2016.

_____.         2015.      “Using       Price     Policies     to     Promote        Healthier     Diets.”
         http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/273662/Using-price-policies-to-promote-
         healthier-diets.pdf. Last accessed January 21, 2016.

_____.    2015. “Obesity and Overweight.” Fact Sheet No 311. Updated January                         2015.
         http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/. Last accessed January 22, 2016.

World Bank. 2016. Earmarking for Health. Working Paper. Forthcoming. Washington DC.




                                                                                                       75
                                          VIII. ANNEXES
Annex I: Average Price Definitions and Values of Foods and Beverages Subject to the Taxes

  Table I.1 a: Average Prices of Taxed and Potential Substituted Products – Definitions Calorie-
                                dense Foods of Low Nutritional Value
         Article 2 ,
    Fraction I, Incise
     J of the Special     Name of the                   Subgroups of products included in
                                          Source
          Tax on            Product                                    definition
     Production and
     Services (IEPS)
                         Snacks Foods
                                          Average Potato Chips include potato chips and
                        (average of the
                                           Prices    peanuts, but not pork rinds
                          whole family)
          Snacks                                     Other Foods /Chocolates and Candies/
                          Potato Chips
                                          Average Potato Chips/ Specification: Potato Chips
                                           Prices    Other Foods /Chocolates and Candies/
                          Corn Fritters
                                                     Potato Chips/ Specification: Corn Fritters
                                                     Other Foods/ Chocolates and Candies
                         Fruit Popsicles             /Candies and Goat Milk
       Candy Store                       Averages Caramel/Specification: Fruit popsicles
         Products                          Prices    Other Foods/ Chocolates and Candies
                           Goat Milk
                                                     /Candies and Goat Milk
                            Caramel
                                                     Caramel/Specification: Goat Milk Caramel
         Fruit and          Fruit and                Fruit and Vegetables/Fruits and Processed
                                          Average
        Vegetable          Vegetable                 Vegetables/Other Fruit
                                           Prices
          Sweets              Jams                   Preserves/Specification: Jams
                                                     Other Foods/ Chocolates and Candies
                                         Averages
          Caramel           Caramel                  /Candies and Goat Milk
                                           Prices
                                                     Caramel/Specification: Caramel
                                                     Bread, Tortillas and Cereals/Rice and
                          Sweet Corn      Average
     Sugary Cereals                                  Prepared Cereals/Corn Flakes
                             Flakes        Prices
                                                     /Specification: Corn Flakes

                                           Average   Bread, Tortilla and Cereals/Biscuits,
         Cookies           Cookies
                                            Prices   Pastas and Wheat Flour/Biscuits
                                                     /Specification: Sweet
                       Sweet bread (in     Average   Bread, Tortilla and
                           bulk)            Prices   Cereals/Bread/Specification: Sweet Bread
       Sweet Bread                                   Bread, Tortilla and Cereals/Cakes, Muffins
                         Industrialized    Average
                                                     and Packed Sweet Bread/Specification:
                         Sweet bread        Prices
                                                     Sweet Bread
                           Pancakes,                 Bread, Tortilla and Cereals/Cakes, Muffins
        Cakes and                          Average
                           Cakes and                 and Packed Sweet Bread/Specification:
         Muffins                            Prices
                            Pastries                 Muffins
Source: INEGI – Average Prices




                                                                                                  76
  Table I.1 b: Average Prices of Taxed and Potential Substituted Products – Definitions Sugar-
                                      Sweetened Beverages
   Article 2 ,
   Fraction I,
   Incise G of the
                       Name of the                   Subgroup of products included in the
   Special Tax on                       Source
                         Product                                    definition
   Production
   and Services
   (IEPS)
                                                  Fruits and Vegetables/Processed fruits and
                     Juices and Fruit   Average
                                                  Vegetables/Bottled Juices or
                          Nectars        Prices
                                                  Nectars/Specification: the entire group
                        Soft Drinks     Average   Other Foods/Chocolates and Candies/Soft
                      Concentrates       Prices   Drinks concentrate/Specification: in bottle
                      Orange Juice      Average   Other Foods/Chocolates and Candies/Soft
                      Concentrates       Prices   Drinks Concentrate/Specification: Powder
                         Flavored
         Sugar                          Average   Other Foods/Chocolates and Candies/Soft
                      Powder Drink
      Sweetened                          Prices   Drinks Concentrate/Specification: Powder
                            Mix
      Beverages
                                        Average   Sugar, Coffee and soft drinks/Bottled Soft
                        Cola sodas
                                         Prices   Drinks/Specification: Cola
                                        Average   Sugar, Coffee and soft drinks/Bottled Soft
                     Flavored Sodas
                                         Prices   Drinks/Specification: Flavored
                         Flavored       Average   Sugar, Coffee and Soft Drinks/Bottled
                          Waters         Prices   Water/Specification: flavored
                     Energy or sport    Average
                                                                        n.d
                           drinks        Prices
                       Name of the
     Substitutes                        Source          Subgroup of products included
                         Product
                                        Average   Sugar, Coffee and soft drinks/Bottled Soft
                     Light Cola Soda
                                         Prices   Drinks/Specification: Light
                                        Average   Sugar, Coffee and Soft Drinks/Bottled
                      Bottled Water
                                         Prices   Water/Specification: bottle
                                        Average   Milk, Milk Products and Eggs/Pasteurized
                        Whole Milk
                                         Prices   and Fresh Milk/Specification: Whole Milk
                                        Average   Milk, Milk Products and Eggs/Pasteurized
                      Skimmed milk
                                         Prices   and Fresh Milk/Specification: Light Milk
                                        Average   Milk, Milk Products and Eggs/Milk
                         Yoghourt
                                         Prices   Products/Yoghurt/Specification: natural
                       Yoghourt in      Average   Milk, Milk Products and Eggs/Milk
       Potential       varied forms      Prices   Products/Yoghurt/Specification: Fruits
     Substitutes      Whole Powder      Average   Milk, Milk Products and Eggs/Processed Milk
                            Milk         Prices   /Powder Milk/Specification: Whole
                         Skimmed        Average   Milk, Milk Products and Eggs/Processed Milk
                       Powder Milk       Prices   /Powder Milk/Specification: Skimmed
                       Whole wheat      Average   Bread, Tortilla and Cereals/Packed
                           bread         Prices   Bread/Specification: Whole Grain
                     Standard sugar     Average   Sugar, Coffee and Soft
                        production       Prices   Drinks/Sugar/Specification: Standard
                      Refined sugar     Average   Sugar, Coffee and Soft
                        production       Prices   Drinks/Sugar/Specification: Refined
                                        Average
                        Fresh fruit
                                         Prices   Foods/Fruits and Vegetables/ Fresh Fruits
Source: INEGI – Average Prices

                                                                                                 77
                              Table I.1c: Average Prices – Annual Values
         Product Definition          Units    2011       2012      2013    2014    2015
       Snacks (average of the
                                      KG      127.5      135.9     144.8   160.0   166.7
             whole family)
             Potato Chips             KG      145.3      153.8     165.0   184.2   193.6
              Corn Fritters           KG      101.9      108.3     112.6   129.8   133.6
             Fruit Popsicle           KG       77.8       88.6      95.7   117.2   120.3
          Goat milk caramel           KG       76.1       80.9      79.7    87.0    89.6
      Fruit and Vegetable Jams        KG       45.1       48.0      50.1    51.3    52.3
                Caramel               KG       60.0       65.0      68.5    71.6    74.4
        Corn flakes with Sugar        KG       56.3       61.7      63.0    67.5    66.7
                Cookies               KG       63.7       65.9      69.6    78.2    83.4
        Sweet Bread (in bulk)         PZA       4.1        4.5       4.8     5.2     5.2
     Industrialized Sweet Bread       KG       79.0       83.1      87.6   101.8   106.4
     Pancakes, cakes, pastries        KG       98.1      106.4     116.7   134.0   137.7
          Juices and Nectars           LT      16.5       16.7      16.8    17.7    17.9
       Soft drinks concentrates        LT      33.0       34.8      35.8    46.2    58.7
     Orange Juice concentrates        KG      130.6      163.7     148.7   173.3   194.3
     Flavored Powder Drink Mix        KG      166.4      165.7     164.0   161.2   163.1
              Cola sodas               LT      11.6       12.1      12.5    14.2    14.6
            Flavored sodas             LT      10.0       10.4      11.1    12.7    13.1
            Flavored waters            LT      11.5       10.9      11.5    12.6    12.3
             Bottled water             LT       6.3        6.6       6.3     6.4     6.5
           Light cola sodas            LT      14.1       14.6      15.4    16.6    17.2
               Whole milk              LT      12.0       12.4      13.1    13.6    14.2
             Skimmed milk              LT      12.9       13.7      14.5    14.9    15.3
                Yoghourt              KG       23.6       24.3      26.2    27.5    29.6
      Yoghourt in varied forms        KG       25.7       26.1      27.3    28.4    28.6
          Whole Powder Milk           KG       88.8       91.3      94.8   100.5   107.8
        Skimmed Powder Milk           KG      101.2      107.1     107.9   101.4   102.1
         Whole Wheat Bread            KG       39.2       39.5      41.8    44.2    45.9
            Standard sugar            KG       16.7       17.1      12.0    12.0    13.1
             Refined Sugar            KG       20.7       22.4      16.9    16.3    16.8
               Fresh Fruit            KG       21.9       22.0      22.4    24.0    24.1
Source: INEGI – Average Prices




                                                                                           78
Annex II. Sales Volume Indexes – Definitions and Values

                           Table II.1: Sales Volume Indexes – Definitions
        Article 2 ,          North
        Fraction I,       American
      Incise J of the     Industrial         Name of the
                                                                Description of the sale index
     Special Tax on     Classification          product
     Production and        System
     Services (IEPS)       (NAICS)
                                                              Sales volume index of the whole
                            311910           Snack Foods
                                                              family product published by INEGI
                                                              Sales volume index (ton) -Fried
                                             Potato Chips     tortilla, seasoned and/or
         Snacks
                                                              enchiladas
                                                              Sales volume index of corn fritters,
                                              Corn Fritters   including: churritos + fried tortilla +
                                                              totopos + infladas + popcorn
                                           Candies, Chewing
                                             Gum and non-
                                                              Sales volume index of the whole
                            311340             Chocolate
      Candy Store                                             family product published by INEGI
                                             Confectionery
       Products                                Products
                                            Fruit Popsicles   Sales volume index
                                           Goat Milk Caramel  Sales volume index
       Fruit and
                                          Fruit and Vegetable    Sales volume index (tons):
       Vegetable           311422
                                                  Jams           Strawberry+Other
        Sweets
        Caramel            311340             Caramel            Sales volume index
     Sugary Cereals        311230         Sweet Corn Flakes      Sales volume index
                                                                 With marshmallow, with filling, with
                                         Cookies (with filling
        Cookies            311820                                cover, without filling, soda
                                         or cover)
                                                                 crackers.
                                         Industrialized Sweet    Sales volumes index published by
     Sweet Breads          311811
                                                Bread            INEGI
                                                                 Sales volume index, including:
       Cakes and                           Pancakes, Cakes
                           311811                                pancakes+cakes+muffins with
        Muffins                              and Pastries
                                                                 cover
        Article 2 ,         North
       Fraction I,        American
     Incise G of the      Industrial         Name of the
                                                                   Description of the sale index
     Special Tax on     Classification         product
     production and        System
     Services (IEPS)       (NAICS)
                                                                 Sales volume index, including:
                                            Juices and Fruit     mango, Orange, Pineapple,
                           311422
                                                Nectars          Grape, Apples, Peach, Guava and
                                                                 others
         Sugar
                                              Soft Drinks
       Sweetened           311930                                Sales volume index
                                             Concentrates
       Beverages
                                             Orange Juice
                           311930                                Sales volume index
                                             Concentrates
                                           Flavored Powder
                           311930                                Sales volume index
                                               Drink Mix


                                                                                                        79
                                                              Sales volume index for returnable
                           312111          Colas sodas
                                                              + non-returnable bottles + cans
                                                              Sales volume index for returnable
                           312111         Flavored Sodas
                                                              and non-returnable bottles
                                          Energy or sport
                           312111                             Sales volume index
                                              drinks
                            North
                         American
                         Industrial        Name of the
       Substitutes                                              Description of the sale index
                       Classification        product
                          System
                          (NAICS)
                           312111          Bottled Water      Sales volume index
                                                              Sales volume index: Milk re-
                           311511           Whole Milk        hydration+ Pasteurized and
                                                              Homogenized +Ultrapasteurized
                                                              Sales volume index: Skimmed re-
                           311511          Skimmed milk       hydration +Pasteurized and
                                                              homogeneized+Ultrapasteurized
                           311511            Yoghourt         Sales volume index
        Potential                                             Sales volume index: with fruits or
                                         Yoghourt in varied
       Substitutes         311513                             cereals, drinkable, smoothies,
                                              forms
                                                              cream or soft cheese
                           311512        Whole Powder Milk    Sales volume index
                                          Skimmed Powder
                           311512                             Sales volume index
                                                 Milk
                           311811        Whole wheat bread Sales volume index
                                           Standard sugar
                           311311                             Sales volume index
                                             production
                                            Refined sugar
                           311311                             Sales volume index
                                             production
Source: Monthly Survey of Manufacturing Industry (EMIM) - INEGI




                                                                                                   80
                     Table II.2: Sales Volume Indexes 2007-2015 (10 months)
                                                                                        2015
 Sales Volume Indexes
                              2007   2008   2009   2010   2011    2012   2013   2014     (10
 (2013=100)
                                                                                       Months)
 Snack Foods                  0.84   0.82   0.84   0.87   0.90    0.98    1     0.95    1.01
 Potato Chips                 0.97   0.84   0.84   0.84   0.90    0.94    1     0.91    1.02
 Corn Fritters                0.76   0.83   0.84   0.91   0.92    0.99    1     0.98    1.02
 Candies, Chewing Gum
 and non-Chocolate            1.15   1.16   1.07   1.08   1.07    1.11    1     0.97    1.03
 Confectionery Products
 Fruit Popsicles              0.92   1.04   1.07   1.06   1.04    1.09    1     0.90    0.94
 Goat Milk Caramel            1.26   1.17   1.19    n.d    n.d    1.14    1     0.95    0.90
 Fruit and Vegetable Jams     0.70   0.96   0.92   0.99   0.99    n.d     1     1.26    1.37
 Caramel                      0.69   0.77   0.90   0.75   0.80    0.85    1     0.91    0.87
 Sweet Corn Flakes            0.86   0.91   1.02   1.06   1.06    1.03    1     0.91     n.d
 Cookies( with filling or
                              0.87   0.87   0.87   0.90   0.94    0.97    1     0.96    1.01
 cover)
 Industrialized Sweet Bread   0.96   0.90   0.88   0.88   0.88    0.97    1     0.94    0.89
 Pancakes, Cakes and
                              0.93   0.93   0.97   0.98   1.00    1.03    1     0.99    1.02
 Pastries
 Juices and Fruit Nectars     0.88   0.94   1.04   0.89   0.93    0.96    1     1.01    1.02
 Soft Drinks Concentrates     1.09   1.26   1.12   1.01   1.05    1.00    1     1.03    0.86
 Orange Juice Concentrates    0.48   0.66   0.74   0.63   0.85    0.67    1     0.96    0.86
 Flavored Powder Drink Mix    2.28   2.31   2.16   1.28   0.56    1.16    1     1.08    0.94
 Colas sodas                  0.81   0.82   0.83   0.88   0.96    0.98    1     0.99    0.98
 Flavored Sodas               0.98   0.91   0.99   0.99   1.03    1.02    1     0.97    0.97
 Energy or sport drinks       0.86   0.86   0.73   0.72   0.90    1.14    1     1.31    1.26
 Bottled Water                0.82   0.84   0.88   0.91   0.96    1.00    1     1.05    1.24
 Whole Milk                   1.07   1.11   1.10   1.05   0.99    0.84    1     0.91    0.80
 Skimmed milk                 1.01   1.05   1.06   1.01   0.99    0.99    1     0.96    0.98
  Yoghourt                    0.91   0.93   0.88   0.83   1.01    1.01    1     1.07    1.17
 Yoghourt in varied forms     0.94   0.90   0.93   1.01   1.02    1.05    1     0.94    0.98
 Whole Powder Milk            1.09   1.01   0.96   1.03   1.06    0.93    1     0.96    1.00
 Skimmed Powder Milk          0.44   0.46   0.42   0.45   0.53    1.21    1     0.87    0.82
 Whole wheat bread            0.85   0.82   0.75   0.80   0.90    0.96    1     1.04    1.03
 Standard Sugar               0.64   0.69   0.65   0.58   0.65    0.71    1     0.91    0.87
 Refined Sugar                  0.81 0.96 0.81        0.80 0.88   0.75    1     0.80    0.81
Source: Monthly Survey of Manufacturing Industry (EMIM) - INEGI
Sales Volume Index T = Sales Volume T / Sales Volume 2013
Volumes= Tons and liters




                                                                                               81
 Annex III: TTest for Statistical Significance of Descriptive Analysis of Section VII

  Table A III.1: TTest-Proportion of Households that Purchased SSBs during the Reference Week.
                                         Mexico, 1989-2014
         1989        1994       2000       2004         2006     2008      2010     2012    2014
1989        0
1994    -0.065***       0
2000    -0.158***   -0.093***       0
2004    -0.191***   -0.126***   -0.034***       0
2006    -0.192***   -0.127***   -0.035***     -0.001          0
2008    -0.237***   -0.172***   -0.079***   -0.046***     -0.045***        0
2010    -0.200***   -0.135***   -0.042***    -0.009**      -0.007*     0.037***      0
2012    -0.202***   -0.137***   -0.044***    -0.010*       -0.009      0.035***    -0.002       0
2014    -0.199***   -0.134*** -0.041***      -0.008*       -0.006      0.038***     0.001     0.003      0
                    Note: Differences defined as column-line * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01

 Table A.III.2: TTest- Proportion of Households that Purchased Bottled Water during the Reference
                                      Week. Mexico, 1989-2014
         1989        1994       2000      2004        2006       2008       2010       2012    2014
1989       0
            -
1994                   0
        0.040***
            -           -
2000                                0
        0.206***    0.166***
            -           -
2004                            -0.060***      0
        0.266***    0.227***
            -           -
2006                            -0.014***   0.046***        0
        0.220***    0.180***
            -           -
2008                            -0.051***   0.010**    -0.037***          0
        0.257***    0.217***
            -           -
2010                            -0.035***   0.025***   -0.021***       0.015***         0
        0.241***    0.202***
            -           -
2012                            -0.042***   0.018***   -0.028***        0.008        -0.007         0
        0.248***    0.209***
            -           -                                                                         -
2014                            -0.086*** -0.026***    -0.072***      -0.036*** -0.051***                 0
        0.292***    0.252***                                                                  0.044***
                     Note: Differences defined as column-line * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01




                                                                                                         82
   Table A.III.3: TTest- Proportion of Households that Purchased Milk during the Reference Week.
                                            Mexico, 1989-2014
          1989        1994        2000        2004        2006          2008          2010    2012  2014
1989        0
1994    0.029***        0
            -           -
2000
        0.031*** 0.060***           0
            -           -
2004
        0.039*** 0.068***        -0.008         0
                        -
2006
         -0.005     0.034*** 0.026***       0.034***        0
            -           -
2008
        0.016*** 0.045*** 0.015***          0.023***    -0.011**          0
2010    0.042*** 0.014*** 0.074***          0.082***    0.048***      0.058***          0
2012    0.029***        0       0.060***    0.068***    0.034***      0.045***      -0.014**    0
2014    0.022***     -0.006     0.054***    0.062***    0.028***      0.038***     -0.020*** -0.006   0
                    Note: Differences defined as column-line * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01

    Table A.III.4: TTest- Proportion of Households that Purchased High Calorie Goods during the
                                  Reference Week. Mexico, 1989-2014
          1989        1994        2000      2004         2006      2008       2010    2012     2014
1989        0
1994     0.021***      0
2000    -0.027***   -0.047***      0
2004    -0.025***   -0.046***    0.001          0
2006    -0.034***   -0.055***    -0.008      -0.009*          0
2008    -0.053***   -0.073***   -0.026***   -0.027***     -0.018***        0
2010    -0.040***   -0.060***   -0.013**    -0.014***      -0.005      0.013***       0
2012    -0.057***   -0.078***   -0.031***   -0.032***     -0.023***     -0.005    -0.018***    0
2014    -0.047***   -0.068*** -0.021***     -0.022***    -0.013***       0.005      -0.008*   0.01    0
                    Note: Differences defined as column-line * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01

    Table A.III.5: TTest- Proportion of Households that Purchased Vegetables or Fruits during the
                                    Reference Week. Mexico, 1989-2014
                  1989         1994       2000         2006           2008          2010     2012    2014
    1989            0
    1994        0.017***         0
    2000         0.007       -0.010**       0
    2006        0.048***     0.031***   0.041***         0
    2008       -0.010*** -0.027*** -0.017***         -0.058***          0
    2010        -0.008**    -0.024*** -0.014***      -0.055***       0.002            0
    2012        0.021***      0.004     0.014***     -0.027***      0.031***      0.029***     0
    2014            0       -0.016***    -0.006      -0.047***      0.010***      0.008**  -0.021***   0
                      Note: Differences defined as column-line * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01




                                                                                                     83
    Table A.III.6: TTest- Proportion of Households that Purchased SSBs during the Reference Week by
                                           Quintile Mexico, 1989-2014
                                                   Quintil 1
         1989          1994        2000         2004          2006      2008    2010     2012   2014
1989       0
1994 -0.051***           0
2000 -0.152***       -0.100***       0
2004 -0.194***       -0.143***   -0.043***        0
2006 -0.224***       -0.173***   -0.073***    -0.030***         0
2008 -0.286***       -0.235***   -0.134***    -0.092***    -0.062***      0
2010 -0.244***       -0.193***   -0.092***    -0.050***     -0.020**  0.042***    0
2012 -0.252***       -0.201***   -0.100***    -0.058***     -0.028**  0.034*** -0.008      0
2014 -0.233***       -0.182***   -0.081***    -0.039***      -0.009   0.053*** 0.011     0.019    0

                                              Quintil 2
         1989       1994        2000        2004        2006        2008       2010       2012     2014
1989       0
1994   -0.090***       0
2000   -0.187***   -0.097***        0
2004   -0.209***   -0.119***     -0.022*        0
2006   -0.234***   -0.144***   -0.047***    -0.025**       0
2008   -0.262***   -0.173***   -0.075***   -0.054***   -0.028***      0
2010   -0.242***   -0.152***   -0.055***   -0.033***    -0.008     0.020**        0
2012   -0.244***   -0.154***   -0.057***   -0.035***     -0.01      0.018      -0.002       0
2014   -0.213***   -0.123***    -0.026**     -0.004     0.021**    0.050***   0.029***   0.031**    0

                                              Quintil 3
         1989       1994        2000        2004        2006        2008       2010       2012     2014
1989       0
1994   -0.078***       0
2000   -0.175***   -0.097***        0
2004   -0.199***   -0.120***    -0.024**        0
2006   -0.189***   -0.111***     -0.014       0.01         0
2008   -0.222***   -0.144***   -0.047***   -0.023***   -0.033***      0
2010   -0.198***   -0.120***    -0.023**     0.001      -0.009     0.024***      0
2012   -0.206***   -0.127***    -0.031**    -0.007      -0.016      0.016     -0.008        0
2014   -0.177***   -0.099***     -0.002     0.022**      0.012     0.045***   0.021**    0.028**    0

                                              Quintil 4
         1989       1994        2000        2004        2006        2008       2010       2012     2014
1989       0
1994   -0.086***       0
2000   -0.167***   -0.081***        0
2004   -0.183***   -0.097***     -0.016        0
2006   -0.176***   -0.090***     -0.009      0.007          0
2008   -0.206***   -0.120***   -0.039***   -0.023***   -0.030***       0
2010   -0.174***   -0.088***     -0.008      0.008       0.001     0.031***       0
2012   -0.184***   -0.098***     -0.017     -0.002       -0.009     0.021*      -0.01       0
2014   -0.192***   -0.106***    -0.026**     -0.01      -0.017*     0.013     -0.018**   -0.008     0




                                                                                                   84
                                                 Quintil 5
         1989        1994         2000         2004        2006          2008        2010          2012     2014
1989       0
1994   -0.087***       0
2000   -0.145***   -0.058***         0
2004   -0.156***   -0.069***      -0.012         0
2006   -0.166***   -0.079***     -0.021*       -0.01         0
2008   -0.200***   -0.113***    -0.055***    -0.044***  -0.034***          0
2010   -0.160***   -0.072***      -0.015      -0.003      0.006        0.040***         0
2012   -0.164***   -0.077***      -0.019      -0.008      0.002        0.036***      -0.004          0
2014   -0.189***   -0.102***    -0.044***    -0.033***   -0.023**       0.011       -0.029***     -0.025*    0
                      Note: Differences defined as column-line * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01



     Table A.III.7: TTest- Proportion of Households that Purchased Bottled Water during the Reference
                                      Week by Quintile Mexico, 1989-2014
                                                  Quintil 1
         1989         1994        2000        2004        2006      2008     2010        2012     2014
1989       0
1994 -0.015***          0
2000 -0.113*** -0.097***            0
2004 -0.164*** -0.149*** -0.051***              0
2006 -0.134*** -0.118***        -0.021**    0.030***        0
2008 -0.154*** -0.139*** -0.042***            0.01     -0.021***      0
2010 -0.168*** -0.152*** -0.055***           -0.004    -0.034***   -0.013*     0
2012 -0.164*** -0.149*** -0.051***              0      -0.030***    -0.01    0.004         0
2014 -0.220*** -0.205*** -0.107*** -0.056*** -0.086*** -0.066*** -0.052*** -0.056***                0

                                                Quintil 2
         1989        1994        2000        2004       2006          2008         2010           2012      2014
1989       0
1994   -0.035***       0
2000   -0.202***   -0.167***        0
2004   -0.265***   -0.230***   -0.063***       0
2006   -0.229***   -0.193***    -0.027**   0.036***         0
2008   -0.241***   -0.206***   -0.039***   0.024***      -0.012         0
2010   -0.233***   -0.198***   -0.031***   0.032***      -0.005       0.008          0
2012   -0.243***   -0.208***   -0.041***    0.022*       -0.014      -0.002       -0.009            0
2014   -0.288***   -0.253***   -0.087***   -0.023**     -0.060***   -0.048***    -0.055***      -0.046***    0

                                                Quintil 3
         1989        1994        2000        2004       2006          2008         2010           2012      2014
1989       0
1994   -0.040***       0
2000   -0.235***   -0.195***         0
2004   -0.283***   -0.243***   -0.048***       0
2006   -0.244***   -0.204***      -0.009   0.039***         0
2008   -0.275***   -0.235***   -0.040***     0.008      -0.031***       0
2010   -0.262***   -0.222***    -0.027**    0.021**      -0.018*      0.013          0
2012   -0.265***   -0.224***     -0.029*     0.019        -0.02       0.011       -0.003            0
2014   -0.307***   -0.266***   -0.071***   -0.023**     -0.063***   -0.032***    -0.045***      -0.042***    0



                                                                                                            85
                                                   Quintil 4
          1989         1994         2000        2004       2006            2008         2010       2012      2014
1989        0
1994    -0.084***        0
2000    -0.285***    -0.201***        0
2004    -0.302***    -0.218***     -0.017          0
2006    -0.258***    -0.175***     0.026**     0.044***         0
2008    -0.285***    -0.202***     -0.001       0.016*      -0.027***        0
2010    -0.271***    -0.188***      0.013      0.031***      -0.013        0.014          0
2012    -0.306***    -0.222***     -0.021       -0.004      -0.048***     -0.021      -0.035***       0
2014    -0.327***    -0.243***    -0.042***    -0.025**     -0.069***    -0.041***    -0.056***    -0.021     0

                                                   Quintil 5
          1989         1994         2000        2004       2006            2008         2010       2012      2014
1989        0
1994    -0.064***        0
2000    -0.239***    -0.175***        0
2004    -0.297***    -0.233*** -0.058***           0
2006    -0.264***    -0.200***     -0.025*    0.033***        0
2008    -0.314***    -0.250*** -0.075***       -0.017*    -0.050***        0
2010    -0.299***    -0.235*** -0.060***        -0.002    -0.035***      0.015           0
2012    -0.330***    -0.266*** -0.091***      -0.033**    -0.066***     -0.016       -0.031**         0
2014    -0.332***    -0.268*** -0.093*** -0.035*** -0.068***           -0.018*      -0.033***      -0.002     0
                         Note: Differences defined as column-line * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01

    Table A.III.8: TTest- Proportion of Households that Purchased Milk during the Reference Week by
                                         Quintile Mexico, 1989-2014
                                                    Quintil 1
         1989          1994        2000         2004         2006     2008      2010      2012    2014
 1989      0
 1994    0.008           0
 2000 -0.080***      -0.088***        0
 2004 -0.070***      -0.078***      0.01          0
 2006 -0.089***      -0.097***    -0.009      -0.019*          0
 2008 -0.120***      -0.127***   -0.039***  -0.049***     -0.030***     0
 2010 -0.075***      -0.083***     0.005       -0.005        0.014  0.044***      0
 2012 -0.101***      -0.108***    -0.021     -0.030**       -0.011   0.019    -0.025**      0
 2014 -0.136***      -0.144***   -0.056***  -0.066***     -0.047***  -0.017  -0.061***  -0.035***   0

                                                     Quintil 2
           1989         1994          2000        2004        2006           2008        2010        2012     2014
 1989        0
 1994      0.021          0
 2000    -0.080***    -0.101***         0
 2004    -0.081***    -0.102***      -0.001         0
 2006    -0.074***    -0.095***      0.006        0.007          0
 2008    -0.043***    -0.064***     0.037***     0.038***     0.031***         0
 2010      0.014       -0.007       0.094***     0.095***     0.088***     0.057***         0
 2012     -0.021      -0.042***     0.060***     0.061***     0.054***      0.023*      -0.034**       0
 2014     -0.012      -0.033***     0.068***     0.069***     0.062***     0.032***     -0.025**     0.009        0




                                                                                                             86
                                                 Quintil 3
          1989      1994         2000         2004        2006         2008         2010      2012     2014
1989        0
1994     -0.006         0
2000   -0.051***   -0.044***       0
2004   -0.054***   -0.048***    -0.003         0
2006    -0.022*      -0.016    0.029**      0.032***        0
2008     -0.008      -0.001    0.043***     0.046***      0.014          0
2010    0.032***    0.039***   0.083***     0.087***     0.054***     0.040***        0
2012     0.021       0.027*    0.071***     0.075***     0.043***     0.028**      -0.012      0
2014    0.039***    0.046***   0.090***     0.094***     0.061***     0.047***      0.007    0.019          0

                                                 Quintil 4
         1989       1994         2000         2004        2006         2008         2010      2012     2014
1989       0
1994    0.014           0
2000   -0.023*     -0.037***      0
2004    -0.004      -0.019*     0.018          0
2006   0.035***      0.021*    0.058***     0.039***        0
2008   0.048***     0.033***   0.071***     0.052***      0.013          0
2010   0.092***     0.078***   0.115***     0.097***     0.057***     0.044***        0
2012   0.065***     0.050***   0.087***     0.069***     0.030**       0.017      -0.028**      0
2014   0.096***     0.081***   0.118***     0.100***     0.061***     0.048***     0.003     0.031**        0

                                                 Quintil 5
         1989       1994         2000         2004        2006         2008         2010      2012     2014
1989       0
1994     -0.01        0
2000     0.02      0.029**          0
2004   0.039***    0.049***       0.02          0
2006   0.079***    0.089***     0.060***    0.040***        0
2008   0.058***    0.068***     0.039***     0.019**    -0.021**          0
2010   0.117***    0.126***     0.097***    0.077***    0.038***     0.059***          0
2012   0.113***    0.123***     0.094***    0.074***     0.034**     0.055***       -0.004     0
2014   0.113***    0.122***     0.093***    0.073***    0.034***     0.055***       -0.004     0            0
                     Note: Differences defined as column-line * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01

    Table A.III.9: TTest- Proportion of Households that Purchased High Calorie Goods during the
                             Reference Week by Quintile Mexico, 1989-2014
                                               Quintil 1
         1989         1994         2000      2004         2006     2008      2010     2012    2014
 1989      0
 1994   -0.018          0
 2000 -0.089*** -0.071***            0
 2004 -0.080*** -0.062***         0.009        0
 2006 -0.120*** -0.102***        -0.031**  -0.040***        0
 2008 -0.145*** -0.127*** -0.056*** -0.065***           -0.025**     0
 2010 -0.137*** -0.120*** -0.049*** -0.058***            -0.018*   0.007       0
 2012 -0.149*** -0.131*** -0.060*** -0.069***           -0.029**  -0.004    -0.012      0
 2014 -0.158*** -0.141*** -0.070*** -0.079*** -0.039***           -0.014   -0.021**  -0.009     0




                                                                                                       87
                                                Quintil 2
         1989        1994        2000         2004        2006        2008        2010       2012     2014
1989       0
1994    0.026*         0
2000   -0.051***   -0.077***        0
2004   -0.046***   -0.071***     0.006           0
2006   -0.063***   -0.088***     -0.012       -0.017        0
2008   -0.071***   -0.096***     -0.019      -0.025**    -0.008          0
2010   -0.069***   -0.094***     -0.017      -0.023**    -0.006        0.002        0
2012   -0.103***   -0.128***   -0.051***    -0.057***   -0.040***    -0.032**   -0.034***      0
2014   -0.078***   -0.104***    -0.027**    -0.033***    -0.016       -0.008      -0.01     0.024*     0

                                                Quintil 3
           1989      1994        2000         2004        2006        2008        2010       2012     2014
1989         0
1994     0.030**       0
2000      -0.013   -0.043***       0
2004      -0.016   -0.046***    -0.003          0
2006      -0.013   -0.043***       0          0.003         0
2008    -0.029**   -0.060***    -0.016       -0.013      -0.016          0
2010      -0.016   -0.047***    -0.003          0        -0.003       0.013         0
2012   -0.057***   -0.087***   -0.044***    -0.041***   -0.044***    -0.028**   -0.041***      0
2014     -0.022*   -0.052***    -0.009       -0.006      -0.009       0.007      -0.006     0.035**    0

                                                Quintil 4
         1989        1994        2000         2004        2006        2008        2010       2012     2014
1989       0
1994    0.026*           0
2000     0.018        -0.008        0
2004     0.015        -0.011     -0.003         0
2006       0        -0.026**     -0.018      -0.015          0
2008    -0.008     -0.034***    -0.026**    -0.023**      -0.008        0
2010     0.008        -0.017      -0.01      -0.007       0.009      0.017*         0
2012    -0.007      -0.032**     -0.025      -0.022       -0.006     0.002       -0.015       0
2014     0.004       -0.022*     -0.014      -0.011       0.004      0.012       -0.004     0.011      0

                                                Quintil 5
         1989        1994        2000         2004        2006        2008        2010       2012     2014
1989       0
1994    -0.009         0
2000    -0.018      -0.009          0
2004     0.009      0.018       0.027**         0
2006     0.012      0.021       0.030**      0.003           0
2008    -0.006      0.003        0.013       -0.015      -0.018*        0
2010     0.009      0.018       0.027**         0         -0.003      0.015          0
2012     0.015      0.024        0.034*      0.006        0.003       0.021        0.006      0
2014     0.017      0.026*      0.036**      0.008        0.005      0.023**       0.008    0.002      0
                   Note: Differences defined as column-line * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01




                                                                                                      88
       Table A.III.10: TTest- Proportion of Households that Purchased Complementary High Calorie
                       Goods during the Reference Week by Quintile Mexico, 1989-2014
                                                    Quintil 1
           1989         1994        2000        2004          2006     2008     2010     2012    2014
1989         0
1994      -0.003          0
2000    -0.050***    -0.047***        0
2004      -0.004       -0.001    0.046***         0
2006      -0.001        0.002    0.049***      0.003            0
2008    -0.073***    -0.070***    -0.023**   -0.069***     -0.072***     0
2010    -0.071***    -0.068***    -0.022**   -0.067***     -0.071***  0.002       0
2012     -0.030**     -0.027**     0.019*     -0.026**     -0.029*** 0.043*** 0.041***     0
2014    -0.062***    -0.059***     -0.012    -0.058***     -0.061***  0.011    0.009   -0.032***   0

                                               Quintil 2
          1989      1994        2000        2004         2006      2008       2010      2012      2014
1989        0
1994     0.017*        0
2000     0.003      -0.014       0
2004    0.049***   0.031***   0.046***         0
2006    0.046***   0.029***   0.043***      -0.002        0
2008     0.005      -0.013     0.002      -0.044***   -0.041***      0
2010     0.006      -0.011     0.003      -0.042***   -0.040***    0.001        0
2012    0.029***     0.011    0.026**      -0.020*     -0.018*    0.024***   0.022**      0
2014     0.011      -0.006     0.008      -0.037***   -0.035***    0.006      0.005    -0.017*        0

                                               Quintil 3
          1989      1994        2000        2004         2006      2008       2010      2012      2014
1989        0
1994     0.013         0
2000        0       -0.012       0
2004    0.043***   0.030***   0.042***         0
2006    0.054***   0.041***   0.054***      0.011         0
2008     0.002      -0.011     0.001      -0.041***   -0.052***      0
2010     0.003       -0.01     0.002      -0.040***   -0.051***    0.001        0
2012    0.022**      0.009    0.022**      -0.021**   -0.032***   0.020**    0.019**      0
2014      0.01      -0.003     0.009      -0.033***   -0.044***    0.008      0.007    -0.013         0

                                               Quintil 4
          1989      1994        2000        2004         2006      2008       2010      2012      2014
1989        0
1994    0.021**        0
2000    0.056***   0.035***       0
2004    0.071***   0.050***     0.015         0
2006    0.072***   0.051***     0.016       0.001         0
2008    0.020**     -0.001    -0.036***   -0.051***   -0.052***      0
2010    0.021***     0.001    -0.035***   -0.050***   -0.051***    0.001        0
2012    0.043***   0.022**     -0.013     -0.028***   -0.029***   0.023**    0.022**      0
2014    0.025***     0.004    -0.031***   -0.046***   -0.047***    0.005      0.004    -0.018*        0




                                                                                                 89
                                                 Quintil 5
         1989      1994         2000          2004         2006        2008         2010      2012      2014
1989       0
1994    0.019*        0
2000   0.027**      0.008           0
2004   0.063***   0.043***      0.035***       0
2006   0.059***   0.039***      0.031***    -0.004          0
2008    -0.001    -0.021**     -0.029***   -0.064***   -0.060***         0
2010     0.001    -0.019**     -0.027***   -0.062***   -0.058***       0.002          0
2012   0.032***     0.013        0.005     -0.030***    -0.027**      0.034***     0.032***      0
2014    0.018*     -0.002         -0.01    -0.045***   -0.041***      0.019***     0.017**    -0.015        0
                    Note: Differences defined as column-line * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01




                                                                                                       90
Annex IV: Methodology to Estimate the Own-price and Cross-price Elasticities of Demand of
Foods and Beverages Subject to the Tax

The model explained in detailed in this section will be used to describe the possible effect of the taxes on
sweetened beverages and foods of low nutritional value. Specifically we will estimate the price-elasticity of
demand of sweetened beverages; the price-elasticity of demand of high calorie foods subject to the second
tax, and the cross-elasticities of demand of related products; for instance, the cross-elasticity of demand of
milk and bottled water to a change in the price of sweetened beverages using data from the years before
and after the enactment of the tax law.

Since the estimation of the demand for sodas and high-calorie foods using micro-data is censored, that is,
there are households that do not consume these goods and thus total consumption for these households
is zero, we will use Heckman two-step estimation for the demand for sodas and high calorie foods following
Parks and Capps (1997). We will first estimate the probability of households buying sweetened
beverages/high calorie foods and in the second step we will estimate the demand for these two goods.

First step:

              Zih =fi (Xh, Yh, Dh)

              Where Z is 1 if house “h” buys good “i” and 0 otherwise.

              Xh: is a vector of household characteristics, including: income; household size, region of
              residence.

              Yh: is a vector of meal planner characteristics

              Dh: is a dummy variable indicating whether the household is “healthy conscious”. We are
              using as a variably indicating this, whether or not the household owns a bicycle.

Second step:

              Qih = fi (Xh, Pi*, Pj*, γt, λih)

              Where Qih is the quantity of the sweetened beverage or high calorie food “i” bought by
              household h and IMR is the inverse of the Mills ratio calculated from the first step equation.

              Pi*:quality-adjusted price of taxed items

              Pj*: quality-adjusted price of substitute food items

              γt: this is a vector of dummy variables representing year fix effects

              λih: this is the inverse of the Mills ratio calculated from the first step equation

We expect the characteristics of the meal planner to have an impact on the probability of a household
buying or not sweetened beverages and high-calorie foods, some of these characteristics are unique to the
decision to buy; we expect that healthy conscious meal planners are not likely to buy sweetened beverages
or high calorie foods. To proxy as “health consciousness” of the meal planner we are using the following
characteristics: age, education level, gender, and a dummy variable indicating whether the household owns
a sporting good (in this case a bicycle). We assume that the meal planner is the household head if it is a
single headed household and the female of the household in a two-headed household or household with a


                                                                                                          91
married head. We expect that younger, female and meal planners with a higher education level and that
own exercise equipment are more likely to be health conscious.

The cross sectional household surveys we have for this analysis provide information on expenditure in a
food item and the quantity of the item. Thus prices are estimated. These prices however are prices of a
bundle of goods, they can varied in brand name or in other quality characteristics that are not observable.
Thus to avoid a bias estimation, prices would need to be adjusted by quality. Following the work of Cox
and Wohlgenant (1985), Park and Capps (1997), and Kuchler et al (2004), we estimate the quality-adjusted
prices as the summation of the error term and the intercept of the following regression:

             Pi* = fi (Xh, Yh, Zh, γt, λih)

Where Zh: is a variable that indicates whether the household bought the food or beverage in a “tienda de
abarrotes” which are mom and pop stores where most beverages are sold. These stores are likely to offer
lower prices than supermarkets or specialty stores, where consumers are paying for other services and
advertising. In both the quantity and price equations, the square of the income and household sizes were
included under the assumption that there are economies of scale in the purchase and consumption of
goods.




                                                                                                       92
Faced with a large and increasing obesity epidemic, the Mexican Government in the last years has increased
efforts to prevent and control it. In October 2013, Mexico’s Congress passed legislation imposing taxes on
sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs) and calorie-dense foods of low nutritional value. These taxes were part of
a comprehensive strategy to prevent and control obesity, overweight and diabetes. In addition to fiscal policy
and regulation, this strategy included other health promotion and prevention interventions as well as measures
to ensure better access to effective health care services. The decision to implement this fiscal policy was the
result of a long advocacy process in which different actors participated, including civil society organizations and
government agencies, which provided needed evidence on the status of the epidemic and options to fight
against it. The taxes were designed to avoid, as much as possible, the substitution of consumption of the taxed
goods for other unhealthy foods and beverages not subject to taxation. These taxes have been successful in
increasing both the fiscal revenues and the price of the products taxed. There is also evidence that they have
reduced consumption, particularly of SSBs. The taxes seem to have the highest impact among people in the
poorest quintiles of the income distribution, who had experienced the highest increase in consumption of the
goods under taxation in the last years. A debate remains on the actual impact of the taxes, particularly on health
outcomes. Thus it is important to continue monitoring the impact of the taxes through the development of price
and volume indicators based on publicly available data.




ABOUT THIS SERIES:
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the World Bank. The papers
in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage discussion
and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to
members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and the use of material
presented in this series should take into account this provisional character. For free copies of papers in this
series please contact the individual author/s whose name appears on the paper. Enquiries about the series and
submissions should be made directly to the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@ worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory
Service (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256).

For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




                                                                          1818 H Street, NW
                                                                          Washington, DC USA 20433

                                                                          Telephone: 202 473 1000
                                                                          Facsimile: 202 477 6391
                                                                          Internet: www.worldbank.org
                                                                          E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
