Knowledge Exchange on Rural Community-Driven Development in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries


                                                  Purpose:
SPONSORED BY THE KOREA TRUST FUND FOR             • Gain knowledge and conceptualize potential approaches to improving community development efforts
ECONOMIC AND PEACE-BUILDING TRANSITIONS           based on the implementation experiences and results of Korea’s Saemaul Undong (“New Village
                                                  Movement”) program;
In partnership with the KDI (Korea Development    • Learn the background and approaches used under the program, explore specific strategies for
Institute) School of Public Policy and            enhancing rural welfare and jobs creation, analyze specific enabling and constraining factors, and apply
Management and the Government of Korea’s          these experiences to the specific context and needs of the individual country programs;
Ministry of Strategy and Finance, the World       • Exchange information and learn from each other’s program; and
                                                  • Facilitate follow-up dialogue and networking with the participating governments through the CDD
Bank hosted the Knowledge Exchange on Rural
                                                  Global Solutions Group (GSG).
Community-Driven Development in Fragile and
Conflict-Affected Countries. The event was held
from May 30 – June 5, 2016 in Daejeon and
Seoul in Korea.

The exchange visit brought together 14
government representatives from 5 countries
(Afghanistan, Kenya, Myanmar, Nepal, and the
Philippines), 6 World Bank staff, and experts
from 9 Korean universities and institutions.

The complete list of participants is available
here.



                                                                                                                              Finalized June 23, 2016
                    DAY 1: Introduction to Saemaul Undong & Country Cases

Welcome Remarks                                                    Sean Bradley, Lead Social Development Specialist at the World Bank, gave
    Joonkyu Park, Director for the Korea Ministry of               an overview of CDD programs across the world and some specific issues
Strategy and Finance, opened the event by underlining the           related to operations in fragile and conflict-affected situations.
importance of the event in: 1) supporting the participant
governments’ efforts to respond to the challenges of
fragility and conflict; 2) improving upon the agriculture and
rural development methodology by drawing upon Korea’s
knowledge and experiences; and 3) supporting the Bank’s
goal of ending poverty.
His remarks are available here in English.
    Prof. Seung Joo Lee, Associate Dean, KDI School of
Public Policy and Management, gave an overview of Korea’s
commitment to Saemaul Undong and its unique success in
achieving remarkable growth in a short period of time.
His remarks are available here in English.
   WanSup Kim, Program Manager for the World Bank
Korea Office, welcomed participants by emphasizing the
importance of sharing knowledge with peers from the
other participating countries, as well as with the Korean
experts and practitioners. He also highlighted the role of
the World Bank office in Korea, which serves as a hub for
knowledge sharing on various aspects of Korea’s
development experience.
His remarks are available here in English.
SESSION 1: PRESENTATION ON CDD PROGRAMS
(Facilitated by Phil Karp, Lead Knowledge Management
Officer, World Bank)
In the first session, country representatives from the
Afghanistan, Kenya, Myanmar, Nepal, and the
Philippines shared their experiences and challenges of
scaling up CDD programs in various contexts.
The panel members and audience discussed how CDD
programs evolved with the changing needs and risks in
their countries and shared experiences and
recommendations on how to resolve some of the
challenges they faced while scaling up those programs.
View the presentations for Kenya, Nepal, and             SESSION 2: SAEMAUL UNDONG IN KOREA’S RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Myanmar, as well as materials from Nepal on
                                                         (Professor Jeong Seop Choi, Mokpo National University)
women’s participation and their CDD program.
                                                         This session focused on Korea’s experience in rural development and Saemaul Undong,
                                                         and how it linked CDD programs and activities to enhance frontline service delivery. The
                                                         participants discussed specific approaches and strategies for enhancing rural welfare
                                                         and jobs creation under the Saemaul Undong program.
                                                         The participants learned that Saemaul Undong combined a bottom-up and top-down
                                                         approach, emphasizing the importance of both the central government to set the
                                                         standards and establish the support structures for Saemaul Undong . Professor Choi
                                                         emphasized the important role that Park Chung Hee, who was president at the time,
                                                         played in leading the Saemaul Undong movement and promoting the power of society
                                                         (or ‘social capital’) in local contexts. His role—combined with capable administrative
                                                         support provided by a strong Ministry of Home Affairs, holistic support from most line
                                                         ministries, and coordination by a comprehensive structure at central and sub-national
                                                         levels—was key to the program’s success.

                                                            Korean Rural Development & Saemaul Undong
SESSION 3: SAEMAUL UNDONG IN AGRICULTURE
PRODUCTIVITY IMPROVEMENT
(Professor Kyung Ryang Kim, Gangwon University)
This session focused on strategies and approaches used by
the Saemaul Undong program to improve agriculture
productivity.
The participants learned of the land reform that took place
in Korea in the late 1940s and 1950s and the conditions
that were instrumental in Saemaul Undong’s success. Land
reform helped to reduce inequality between peasants and
more endowed rural populations by providing more
equitable access to a primary asset for rural development
and by dramatically reducing land-rent payments.
Professor Kim suggested that this more egalitarian context
was key to Saemaul Undong ’s success since the possibility
of capture by local elites is lower. Moreover, due to more
egalitarian land ownership, villagers were more interested
in participating in community development projects that
generally helped to increase their land’s value. Professor
Kim also explained how Saemaul Undong contributed to
Korea’s social and economic development through multiple
functions such as social inclusion and income generation
mechanisms.

•   Agricultural Productivity Enhancement and Saemaul
    Undong
                                                      DAY 2: Saemaul Undong & Women’s Roles
SESSION 4: COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT &                            SESSION 5: RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND WOMEN’S ROLE (Professor Kap-Jin Chung, Saemaul History Institute)
SAEMAUL UNDONG
                                                                     This session focused on the role of women's organization under the Saemaul Undong. Professor Chung
(Professor Do Hyun Han, The Academy of Korean Studies)               emphasized that women, and female farmers in particular, were regarded as an important element under Saemaul
                                                                     Undong for the modernization of Korean rural society. Under Saemaul Undong, female farmers overcame two
                                                                     difficulties—a poor economic environment, and a traditional patriarchal system that was based on Confucianism—
This session compared community-driven development and               to realize important increases to their income, and improvements in their living environment and role in society.
Saemaul Undong, and participants examined how government-
led efforts were combined with voluntary grass-roots
participation.                                                       The Saemaul Women’s club demonstrated the potential of women to
                                                                     men in rural areas who refused to recognize women as social and
Professor Han explained how the movement succeeded and has
continued to evolve into a movement for community                    economic agents. The participants also discussed their own program’s
development due to active grassroots participation. The              success stories and challenges in improving inclusiveness of community
participants learned that the Korean Government pursued              decision-making, particularly for the inclusion of women.
Saemaul Undong more as a way to rapidly achieve development
outcomes through mass mobilization of villagers, versus an               Rural Development and Women’s Role
effort to promote grassroots representative democracy in
villages. However, inadvertently, participation provided villagers   SESSION 6: COMMUNITY LEADERSHIP IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT
with a chance to apply basic democratic principles and exercise      (Kyung Won Lee, Korea Saemaul-Undong Center)
greater influence on the local governments.
                                                                     This session looked at the importance of community leaders especially at the village
    Community-Driven Development & Saemaul Undong                   level. Lee explained how the actual leadership was performed in collaboration with the
                                                                     village chief appointed by the township office. He also emphasized that the Saemaul
                                                                     leaders played important roles as change agents disseminating technological innovation
                                                                     and as managers in planning and implementing projects. As such, intensive leadership
                                                                     training was a key feature under Saemaul Undong.
                                                                     The participants learned that the Saemaul leaders’ training program was organized
                                                                     under government sponsorship with a view to fostering leadership as well as inculcating
                                                                     the Saemaul philosophy. These trainings included sessions on: 1) shared experience of
                                                                     trainees and staff members lodging together, 2) cultivating of the Saemaul spirit through
                                                                     actual practice, 3) mutual learning through group discussion and presentation of case
                                                                     studies, and 4) follow-up services and support of the project for the graduates.
                                                                         Case Stories: Saemaul Leader’s Leadership
                                                   DAY 3: Government Role and Saemaul Leadership
SESSION 7: GOVERNMENT ROLE AND GOVERNANCE FOR RURAL
DEVELOPMENT (Professor So Jin Kwang, Gachon University)
This session covered the important roles that national and local government authorities played in
the effective implementation of Saemaul Undong, and the importance of the coordination and
integrated structures. The Ministry of Home Affairs oversaw coordination at all levels of
Government; local government units had a Saemaul Department overseen by the vice-Mayor,
and key line ministries included dedicated Saemaul Undong divisions.
Professor Kwang also explained how Saemaul Undong’s incentive-based performance system
worked, with villages divided into three categories—basic, self-help, and self-reliant—that were
defined by clear quantitative criteria and received different levels of support accordingly. This
system stimulated competitive participation among local communities, and encouraged
government–village cooperation through local administration units that had little autonomy
during the 1970s.
The presentation also touched upon the importance of the then state-run media as a channel for      SESSION 8: EDUCATION FOR SAEMAUL LEADERSHIP
systematic public education campaigns concerning the movement, which ultimately led to              (Sang Ho Choi, Mental Research Institute)
widespread and active participation by local communities. While Saemaul Undong had strong
central and local government involvement and support, which included the provision of technical,    This session reviewed how Saemaul leadership training was organized to encourage participation
financial, and in-kind resources, defining specific community-level activities remained the         by promoting communication among Saemaul leaders from various parts of the country. This
responsibility of the villages.                                                                     training provided an opportunity for community leaders to share their experiences at both the
     Government Role and Governance for Saemaul Undong                                             regional and national levels with both the rural and urban elite. Formal recognition was an
                                                                                                    important element in strengthening and legitimizing the leaders, with President Park Chung Hee
                                                                                                    praising Saemaul Undong leaders as “ushers of the nation’s modernization” and “guides of the
                                                                                                    patriotic movement.” Training, provided by the Training Institute for Saemaul Leaders, was
                                                                                                    geared to the educational levels of the rural communities, and focused more on the Saemaul
                                                                                                    spirit (diligence, self-help, and cooperation) rather than on theories of community development.
                                                                                                    Saemaul leaders also played active roles in local Saemaul training institutes, serving as peer-to-
                                                                                                    peer teachers for new community leaders.
                                                                                                         Saemaul Training for Saemaul Leadership
                                                                             DAY 4: Field Visits
On the fourth day of the conference, participants visited two institutions that support
rural and community development within and outside of Korea: the Korea Rural
Community (KRC) Corporation, and the Agriculture Technology Center of Sejong
Metropolitan Authority.
Participants first visited KRC, a government-owned enterprise that supports large-scale
agricultural production and infrastructure development projects focusing on water
resources and land reclamation, as well as community development. KRC also
participates in the Government’s efforts to extend the Saemaul Undong approach
internationally. Participants learned of KRC’s extensive national program including its
rural community development approach, based on similar principles used under Saemaul
Undong and CDD.
KRC’s presentations are shared here and here.




                                                                                          The visit to the Agriculture Technology Center exposed participants to local government-
                                                                                          led research, development, and extension services for farmers of the Sejong
                                                                                          Metropolitan area, including support for urban farming, organic farming technologies,
                                                                                          and machinery rental services. The summary documentation shared by the Technology
                                                                                          Center is shown here.

                                                                                          Participants sought clarification on how the two organizations work with communities,
                                                                                          and explored possible linkages with home country institutions.
                                            DAY 5: Next Steps – Action Plans for the Way Forward
SESSION 9: FINALIZATION OF COUNTRY-SPECIFIC ACTION PLANS
(Facilitated by Phil Karp, Lead Knowledge Management Officer, World Bank)
The final day of the conference started by reflecting on the discussions and lessons
learned over the past four days. In the first half of the session, the participants shared
their main takeaways from the field visits and other interactions.
The Afghan delegation indicated particular interest in discussing further in detail with KRC
on their “technology consulting project,” which carries out preliminary feasibility tests,
the design and the administration of irrigation and drainage facilities, underwater
development and other agricultural development in developing countries. The
Philippines delegations were interested in the Saemangeum land reclamation project
that KRC undertook, which turned tidal flats into an eco-friendly agricultural complex.
The Myanmar delegation explored the possibilities of adopting agricultural machinery
leasing services that the Agricultural Technology Center provides in Sejong city. The
Nepalese and Kenyan delegations showed interest in how the Agricultural Technology
Center connects urban communities by promoting urban garden and weekend farming.
The delegations then presented their work plans, outlining the status of the CDD
programs in their countries, lessons learned, and next steps in relation to the exchange
visit.
The representatives from Afghanistan, Kenya, Myanmar, Nepal, and the Philippines
expressed interest in further collaboration with Saemaul Undong experts to train,
mobilize, and motivate their community leaders. The Afghan and Nepalese delegations
felt that a strongly motivated leadership at the top-level of the administration and
consistency in commitment is necessary for the successful implementation of CDD
programs. Both countries also wanted to collaborate with Korean experts and other
countries to implement the concept of Women’s club in their countries, and on farmers’
cooperatives. Lastly, Afghan delegates were interested in learning more about the
approach taken by Korea in developing a Rural Development Strategy. The Myanmar
delegation took note of the close collaboration between different branches of
government, the strong gender awareness and role of women in the program, and the
emphasis placed on farm and non-farm rural livelihoods (including vocational education).
The representatives from the Philippines took particular note of the mind-set
change that the Saemaul Undong movement brought about creating a “can-do”
attitude that seemed to have helped drive Korea’s rapid development. They felt
that without this change in mind set, the movement’s long-term impact on
individual and community well-being would not have been possible. The Filipino
representatives were also interested in the balance of top-down/bottom-up
aspect of the Saemaul Undong, and expressed interest in further development of
a training for village leaders that focus on the Saemaul spirit of self-reliance/self-
help and an entrepreneurial mindset to ensure lasting and sustainable change.
For the representative from the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, the
exchange has encouraged her to promote a closer review of the CDD program
that is currently pending adoption by the regional government.
The Nepali delegation noted the important role of land reform, and the
performance based approach applied, which they saw as critical to the success of
the Saemaul Undong. The Nepal delegation also noted the importance of
branding for the movement, and the integrated/holistic approach (including
culture) to supporting community development outcomes. They expressed
interest in further technical collaboration with the Korean experts. Kenya also
noted the critical role that cross-government coordination played in the success
of the program, and the importance of the incentive-based system of village
support. Lastly, the delegations from all countries noted the importance of
coordination not only between government agencies, but also with other public
organizations such as the National Agricultural Cooperative Federation and the
National Fishery Cooperative Federation. They expressed interest in further
guidance on institutional arrangements that strengthened and enabled smooth
coordination between ministries, government agencies, and relevant
organizations.
The following presentations were made:
    Afghanistan
    Myanmar
    Nepal
    The Philippines and the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
    Kenya
                        Closing Remarks & Selected Feedback from the Government Participants

                                    Capacity building is an            Korea's remarkable
                                                                    progress gives hope to us        Alongside capacity building,
                                 essential component of the                                          people’s mindset should be
                                 Saemaul Undong model: it           that our situations can be
                                                                     changed to achieve the          changed to adopt proactive                   Experiences from other
                                  fostered discipline among                                          attitudes and can-do spirit.
                                                                          same status.                                                           countries where there are
  There are many lessons            the rural population to
                                                                                                                                                many similarities in program
emerging as to the necessity         change the mindset.
         of strong                                                                                                                               elements and challenges.
leadership/political backing,
which have attributed to the
success of Saemaul Undong.

                                                                                                                                                      We were surprised by the rapid
                                                                                                                                                   economic development of Korea. The
   This is a country in which almost                                                                                                                Saemaul Undong Movement laid the
   everybody was poor in 1960 and                                                                                                                  foundation, allowing Korea to achieve
which has eliminated extreme poverty                                                                                                                 modernization and development.
 completely within this half-century…
Thank you for sharing these successes
                with us.
                                                                                                                                        We should learn from Korea’s
                                                                                                                                           sense of ownership, and
                                                                                                                                         competitive spirit as part of
                                                                                                                                         efforts to fight poverty and
      The Saemaul Undong leadership
                                                                                                                                          foster the country’s socio-
    program can be used across the CDD
     programs, to help the government                                                                                                     economic transformation.
    address its underlying challenges of
   policy implementation in social capital,
   participation and ownership by people.        Introducing male-female paired                  Strong national political leadership
                                                  leadership in rural villages can               with a commitment to sustainable
                                                 empower women and facilitate                     CDD and empowerment of local
                                                       transformation and                          communities can help facilitate
                                                  modernization of traditionally                  socioeconomic transformation in
                                                     gender-biased societies.                          developing countries.
    If you have any questions on the exchange, please
                         contact:
         Sean Bradley (sbradley@worldbank.org),
Milena Petrova Stefanova (mstefanova@worldbank.org),
                            or
           Kyung Min In (kin1@worldbank.org)

 And visit our website for other CDD materials at:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/communitydriven
                  development
