2016 Innovation Awards
Program Highlights
                     © 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, DC 20433
                     Telephone: +1-202-473-1000
                     Internet: www.worldbank.org


                     This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
                     interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank,
                     its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.


                     The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
                     denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
                     part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
                     boundaries.


                     Rights and Permissions
                     The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
                     knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
                     attribution to this work is given.


                     Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
                     Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: +1-202-522-
                     2625; email: pubrights@worldbank.org




ii   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
Contents




Acknowledgments............................................................................................................ v


Acronyms and Abbreviations...........................................................................................vii


Why Innovation at the WBG? ........................................................................................... 1


What Are the Innovation Awards?.................................................................................... 1


What Do the Innovation Awards Say About Innovation at the WBG?............................... 2
  Characteristics of Nominations.....................................................................................................................................3
  Characteristics of Nominated Innovations..................................................................................................................5


Conclusions....................................................................................................................... 6


Winners and Finalists ....................................................................................................... 7
   Overcoming the Collateral Constraint for Women Entrepreneurs: Psychometric Testing in Ethiopia........8
   Pilot Auction Facility (PAF)...........................................................................................................................................9
   Enhancing Tax Compliance in Costa Rica Using Big Data: Innovative Experiment and Quasi-
   Experimental Tools........................................................................................................................................................ 10
   Tanzania Local Government Revenue Collection System.................................................................................... 11
   Bangladesh Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy (RERED)—Mini-grid Project............................. 12
   Bangladesh Public Procurement Reform Project II—Digital Transformation of Public Procurement...... 13




                                                                                                                                      2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   iii
                    Appendix A: Members of Selection Committees............................................................ 17
                       Cross-VPU Committee................................................................................................................................................ 17
                       Longlisting Committee................................................................................................................................................ 18


                    Appendix B: 125 Eligible Nominations........................................................................... 19


                    Figures
                        Figure 1. Breakdown of Eligile Nominations by Region..........................................................................................3
                        Figure 2. Primary Funding Source.................................................................................................................................4
                        Figure 3. Type of Innovation..........................................................................................................................................5


                    Boxes
                       Box 1. Is Innovation Being Developed Efficiently at the WBG?............................................................................7




iv   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
Acknowledgments




The 2016 Innovation Awards were conducted by a team from the Innovation Labs of Word Bank Group
(WBG) under the Leadership, Learning and Innovation (LLI) Vice Presidency. This activity was led by Victor
Mulas (TTL) under the direction of Adarsh Desai (Manager) and Abha Joshi-Ghani (Director). Elena Gasol
and Dean Thompson were responsible for daily operations of the Innovation Awards. Arathi Sundaravadanan,
Maria Mboono, and Vinod Beri provided communications support, and led the design and implementation of
the Awards Ceremony in June 2016. Ghia Zaatari and Sandra Pocar helped with the nomination process, and
Anastasia Nedayvoda and Jerry Zhang conducted research for this report. Victor Mulas and Dean Thompson
are the authors of this report. Colin Blackman served as editor and James Quigley formatted it.


The team would like to express its gratitude to Human Resources for their support, particularly Carleen
Victoria and Saniya Anwar, whose guidance on running an awards program and other topics was invaluable.
The team extends its most sincere gratitude to the colleagues who participated in each of the Selection
Committees. These included Behnaz Bonyadian, Marcelo Donolo, Meena Munshi, Mattias K. A. Lundberg,
Nadeem Mohammad, Elena Gasol, Yelena Fedeyeva and Victor Mulas in the Longlisting Committee. They
also included Michael Goldberg, Jeffrey Waite, Bilal H. Rahill, Vijay Pillai, Rocio Castro, Roumeen Islam,
Karin Erika Kemper, and Uzma Basim in the Cross-VPU Committee.




                                                                                   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   v
vi   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
Acronyms and Abbreviations




  AFRGI    Africa Gender Impact Evaluation Unit
   ASCI    Amhara Credit & Savings Institution
   CCSA    Cross-Cutting Solution Area
   DPO     Development Policy Operation
    E&E    Energy & Extractives
    EAP    East Asia Pacific Region
    EFI    Equitable Growth, Finance and Institutions
    ERs    Emission reductions
   ESW     Economic and Sector Work
  GCCCF    Global Climate Change and Carbon Finance Unit
    GP     Global Practice
   GPVP    Global Practice Vice Presidency
    HD     Human Development
   IBRD    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
    ICT    Information and communication technology
    IFC    International Finance Corporation
    IMF    International Monetary Fund
     IP    Indigenous people
     KP    Knowledge Product
    LCR    Latin America and the Caribbean Region
     LLI   Leadership, Learning and Innovation
   M&E     Monitoring and Evaluation
   MIGA    Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
   NGO     Nongovernmental organization




                                                                   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   vii
                              OPCS          Operations Procedures and Country Services
                                 PAF        Pilot Auction Facility
                                 RAS        Reimbursable Advisory Services
                                 RBF        Results-based Financing
                                 RVP        Regional Vice Presidency
                                  SD        Sustainable Development
                               SURR         Social, Urban, Rural & Resilience
                                   TF       Trust fund
                               UAVs         Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
                                VPU         Vice Presidential Unit
                               WBG          The World Bank Group

                       All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated




viii   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
2016 Innovation Awards
Program Highlights


Why Innovation at the WBG?


“Innovation has been and will be pivotal for reaching sustained, scalable solutions to the world’s complex
problems.”1 Indeed, innovation is a key driver of transformational engagements—understood as deep, systemic
and sustainable changes with the potential for large-scale impact—and a key pillar of the World Bank Group’s
(WBG) 2030 strategy.2
    How is innovation being applied by The World Bank Group (WBG) to address the world’s complex
problems and achieve the twin goals of reducing extreme poverty and increasing shared prosperity? The
2016 Innovation Awards program offers insights on how innovation is being absorbed and applied in WBG
projects and activities to tackle development challenges. Nominations described different types of innova-
tions in technology, policies, processes, and partnerships—including drones mapping land, solar power
technology, a new climate finance model, and innovative approaches for the use of intangible collateral for
women entrepreneurs in Africa.
    This report describes the WBG’s 2016 Innovation Awards program, highlights the diverse innovations
submitted by WBG teams, and presents the six winners and six additional finalists.



What Are the Innovation Awards?


As part of a broader initiative of Bank leadership to foster an innovative culture, the 2016 Innovation Awards
were designed to recognize staff that innovate at the WBG and to highlight the innovation occurring in

1	 A Call for Innovation in International Development . http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/pubdocs/publicdoc/2015/11/8518514468
   42304852/Call-for-Innovation-in-International-Development.pdf.
2	 Independent Evaluation Group. 2016. Supporting Transformational Change for Poverty Reduction and Shared
   Prosperity. World Bank Group. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://ieg.worldbank.org/Data/reports/
   WBGSupportTransformationalEngagements.pdf.




                                                                                             2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   1
                    WBG operations and activities. The WBG has lacked institutional mechanisms for recognizing and providing
                    incentives, and for strategically managing innovation to accelerate progress towards its goals (see Box 1). The
                    Innovation Awards were conceived as a soft mechanism to address this gap by providing data that could inform
                    the establishment of structured internal mechanisms.
                        This was the first iteration of the Innovation Awards and it took place from January through June 2016.
                    The WBG’s Innovation Labs, under the Leadership, Learning and Innovation (LLI) Vice Presidency, served
                    as the administrator of the awards. Staff and consultants in World Bank Vice Presidential Units (VPUs)
                    were eligible to participate in this program. Although the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the
                    Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) did not officially participate, individual IFC/MIGA staff
                    could be part of nominated teams.


                    Bank staff submitted 168 nominations representing diverse sectors from all six World Bank Regions. To
                    be eligible for an Innovation Award, innovations must have been completed in 2015, and had to be focused on
                    external client operations. In addition, nominations had to address the following selection criteria:


                         1.	 The innovation accelerated development results,
                         2.	 The innovation had to have the potential to be scaled up, and
                         3.	 Scaling-up could improve results in other contexts (for example, regions and sectors).


                        In early May 2016, a Longlisting Committee (see Appendix A) composed of staff from LLI and
                    Operations, procedures and Country Services (OPCS) reviewed the 168 nominations to assess their eligibility,
                    rate them against the selection criteria, and choose 12 finalist teams (see Appendix B). In late May, a Selection
                    Committee (Appendix A) made up of senior staff from the Global Practice Vice Presidencies (GPVPs) and
                    Regional Vice Presidencies (RVPs) scored the 12 finalists to determine the six winners. The winners were
                    recognized at a WBG-wide awards ceremony in June 2016.



                    What Do the Innovation Awards Say About Innovation at the WBG?


                    The Innovation Awards shed light on how WBG staff are applying innovation to address clients’ development
                    challenges. In nominating themselves, staff demonstrate a healthy desire at the Bank to showcase innovative
                    approaches in Bank activities and projects. Although this program cannot provide a complete picture,3 it can help
                    us to understand what, where, and how innovation is happening at the WBG and its usefulness. To this end, the
                    section below provides an overview of the 125 nominations assessed as eligible for an Innovation Award.




                    3	   For a more comprehensive analysis of innovation at the WBG, see World Bank. 2016. Unearthing Innovation. (forthcoming)




2   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
Characteristics of Nominations


Regions and GPVPs submitted the most nominations. Regions submitted 41 percent of nominations,
GPVPs 47 percent, and other VPUs 12 percent (see figure 1). Common VPUs in the “other” category
included Cross-Cutting Solution Areas (CCSAs), the World Bank Treasury, Development Economics, and
the Legal Department.
    Among Regions, Africa proposed the most nominations with 33 percent, followed by South Asia with 27
percent, and Latin American and the Caribbean with 20 percent. Among GPVPs, Sustainable Development
(SD) proposed 42 percent of nominations, Equitable Growth, Finance and Institutions (EFI) 41 percent, and
Human Development (HD) 17 percent. Though Regional VPUs were the source of 41 percent of nomina-
tions, many nominations from Regions proposed teams from Global Practices (GP).4


Figure 1. Breakdown of Eligile Nominations by Region



                                         168 Nominations Spanning All Regions
                                                                                                        • Among 125 eligible
                                                                                                          innovations, 20 were global
                                                                                                          and 21 regionally focused, and
                                                                                                          84 targeted 50 countries
                                                                                                        • 68% of eligible nominations
                                                                                                          were New Solutions, 32%
                                                                                                          Adaptions
                                                                                                        • Trust Funds were the largest
                                                                                                          funding mechanism,
                                                                                                          supporting 37% of
                                                                                                          nominations
                                                                                                        • The top two Global Practices
                                                                                                          engaged in innovations were
                                                                                                          SURR and Energy & Extractives


      Nominations by VPU (n=125)                       Nominations by Region (n=51)                       Nominations by GPVP (n=59)

                  Other                                                                                               GGH
                  12%                                                                                                  VP
                                                                  SAR
                                                                                                                      17%
                                                                  27%            AFR
                              Regional                                                                                              GGS
                                                                                 33%
                                41%                                                                                                  VP
                                                                                                                                    42%
                GPVP                                                                                                GGE
                47%                                                                                                  VP
                                                    MNA              LCR         ECA                                41%
                                                     4%              20%
                                                                             EAP 10%
                                                                             6%




4	   Eight percent of eligible nominations featured two or more VPUs, typically a GPVP and a Region, which suggests cross-VPU coordi-
     nation. However, the analysis only considers the primary VPU from the nomination form.




                                                                                                      2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   3
                    An analysis of nominations from the GPVPs, and those of Regions nominating principally GP teams,
                    suggested innovations came from diverse Global Practices. Using the unit of the team lead(s) as a proxy
                    indicator, the Social, Urban, Rural & Resilience (SURR) GP led with 22 percent of innovations, mainly
                    focused on working in fragile states, preventing and mitigating disasters, and strengthening engagement with
                    young people and vulnerable groups. The Energy & Extractives (E&E) GP was second with about 10 percent
                    of innovations, focused particularly on promoting renewable and clean energy.


                    Most remaining GPs were responsible for 6 to 10 percent of innovations within this pool. In EFI,
                    these included Governance, Finance & Markets, Trade & Competitiveness, and Macroeconomics &
                    Fiscal Management. In the Social Development (SD) network, these included Water, Transport & ICTs,
                    and Environmental & Natural Resources. In the Human Development (HD) network, the Education
                    GP contributed about six percent of nominations—with the Health, Nutrition & Population and Social
                    Protection & Labor GPs about three and four percent, respectively. A few nominations came from CCSAs,
                    such as Climate Change, and Fragility, Conflict & Violence. Nevertheless, because many innovations cut
                    across sectors, this simple attribution methodology may not be fully representative of the nomination pool.


                    Trust funds (TF) and lending were the primary
                                                                                  Figure 2. Primary Funding Source
                    funding sources for innovations (see figure 2).
                    Trust funds supported 37 percent of innovations
                                                                                                    No Info
                    and lending 26 percent. All other sources of funding                             10%
                    (Reimbursable Advisory Services—RAS, Economic
                                                                                                                       Lending
                    and Sector Work—ESW, Knowledge Products—KP,                                                          26%

                    and so on) supported 27 percent of innovations. The                    Other
                                                                                           Figure   2. Primary Funding Source
                                                                                           27%
                    funding source was unclear for about 10 percent of
                    the nominations.
                                                                                                              Trust Fund
                                                                                                                 37%
                    Trust funds and discretionary funding (for example,
                    innovation grants) are used by Bank teams to
                    rapidly pilot and demonstrate the results of innova-
                    tions. Based on research and suggested by the nomina-
                    tions, Bank teams appear to prefer TFs for pilots and so-called “frontier” innovations as TFs provide relatively
                    easier access to funds, quick disbursements, and have lenient procedures. This is consistent with the units
                    that provided more nominations, with those working on fragile states, preventing and mitigating disasters, or
                    energy-related innovations being most prominent. All of these thematic areas are supported by TF facilities.
                    When teams pilot within a lending operation, the innovation tends to be funded by TF and other discre-
                    tionary funding, complementing the existing design of the lending operation




4   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
Characteristics of Nominated Innovations


The Innovation Awards program defined innovation as a brand new solution, or an adaption of an established
approach to different sectors or contexts. Thirty-one percent of eligible nominations were deemed to be new
solutions, and 69 percent adaptations, which suggests that the Bank is playing a key role in scaling innovation
sourced from elsewhere.
    Figure 3 illustrates the types of nominated innovations. Nearly
                                                                              Figure 3. Type of Innovation
half of innovations were a product or technology, while policy and
process innovations each made up 19 percent. Organizational or
partnership innovations made up 13 percent. Though listing all                            Organizational/
                                                                                            Partnership
nominations in these types is not possible here, selected examples                             13%

are provided below:                                                                           Figure 3. Type of Innovation
    •	 Product/technology: Sample innovations included creative                        Policy
                                                                                        19%               Product/Technology
        uses of satellite and drones, to map slums in India and assess                                           49%

        war damage in Syria, and mobile and tablet-based technol-
        ogies, such as apps to survey poverty, monitor road condi-                            Process
                                                                                                19%
        tions, compare remittance service providers, and engage
        stakeholders in monitoring public services. Innovations
        made use of open data and big data, from a new open data
        portal supporting development in Sudan, to open source
        software tracking taxi trips to improve congestion analysis
        in the Philippines, to the World Bank’s PovcalNet, an online poverty monitoring system allowing
        external visitors to create new poverty measurements. Other innovations included information systems
        to improve procurement, web-based platforms for sharing knowledge, and technologies and risk and
        insurance products in agriculture, disaster management, and climate change.
    •	 Process: Nominations focused on innovative ways that Bank teams used, sequenced, and mixed Bank
        products, including through programmatic and multisector approaches, and performance-based
        contracting and results-based financing (RBF), such as an RBF program to promote clean stoves in
        China. Nominations highlighted inventive ways of packaging Bank assistance, such as a program
        combining seed funding and technical assistance within Bank operations to develop technological
        innovations that improve disaster resilience. Nominations presented new methods of engaging commu-
        nities, such as mechanisms to involve indigenous people in designing and delivering an environmental
        grant program in Peru, and engaging men and stakeholders to prevent violence against women in
        Honduras. Teams proposed new methodologies for assessing risks, such as the Bank Treasury’s efforts to
        develop methods for assessing credit risk of state-owned enterprises in Indonesia.
    • 	 Policy: Nominations highlighted how Bank teams had creatively used Development Policy Operations
        (DPOs), such as the first-ever regional DPO to improve transport policies between Burkina Faso and
        the Ivory Coast, and a DPO promoting “green growth” policies in transport, energy, and other sectors
        in Colombia. Nominations featured new designs and policies for social safety nets, including innovative
        targeting mechanisms and measures for channeling social assistance, such as through public works in
        postdisaster contexts. Innovations informed policy reform, such as an online portal for recommenda-




                                                                                        2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   5
                           tions and information on mining legislation in Africa, and a tool combining tax records and household
                           survey data to assess tax reform in Chile. Nominations highlighted how big data from tax records and
                           behavioral techniques can improve tax compliance in Costa Rica and other countries.
                       •	 Organizational/Partnership: Nominations demonstrated ways that the Bank had brought together
                           stakeholders to raise awareness of issues, encourage research and knowledge exchange, promote
                           consensus, and support project design and implementation. In Africa, the Bank helped mobilize 100
                           journalists from multiple countries to report on the dire condition of coastal fisheries, and convened
                           governments, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and organizations from 14 countries to
                           support research and projects in early childhood development. In the East Asia Pacific region (EAP),
                           the Bank created a network of finance ministers from Asian-Pacific countries to discuss and foster
                           commitment to credit infrastructure reforms. A regional, cross-GP initiative in the Latin American
                           and the Caribbean region (LCR) convened governments, development institutions, and indigenous
                           peoples (IPs) to support dialogue on IP issues, advocate IP policies, and design projects for IPs and
                           Afro-descendants. The Bank helped create a global partnership program promoting learning on
                           carbon pricing and solutions in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and
                           other organizations.
                        An analysis of how nominations were scored reveals mid-range scores on the first selection criterion:
                    whether the innovation accelerated development results. Yet scores were higher on other selection criteria—
                    whether the innovation has the potential to be scaled up, and scaling up could improve results in other contexts.
                    This suggests that Bank teams nominated innovations not yet fully mature and without demonstrable results,
                    but with tangible demand and promise for scale.



                    Conclusions


                    The scale and breadth of nominations to the 2016 Innovation Awards suggest that there is considerable
                    bottom-up innovation at the WBG. Nominations spanned all Regions and GPs and several other VPUs,
                    despite the program’s limited focus on external client operations. Certain groups and GPs were responsible for
                    comparatively more nominations—SURR and E&E, for example, in such areas as fragile states, disaster resil-
                    ience, and renewable energy, perhaps because of easier access to agile funding (for example, TFs) or innovation
                    friendly leadership. The program also featured different types of innovation, with one-third applied globally or
                    regionally, and the rest focused in 50 countries.


                    Innovation at the WBG focuses on scaling innovation sourced from elsewhere more than creating brand
                    new solutions. Most nominations featured adaptations of existing solutions, with almost 50 percent of them being
                    product or technology related. This is consistent with the role and the scale of the WBG. As the IEG report on
                    Transformational Engagement puts it, citing the example of Lighting Africa Kenya, the WBG’s role is not necessarily
                    that of an inventor, but the Bank can help scale-up technologies that have potential to be transformational.5



                    5	 Op cit, Note 2.




6   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
  Box 1. Is Innovation Being Developed Efficiently at the WBG?

  Nominations and existing research suggest that the preeminence of a bottom-up mechanism for generating innovation
  results in multiple teams “reinventing the wheel” and parallel processes of introducing the same innovation in the WBG.
  For example, multiple nominations from different GPs showcased the transition from paper to mobile-based monitoring
  of public services. Among others, the Water GP employed mobile phones to monitor rural water services in Vietnam, the
  Governance GP smartphones to collect data on crime, health, and education in Pakistan; and the Transport & ICT GP
  a tablet app to survey the condition of bridges in Nepal. All of these teams are taking similar approaches to problems
  faced systematically by WBG activities and operations in the area of data collection and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).
  However, each team approached their solution separately and without sharing core resources. This multiplies costs and
  reduces the economies of scope and scale for the WBG. GPs tend to innovate ad hoc and in pockets—without adequate
  sharing of innovations and lessons between units, rendering scaling inefficient.




Most nominations used TFs as the funding mechanism, with lending as the second preferred option.
WBG teams seem to prefer TF and grant sources for testing and piloting frontier innovations, as these sources
provide easier, just-in-time access to quick-disbursing funds and more lenient procedures. Although lending
supports innovation, the longer timeframes of lending projects and use of client funds may favor financing
adaptations of tested and proven innovations—minimally a more cautious and planned approach.


Given the importance of innovation to development and high participation in this program, Bank
leadership may want to continue the Innovation Awards in 2017. If such a decision is made, Bank leadership
may want to expand the focus beyond external client operations, possibly to include innovations in internal
Bank processes, and officially include IFC and MIGA.



Winners and Finalists


The six winners of the Innovation Awards are described in the following pages, along with six additional finalists.
These descriptions are based on selected information from the nominations. Congratulations to both groups.




                                                                                         2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   7
                                    WINNER
                                    2016 Innovation Award                             VPU: Africa



                    TEAM LEAD

                    Markus Goldstein
                    Lead Economist, AFRCE

                    Overcoming the Collateral Constraint for Women
                    Entrepreneurs: Psychometric Testing in Ethiopia


                    Under the FY12 Women Entrepreneurship project, the WBG worked with
                    government, financial institutions, and a tech start-up to devise a way to use
                    characteristics of borrowers as a substitute for loan collateral—captured in a
                    psychometric testing tool. Potential borrowers could take a 45-minute test,
                    designed to measure the likelihood of repayment, on a tablet computer in
                    a branch of Ethiopia’s largest microfinance institution (Amhara Credit &
                    Savings Institution, ACSI). ACSI provided loans up to $7,500 for those above
                    a scoring cutoff. 600 borrowers took the test in 2015. Among the 349 offered
                    loans, repayment is at 99.4%, and women borrowers increased profits by 24%.
                    ACSI scaled the program from two to 12 branches, and aims to provide 2,000
                    loans in 2016.




8   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
              WINNER
              2016 Innovation Award               VPU: Climate Change CCSA



TEAM LEAD

Scott Cantor
Carbon Finance Specialist, GCCCF

Pilot Auction Facility (PAF)


The multidonor PAF for Methane and Climate Change Mitigation is an
innovative climate finance model to incentivize private investment in projects
that reduce greenhouse gas emissions and maximize impact of limited
public funds. Through an online auction of put options, the PAF provides a
guaranteed floor price for future emission reductions (ERs). These options
give auction winners a right, but not an obligation, to sell ERs to the PAF. The
PAF’s first auction in July 2015 attracted 28 bidders from 17 countries. 12
won price guarantees for 8.7 million tons of ERs at a clearing price of $2.40/
ton of CO2 equivalent. The PAF released a report on lessons on the first
auction and a briefing note, and discussed the concept with several countries.
Environmental Finance awarded PAF’s first auction its Carbon Deal of the
Year in March 2016.




                                                              2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   9
                                              WINNER
                                              2016 Innovation Award                       VPU: GGEVP



                    TEAM LEADS

                    Anne Brockmeyer                                   Marco Hernandez
                    Economist, GFM04                                  Senior Economist, GFM04


                    Enhancing Tax Compliance in Costa Rica Using Big Data:
                    Innovative Experiment and Quasi-Experimental Tools


                    This project used big data to improve tax compliance in Costa Rica. The
                    project used a decade-long, nationwide panel of tax declarations submitted
                    by 400,000 firms and more than 20 million financial transaction reports to
                    estimate tax compliance gaps. Supported by a unique partnership involving
                    tax authorities and the U.K. Behavioural Insights Team, authorities sought
                    to increase tax filing by sending email tax reminders to firms emphasizing
                    information from credit and debit reports about their economic activities.
                    In addition, the team evaluated the impact of a policy whereby debit card
                    companies withhold tax on card transactions. The project showed good
                    results: randomized email reminders tripled the tax filing rate and doubled
                    the payment rate among targeted firms, and the withholding policy increased
                    sales tax payment by 50% among affected firms. The team has started big data
                    projects with Guatemala, Poland, and Uruguay, and received interest from
                    Bank teams in Croatia and Madagascar. Such techniques hold promise for
                    other uses, such as in enhancing payment of service fees to public utilities.




10   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
             WINNER
             2016 Innovation Award              VPU: Climate Change GGSVP



TEAM LEADS

Chyi-Yun Huang                       Onur Ozlu,
Urban Specialist, GSU19              Senior Urban Economist, GSU11


Tanzania Local Government Revenue Collection System


The Tanzania Strategic Cities Project introduced an innovative Local
Government Revenue Collection Information System (LGRCIS) to help
Tanzanian cities collect own source revenue (OSR) from multiple sources, such
as property taxes, service levies, and business fees. Now operational in seven
cities, the system supports identification of taxpayers and defaulters, invoicing
and receipts, bill generation, and online payment through a single gateway.
It enables reporting and analysis by geography, payers, and revenue type.
Participating cities increased their OSR by 30% in the first year, which has
been critical in meeting budget shortfalls from central government transfers,
and the system is being scaled countrywide and through Bank projects.




                                                             2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   11
                                         WINNER
                                         2016 Innovation Award                      VPU: GGSVP



                    TEAM LEAD

                    Zubair Sadeque
                    Senior Energy Specialist, GEE06


                    Bangladesh Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy
                    (RERED)—Mini-grid Project


                    This project tested a business model implemented for solar home systems
                    on new technologies: solar irrigation pumps (SIPs) and solar powered-
                    minigrids. A $1.1m grant financed 41 SIPs benefiting 1,356 poor farmers,
                    and a 100kW minigrid providing energy to 253 poor households. The
                    project leveraged an innovative PPP with the state-owned Infrastructure
                    Development Company Limited (IDCOL), and innovative financing,
                    including capital buydown grants to ensure access to poor households
                    and farmers to clean energy. Farmers reported reduced irrigation costs
                    and savings in time and labor. Customers linked to the minigrid replaced
                    polluting fuel sources, such as diesel, with clean energy. Income generating
                    activities developed in project areas. Lessons are being shared with Mali,
                    Uganda, Tanzania, and other countries, and additional financing is
                    supporting the scaleup of the two technologies.




12   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
            WINNER
            2016 Innovation Award                                    VPU: GGEVP



TEAM LEAD

Zafrul Islam
Lead Procurement Specialist, Governance, GGO06


Bangladesh Public Procurement Reform Project II—Digital
Transformation of Public Procurement


The Bank supported Bangladesh to build a single uniform integrated
e-GP system covering bid invitation up to final payment, including online
bid evaluations, contract awards, contract management, payments, and
procurement measurement (e-PMIS). The e-PMIS module captures real-time
procurement and contract management indicators, allowing stakeholders and
citizens to monitor public procurement. The e-GP system drove good results:
the number of registered bidders grew 35-fold, the days from tender opening
to award fell from 51 in 2012 to 29 in 2015, and there is evidence of less fraud.
The Bank is helping to scale-up of the program, and several countries have
shown interest in the e-GP solution, such as Uganda, Zambia, and Nepal.




                                                             2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   13
FINALISTS
2016 Innovation Award

Innovation Title                   Team Lead(s)       VPU                            Description

Country Disaster                 Oscar Anil            LCR    Countries are increasingly exposed to high risks
Risk Profiles                    Ishizawa,                    of meteorological and geophysical hazards, but
                                 Sr. Disaster Risk            governments lack capacity to quantify sovereign risk due
                                 Management                   to disasters. The Bank supported the development of
                                 Specialist, GSU10            open, free, and globally consistent Country Disaster Risk
                                                              Profiles (CDRPs), which provide estimates of potential
                                 Rashmin                      economic losses and future risks to property and other
                                 Gunasekera,                  asset classes from natural disasters (e.g., hurricanes,
                                 Disaster Risk                earthquakes). CDRPs were used to estimate fatalities and
                                 Management                   direct economic losses to property within one week after
                                 Specialist, GSU10            the Nepal earthquake at an accuracy of over 90%, and
                                                              help produce maps and information on building types,
                                                              distribution, and economic value in African cities, helping
                                                              the Bank to assess the level of investment in these cities.

Drones Kosovo                    Kathrin Kelm         GGSVP   Imaging and mapping land are important to property
(Mapping)                        Sr. Land                     rights and resource decisions, but conventional aerial
                                 Administration               surveys and national-level orthophotos can cost millions
                                 Specialist,                  of dollars and take more than a year to deliver. The
                                 GSULN                        Bank supported using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs,
                                                              or drones) to collect aerial imagery, and produce high-
                                                              level orthophotos and accurate maps and 3D models
                                                              at a fraction of the cost and time. The team used UAVs
                                                              to map and develop in under a week orthophotos of a
                                                              village where war widows lack formal property titles, and
                                                              Kosovo’s National Cadastral Agency helped these women
                                                              register their rights. UAVs were used in a fast growing city
                                                              to support a government program to legalize property
                                                              rights. The team used UAVs to develop within 24 hours
                                                              a 3D map of an area where an archeological site had
                                                              stopped construction of the national highway, providing
                                                              accurate information for rerouting of the road and
                                                              preservation of the site.

Assessments                      A.K. Farhad          South   The April 2015 earthquake damaged bridges in Nepal,
and Design of                    Ahmed, Sr.            Asia   but assessing bridge conditions and devising remedial
Earthquake                       Transport                    measures was difficult given postquake physical and
Affected Bridges in              Specialist, GTI06            institutional constraints. The Bank team worked with
Nepal                                                         the client to develop an Android-supported, tablet-
                                                              based application for assessing quake-affected bridges.
                                                              This application was designed to record each bridge
                                                              element, survey the condition of each component,
                                                              measure the extent and severity of defects, and prioritize
                                                              remedial measures. It included photos to corroborate
                                                              information and help produce the best remedial designs.
                                                              The team recruited 11 engineers to conduct the bridge
                                                              surveys, and remedial designs were completed and the
                                                              Bridge Management System updated. Lessons helped
                                                              to develop another tablet-based application for the
                                                              supervision of bridges.




14   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
Innovation Title        Team Lead(s)       VPU                            Description

Big Data for          Wei Winnie          GGSVP     Road agencies face challenges in monitoring road
User-focused          Wang, Transport               conditions and developing cost-effective asset
Identification of     Specialist, GTI03             management strategies given limited funds. In
Road Infrastructure                                 collaboration with Belarussian authorities, the Bank
Condition and                                       developed a smartphone app to determine user-
Safety Concerns                                     focused road condition indicators and safety concerns
                                                    by extracting information from big data collected
                                                    from drivers and road users. Using accelerometers in
                                                    smartphones, this app automatically evaluates pavement
                                                    roughness and detects road bumps, and users can
                                                    upload pictures of potholes, black spots, and accidents.
                                                    This crowdsourcing approach provides wider and more
                                                    frequent coverage of road networks, supports better
                                                    decisions on asset management, and enhances citizen
                                                    engagement and government accountability. The team
                                                    is working with the Global Solutions Group for Road
                                                    Asset Management to make the mobile app universally
                                                    applicable.

Code for Resilience   Keiko Sato,         Climate   An initiative of GFDRR’s DRM Innovation Labs, Code
                      Disaster Risk       Change    for Resilience (CfR) explores ways to introduce scalable,
                      Management           CCSA     technological innovations to strengthen community
                      Specialist,                   resilience to natural disasters within World Bank
                      GFDRR                         operations. Continuing outreach to nine countries in
                                                    2014, the CfR team sought further collaboration with
                                                    World Bank operations in 2015. Given demand from Bank
                                                    teams for innovation in hydromet services, CfR provided
                                                    seed funding and TA to codesign innovations, especially
                                                    open source approaches for hydromet. For example,
                                                    the team helped Haiti use open technology to collect
                                                    and aggregate data to improve decision making and
                                                    information for flood risk management and food security
                                                    operations. CfR helped Togo to prepare for floods by
                                                    supporting development of an innovative model for
                                                    upstream flow prediction, dam operations, downstream
                                                    flow prediction, and early warning. Early testing showed
                                                    excellent results.

TransFORM/            Gerald Paul         GGSVP     Launched by President Kim and China’s Minister
China Transport       Ollivier, Senior              of Finance, TransFORM sought to make transport
Transformation        Infrastructure                safer, cleaner, and more affordable for development
& Innovation          Specialist, GTI02             in China, and share China’s experiences with other
Knowledge                                           countries, relying on pilots; engagement with academia,
Platform              Ke Fang,                      practitioners, and development institutions on strategic
                      Lead Urban                    topics; and accelerated knowledge exchange (e.g., 21
                      Transport                     workshops and 1,600 people trained through distance
                      Specialist,                   learning). Among other activities, TransFORM promoted
                       GTIDR                        innovative solutions of key pilots, including employer-
                                                    based voluntary green commuting initiatives in Beijing;
                                                    development of an electric vehicle business model
                                                    in Wuhan; and use of open data for transit analysis,
                                                    information service, and transport service analysis in
                                                    Zhengzhou and Nanchang.




                                                                        2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   15
Appendix A: Members of Selection Committees




Cross-VPU Committee

Name                       Represented VPU                       Title                        Unit

Michael Goldberg                 GGEVP                 Lead Operations Officer              GFMDR

Jeffrey Waite                   GGHVP                           Adviser                     GEDDR

Bilal H. Rahill                  GGSVP                         Director                    GGEND

Vijay Pillai                     AFRVP                          Adviser                     AFRVP

Rocio Castro                     EAPVP                          Adviser                     EAPVP

Roumeen Islam                    ECAVP                    Economic Adviser                  ECADE

Karin Erika Kemper               LCRVP                  Senior Regional Adviser             LCRVP

Najy Benhassinea                MNAVP                      Practice Manager                 GTCME

Uzma Basim                       SARVP                  Senior Country Officer              SACPA

* Nominated for cross-VPU committed but did not participate in scoring process




                                                                          2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   17
                    Longlisting Committee

                     Name                                                     Title                 Unit

                     Behnaz Bonyadian                                Operations Officer            OPSRR

                     Marcelo Donolo                              Senior Operations Officer         OPSRR

                     Meena Munshi                           Integrated LLI Engagement Leader       LLICC

                     Mattias K. A. Lundberg               Lead Specialist, Global Youth Programs   LLICC

                     Nadeem Mohammad                              Lead Operations Officer          LLIOP

                     Elena Gasol Ramos*                          Senior ICT Policy Specialist      GTI09

                     Yelena Fadeyeva                             Senior Operations Officer         LLIOP

                     Victor Mulas                                Senior Operations Officer         LLIIL

                     * In cross-support capacity to LLIIL for this activity




18   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
Appendix B: 125 Eligible Nominations




                                                                          Geographic Focus
Nomination Title                                  Responsible VPU     (Country, Regional, Global)
Overcoming the Collateral Constraint for
Women Entrepreneurs: Psychometric Testing              AFR                        Ethiopia
in Ethiopia

Guinea Power PPP                                       AFR                         Guinea

Engaging Africa’s Journalists for Sustainable
                                                       AFR                        Regional
Fisheries
Innovations to Boost Fisheries Benefits in West
                                                       AFR                        Regional
Africa (P156759)
Regional Study on Confronting Drought in
                                                       AFR                        Regional
Africa’s Drylands
Madagascar ACGF Financial Services Project
                                                       AFR                     Madagascar
(P109607)
Data-Driven Decisions in FCS: The Sudan
                                                       AFR                         Sudan
Evidence Base Program
Obtaining Health Results at Scale in
                                                       AFR                      Cameroon
Cameroon
Preparation of Saving One Million Lives
                                                       AFR                        Nigeria
Program for Results
CAR Emergency Public Services Response
                                                       AFR              Central African Republic
Project (P149884)
Urban Fragility and Violence in Africa—A
                                                       AFR                        Regional
Cross-country Analysis
Kenya Devolution Support Program—PforR
                                                       AFR                         Kenya
Preparation

Urgent Response to the 2015 Malawi Floods              AFR                         Malawi




                                                                    2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   19
                                                                            Geographic Focus
 Nomination Title                                     Responsible VPU   (Country, Regional, Global)
 Local Government and Service Delivery
                                                           AFR                 South Sudan
 Project (LGSDP) Supervision
 Competition & Market Regulation in Kenya—
                                                           AFR                    Kenya
 From Analytics to Action

 São Tomé Investment Climate                               AFR                  Sao Tome

 Implementation Monitoring Mechanism (I2M)                 AFR                    Togo

 Code for Resilience                                      CCSA                    Global

 Commodity Market Outlook                                 DECVP                   Global

 PovcalNet/Global Poverty and Shared
                                                          DECVP                   Global
 Prosperity Monitoring 2015
 National Video Contest for Primary School
                                                           EAP                   Vietnam
 Teachers in Vietnam

 East Asia and Pacific Clean Stove Initiative              EAP                   Regional

 China: Jiangsu Water and wastewater Project
                                                           EAP                    China
 (P096926)
 Russian Education Aid for Development
                                                           ECA                    Russia
 (READ)
 Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Program
                                                           ECA                   Regional
 for Aral Sea Basin
 Poland—Enhancement of Public Sector
                                                           ECA                    Poland
 Accounting and Finance
 Framework for Sub-national Infrastructure
                                                           ECA                   Romania
 Investment Programs
 Kazakhstan Technology Commercialization
                                                           ECA                 Kazakhstan
 Project (TCP) (P090695)

 End to Gas Flaring Video                                 ECRVP                   Global

 PabsyLive                                                ECRVP                   Global

 Pilot Auction Facility (PAF)                              GCC                    Global

 Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition (P154382)             GCC                    Global

 Bangladesh Public Procurement Reform
                                                          GGEVP                Bangladesh
 Project II
 Making Housing More Affordable for the Poor
                                                          GGEVP                 Kyrgyzstan
 in Kyrgyzstan

 Project Greenback (P156193)                              GGEVP                   Global

 Pick Remit Smartphone App                                GGEVP                   Global




20   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
                                                                        Geographic Focus
Nomination Title                                Responsible VPU     (Country, Regional, Global)

Kenya National Agriculture Insurance Program        GGEVP                        Kenya

Enhancing Tax Compliance in Costa Rica Using
Big Data: Innovative Experiment and Quasi-          GGEVP                     Costa Rica
Experimental Tools
Financial Infrastructure Development Network
                                                    GGEVP                     Philippines
(FIDN Launch)
India MSME Growth Innovation and Inclusive
                                                    GGEVP                         India
Finance project (P151544)
Performance Monitoring, Beneficiary
Feedback and Transparency Innovations in the
                                                    GGEVP                       Pakistan
Punjab Public Management Reform Program
(P132234)
Second Public Financial Management Reform
                                                    GGEVP                     Afghanistan
Project (P120427/P150632)
Tanzania Open Government and Public
                                                    GGEVP                       Tanzania
Financial Management DPO (P133798)
Central Asia Tax Program—Implementing RBA
                                                    GGEVP                       Regional
in Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan
Strengthening Citizen Engagement through
Complaint Handling Mechanisms (CHMs) in             GGEVP                      Palestine
Palestine

Chile Tax Reform (P151824)                          GGEVP                         Chile

Applying Behavioral Insights to Improve Tax
                                                    GGEVP                        Poland
Compliance in Poland
Enhancing Financial Capability in Ebola
                                                    GGEVP                       Regional
affected countries
Piloting Multi-country DPOs to Tackle
                                                    GGEVP           Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire
Regional Policy Challenges
Real-time Tracking of Market Prices in South
                                                    GGEVP                    South Sudan
Sudan
Estimating Poverty with Household Surveys in
                                                    GGEVP                       Regional
Less than 60 Minutes

Applying Behavioral Insights in Policy              GGEVP                        Global

Using WBG-developed Software to Improve
Online G2B Service Delivery in Africa and FCS       GGEVP                       Regional
Countries

Great Lakes Trade Facilitation                      GGEVP                       Regional

Boosting Youth Participation in Governance
                                                    GGEVP                       Regional
through ICT in Bulgaria and Beyond
Strategic Data Dissemination Blogging with
                                                    GGEVP                       Regional
the LAC Equity Lab




                                                                  2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   21
                                                                            Geographic Focus
 Nomination Title                                     Responsible VPU   (Country, Regional, Global)
 Economic Empowerment of Adolescent Girls
                                                          GGHVP                   Liberia
 and Young Women
 Supporting the School-to-University Transition
                                                          GGHVP                  Romania
 of Romanian Disadvantaged Students
 Think! Technology and Incentives for Capacity
 Strengthening, Accountability, and Results in            GGHVP                    Haiti
 Fragile Contexts
 Jamaica Education Transformation Capacity
                                                          GGHVP                  Jamaica
 Building Project (P107407)

 Africa Early Learning Partnership (P144137)              GGHVP                  Regional

 Reproductive Health Vouchers Program in
                                                          GGHVP                  Uganda
 Uganda (P144102)
 Working with Counterparts to Use Evidence to
                                                          GGHVP                 Myanmar
 Improve Programs
 Strengthening Social Safety Net Project SSNP
                                                          GGHVP                   Egypt
 (P145699)
 Insuring the Poorest—Innovative Safety Net
                                                          GGHVP                  Uganda
 Design
 Ethiopia: Urban Productive Safety Net
                                                          GGHVP                  Ethiopia
 Program
 Operating in High-risk Environments:
                                                          GGSVP          Central African Republic
 The LONDO Project in CAR (P152512)
 Bangladesh Rural Electrification and
                                                          GGSVP                Bangladesh
 Renewable Energy (RERED)—Minigrid
 IDA Guarantee Mobilizes $500 million
 Commercial Financing for Kenya Power and                 GGSVP                   Kenya
 Lighting Company Debt Restructuring
 Global Geothermal Development Plan
                                                          GGSVP                   Global
 (P130625)

 Value Chain Approach to Ghana’s Challenges               GGSVP                   Ghana

 Rejuvenating Mozambique’s Forests and
                                                          GGSVP               Mozambique
 Landscapes
 Piauí Productive and Social Inclusion DPL and
                                                          GGSVP                   Brazil
 IPF (P156131)
 Programmatic Approach to Peace and Post-
                                                          GGSVP                 Colombia
 Conflict Consolidation (P153567)
 Promoting Resilient Infrastructure across
                                                          GGSVP                  Regional
 sectors in South Asia (P153443)
 National Violence Monitoring System
                                                          GGSVP                 Indonesia
 (Indonesia) (P127133)

 Drones: New Mapping Solution (P101214)                   GGSVP                  Kosovo




22   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
                                                                        Geographic Focus
Nomination Title                                Responsible VPU     (Country, Regional, Global)
From Satellites to Settlements: Mapping
                                                    GGSVP                     Philippines
Slums from Outer Space in Metro Manila
Iraq Emergency Operation for Development
                                                    GGSVP                          Iraq
(P155732)
CityStrength Diagnostic: A Multisectoral Tool
                                                    GGSVP                       Ethiopia
That Aims to Enhance Resilience in Cities
Saweto Dedicated Grant Mechanism: Building
Real Capacity through Participatory Project         GGSVP                         Peru
Preparation (P148499)
Afghanistan’s National Solidarity Program
                                                    GGSVP                     Afghanistan
(NSP) Jobs for peace initiative (P117103)
Tanzania’s Local Government Revenue
                                                    GGSVP                       Tanzania
Collection Information System (LGRCIS)
Testing Evidence-based Approaches to Foster
Collective Action in Addressing Intimate            GGSVP                      Honduras
Partner Violence
TransFORM/China Transport Transformation &
                                                    GGSVP                        China
Innovation Knowledge Platform (P129850)

Open Traffic                                        GGSVP                        Global

Transport Contribution to the Africa Climate
                                                    GGSVP                       Regional
Business Plan
Big Data for User-focused Identification of
Road Infrastructure Condition and Safety            GGSVP                       Belarus
Concerns (P153697)
Mainstreaming ICT in Results Verification of
                                                    GGSVP                       Vietnam
Water PforRs
Confronting Climate Uncertainty in Water
Planning and Project Design—The Decision            GGSVP                        Global
Tree Framework
Multi Sectoral Action for Nutrition (MSAN)—
                                                    GGSVP                       Pakistan
P158769
32nd Joint Colloquium on International
                                                     ICSID                       Global
Arbitration
Colombia Green Growth and Sustainable
                                                     LCR                       Colombia
Development DPL
Brazil: Rapid Agriculture Risk Management
                                                     LCR                          Brazil
Review (P155386)

UY SCD                                               LCR                        Uruguay

Country Disaster Risk Profiles (TF014499)            LCR                         Global

Indigenous Peoples and Afro-Descendants
                                                     LCR                        Regional
Engagement in LAC

Strengthening the Capacity of Procuradoria           LCR                          Brazil




                                                                  2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   23
                                                                            Geographic Focus
 Nomination Title                                     Responsible VPU   (Country, Regional, Global)
 Rural Water and Sanitation Information System
                                                           LCR                   Regional
 (SIASAR)
 Caribbean Growth Forum preparation for
                                                           LCR                   Regional
 Phase II (P159034)

 Road to Lima                                              LCR                   Regional

 Brazil: Skills and Jobs (P133162)                         LCR                    Brazil

 African Mining Legislation Atlas (AMLA)
                                                          LEGVP                  Regional
 Project (P155194/P150234)
 Saudi Arabia Energy Efficiency Financing RAS
                                                           MNA                 Saudi Arabia
 (P143872)

 Syria Damage and Needs Assessment (DNA)                   MNA                     Syria

 India Partial Risk Sharing Facility (PRSF) for
                                                           SAR                     India
 Energy Efficiency

 Study of Electricity Dispatch Efficiency                  SAR                 Bangladesh

 India—Energy Efficient Urban Street Lighting
                                                           SAR                     India
 Knowledge Activity (P149482)
 BAN Climate Resilient Participatory
                                                           SAR                 Bangladesh
 Afforestation Reforestation Project

 Impact of Afghanistan REDP on Rural Women                 SAR                 Afghanistan

 FATA Rural Livelihoods and Community
                                                           SAR                   Pakistan
 Infrastructure Project (P126833)
 Creating Demand for Modernizing Public
                                                           SAR                     India
 Financial Management in India
 Social and Economic Empowerment of Youth
                                                           SAR                   Pakistan
 through ICT Solutions
 Development of National Platform for Risk
                                                           SAR                   Pakistan
 Assessment and CAT Risk (P132625)
 Rebuilding Local Government in War-torn
                                                           SAR                   Sri Lanka
 Areas of Sri Lanka

 Pakistan: FATA Urban Centers Project                      SAR                   Pakistan

 Railway Engagement in India: EDFC 1-3
                                                           SAR                     India
 Program and RIDF Projects
 Assessments and Design of Earthquake
                                                           SAR                    Nepal
 Affected Bridges in Nepal
 KP, Federally Administered Tribal Areas(FATA)
                                                           SAR                   Pakistan
 and Balochistan MDTF (P120179)
 Disaster Risk Management Intermediation
                                                          TREVP                   Global
 Platform

 FX Hedging for Emerging Market Currency                  TREVP                   Global




24   •   2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights
                                                                     Geographic Focus
Nomination Title                             Responsible VPU     (Country, Regional, Global)
Contingent Liabilities Risk Management in
                                                 TREVP                      Indonesia
Indonesia

BlueTrack Modeling Lab: Risk Decomposition       TREVP                        Global

Integrated Strategic Asset Allocation            TREVP                        Global

Core Technical Advisory (CTA) Program            TREVP                        Global




                                                               2016 Innovation Awards: Program Highlights   •   25
