INDEPENDENT EVALUATION GROUP




Work Program and Budget (FY17)
              and
   Indicative Plan (FY18–19)




           May 25, 2016
                    ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AAA     Analytic and Advisory Activities
CAS     Country Assistance Strategy
CCSA    Cross-Cutting Solution Areas
CLEAR   Centers for Learning Evaluation and Results
CLR     Completion and Learning Review
CODE    Committee on Development Effectiveness
CPE     Country Program Evaluation
CPF     Country Partnership Framework
CSC     WBG Corporate Scorecard
DEC     Development Economics Vice Presidency
DGE     Director General, Evaluation
DPF     Development Policy Financing
ECD     Evaluation Capacity Development
ECG     Evaluation Cooperation Group
FCS     Fragile and conflict-affected situation
FY      Fiscal year
GP      Global Practice
IBRD    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICR     Implementation Completion and Results Report
ICRR    ICR Review
IDA     International Development Association
IEG     Independent Evaluation Group
IFC     International Finance Corporation
IPDET   International Program for Development Evaluation Training
IPF     Investment Project Financing
IT      Information technology
MAR     Management Action Record
M&E     Monitoring and evaluation
MDG     Millennium Development Goal
MIC     Middle income countries
MIGA    Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
PCR     Project Completion Report
PER     Project Evaluation Report
P4R     Program for Results
PLR     Performance and Learning Review
PPAR    Project Performance Assessment Report
RAP     Results and Performance (IEG annual report)
SCD     Systematic Country Diagnostic
SDGs    Sustainable Development Goals
VFM     Value for Money
WB      World Bank
WBG     World Bank Group
XPSR    Expanded Project Supervision Report
Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................................................ I
I.          STRATEGIC CONTEXT .................................................................................................................................... 1
       1. CHANGING INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL LANDSCAPE .............................................................................................1
       2. IEG STRATEGIC DIRECTIONS ................................................................................................................................2
II.         ENHANCING IEG IMPACT .............................................................................................................................. 5
       1.   CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES ......................................................................................................................5
       2.   INNOVATING AND REALIGNING BUSINESS LINES..................................................................................................6
       3.   ENHANCING QUALITY AND CREDIBILITY ............................................................................................................11
       4.   ENHANCING KNOWLEDGE AND COMMUNICATIONS ...........................................................................................13
III.        PROPOSED WORK PROGRAM FOR FY17-19 ................................................................................................ 15
       1.   MAJOR EVALUATIONS .........................................................................................................................................15
       2.   PROJECT EVALUATIONS.......................................................................................................................................21
       3.   VALIDATION PRODUCTS ......................................................................................................................................21
       4.   LEARNING AND KNOWLEDGE SHARING .............................................................................................................21
       5.   OTHER EVALUATION WORK ...............................................................................................................................22
       6.   EVALUATION CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT .............................................................................................................23
IV.         STAFFING AND BUDGET .............................................................................................................................. 25
       1. HUMAN RESOURCES ..........................................................................................................................................25
       2. BUDGET PROPOSAL ...........................................................................................................................................26
       3. ACCOUNTABILITY FRAMEWORK........................................................................................................................30
ANNEX 1: IEG RESULTS FRAMEWORK .................................................................................................................. 32
ANNEX 2: DESCRIPTION OF IEG STRATEGIC ENGAGEMENT AREAS ....................................................................... 34
ANNEX 3: SELECTIVITY FRAMEWORK FOR IEG EVALUATION TOPICS .................................................................... 39
ANNEX 4: GAP ANALYSIS OF RECENT IEG EVALUATIONS ...................................................................................... 41
       RECENT IEG EVALUATIONS BY SECTOR (FY10-16) .................................................................................................41
       RECENT IEG EVALUATIONS BY THEME (FY10-16) ..................................................................................................42
ANNEX 5: PROPOSED WORK PROGRAM FOR FY17-19.......................................................................................... 43
       TABLE 1: WORK PROGRAM BY BUSINESS LINE .........................................................................................................43
       TABLE 2: MAJOR EVALUATIONS AND LEARNING PRODUCTS BY OBJECTIVES ...........................................................45
       TABLE 3: MAJOR EVALUATIONS BY INSTITUTION, WBG STRATEGIC FOCUS, AND IDA SPECIAL THEME..................47
ANNEX 6: INDICATIVE LIST OF IEG LEARNING AND KNOWLEDGE SHARING ACTIVITIES IN FY16 ........................... 48
ANNEX 7: LIST OF DGE STATEMENTS TO WBG EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS AND MANAGEMENT IN FY16 ................... 50
                     Independent Evaluation Group Work Program and Budget (FY17)
                                      and Indicative Plan (FY18-19)

                           Report to the Board from the Budget Committee and the
                                  Committee on Development Effectiveness

                                             Joint Meeting of June 10, 2016



        The Budget Committee and the Committee on Development Effectiveness (the committees) met to
consider the Independent Evaluation Group Work Program and Budget (FY17) and Indicative Plan
(FY18-19) (R2016-0101[IDA/R2016-0128, IFC/R2016-0157, MIGA/R2016-0034]).

         The committees were supportive of IEG’s work program and budget (FY17) and Indicative Plan
(FY18-19) and reiterated the important role that IEG plays in enhancing oversight and accountability.
Members welcomed IEG’s focus on strategic directions, the shift from a product-driven approach to a
learning mindset, and IEG’s ongoing commitment to improve its engagement with Management and
operational staff at all stages of the work process. Members encouraged IEG to better align its work program
to that of the WBG and to consider demand and selectivity in designing its work plan in order to focus on
core issues pertaining to development impact. Members looked forward to seeing more real-time
evaluations, given their potential for impact and their relevance to the Board and staff. Members also
recognized that broader evaluations were still needed, particularly on cross-cutting themes. A number of
members commented that the work program was too ambitious and cautioned against overburdening staff
and limiting their capacity to properly absorb IEG products. Members welcomed IEG’s efforts to
harmonize its evaluation instruments across the WBG, with some noting that due attention should be given
to the distinctions of each institution’s business model. In this respect, some supported IFC and MIGA
PPARs given the accountability role they play, while others suggested the instrument be reviewed in FY17
to assess the products’ content, resource impact on IFC and MIGA, and whether they achieve the objective
of enhancing accountability and learning. The committees agreed that issues of selectivity, bunching, utility
and credibility of IEG products should be addressed by CODE in the context of Recommendation 6 of the
External Review of IEG action plan.

       Members requested further detail on the types of mechanisms IEG planned to use to assess WBG
demand for IEG products. They urged IEG to ensure earlier engagement with WBG Management on its
work program and indicative plan before the draft comes to the first CODE informal meeting on the subject.
They also asked that CODE be apprised of WBG Management’s input and associated discussions so the
committee could better understand areas of agreement/disagreement.

        The committees urged IEG to address bunching, to put in place mechanisms that could track IEG’s
expenditures against its deliverables, and to avoid backlogs that could potentially affect IEG’s budget.
Members encouraged IEG to review its timelines and to use its quarterly business review process as a way
of monitoring bunching. Members welcomed IEG’s achievement of Expenditure Review targets and urged
IEG to continue to improve efficiencies in travel and consultancy spending in order to catch up with wider
WBG trends.





    This report is not an approved record.
                           IEG WORK PROGRAM AND BUDGET (FY17)
                                          AND
                                 INDICATIVE PLAN (FY18-19)


                                              Executive Summary

Strategic Directions for FY17-19

1.      To achieve the twin goals, the WBG needs to better understand what works and the reasons
why, and draw lessons and good practices from experience. IEG has taken several steps over the
past few years to re-align our work with the new WBG strategic directions, and generate the critical
evaluation evidence needed to accelerate WBG development effectiveness. We have introduced
new strategic objectives and a new results framework; refocused our work on three Strategic
Engagement Areas of Inclusive Growth, Sustained Service Delivery for the Poor, and
Environmental Sustainability; and continued to improve and innovate our business lines.

2.       The External Review of IEG challenged us to do more: “while IEG is evolving and is at the
beginning of a period of innovation and renewal, it is critically important that IEG make more substantive changes.”
In particular, IEG was urged to pay greater attention to utilization of its work, and the value of
fewer, shorter, and sharper products that build in double-loop learning.

3.      Deepening the influence of IEG’s work and increasing WBG staff use of IEG products is a
top priority. To this end, we will focus on the following four key issues in FY17-19.

        Innovation and realignment of IEG business lines – including stronger alignment of
         major evaluations with WBG strategic priorities; improving the process of engaging with
         WBG Management and building in more feedback loops during evaluation work; making
         reports shorter with the introduction of strict page limits; and improving the efficiency and
         effectiveness of the project-level validation system.

        Enhancing the quality and credibility of IEG work – including deepening our quality
         assurance framework; developing a new methods function under the Director General to
         provide strategic and technical leadership to enhance our methods and data work, including
         strengthening methodologies related to the assessment of inclusive growth, gender equality,
         and value for money; and continued updating of standards and tools for data, including
         more use of beneficiary feedback mechanisms.

        Improving learning and knowledge sharing – through a significant redesign of how we
         deliver learning and knowledge services; developing stronger knowledge partnerships with
         the Results Measurement and Evidence Stream, Global Practices, and other technical
         operational units; upgrading our knowledge management tools and systems; and introducing
         more innovative formats and templates to make IEG reports more readable and accessible.

        Managing human and financial resources more effectively – with a focus on
         implementing and updating IEG’s strategic staffing plan, completing the organizational
         renewal, and continued strengthening of budget management and sequencing of report
         delivery.
                                                - ii -


Proposed Work Program

4.       Major Evaluations. In line with CODE’s recommendation for increased selectivity and
fewer large evaluations, IEG will deliver eight major new evaluations and one annual synthesis of
results and performance each year.

      The evaluations that CODE approved in last year’s work program for FY17-18 have all been
       retained (with the exception that the earlier proposed evaluation on Informal Sector has
       been dropped, as this portfolio has now been largely covered in other evaluations). The
       timing of some of the earlier approved evaluations has shifted, in response to suggestions
       from CODE and WBG Management, and as part of IEG’s focus to reduce report bunching.

      The proposed evaluations provide strong coverage of most of the WBG strategic focus
       areas, as set out in the “Forward Look,” the FY17-19 Strategic Planning, Budgeting, and
       Performance Review (W) process, the IFC Business Strategy and Outlook FY17-19, and the
       provisional IDA18 Special Themes. There are a few strategic areas where we are not
       planning major evaluations, but will address through Project Performance Assessment
       Reports (PPARs) and learning activities -- such as leadership of global and regional issues
       (like pandemics, natural disasters, climate change, and regional integration), and some IFC
       focus industries (like agribusiness and technology).

      In line with CODE’s guidance for a “One WBG” perspective, two-thirds of the evaluations
       cover all three WBG institutions, and 80 percent cover both World Bank and IFC.About
       three-quarters of the major evaluations will contribute to the first objective of the IEG
       results framework of deepening evidence about the results of WBG programs and activities.
       FY17 evaluations will focus on (1) early assessment of the shared prosperity goal, (2) rural
       non-farm economy, and (3) higher education in the Inclusive Growth area; (4) water
       supply and sanitation, and (5) urban transport in the Service Delivery area; and (6) the
       annual Results and Performance Report, with a thematic focus on Managing for Results.

      About one-quarter of the work program will focus on the second objective of generating
       evidence about the early implementation experience of the new WBG Strategy. FY17
       evaluations include: (1) the Systematic Country Diagnosis and Country Partnership
       Framework process; (2) IFC client engagement model; and (3) data for development.

5.       PPARs. As agreed last year, IEG will scale up the number of PPARs of World Bank
operations in FY17-19, in line with the earlier objective to cover about 20-25 percent of closed
projects to ensure robust learning and accountability for actual project performance (the coverage
rate fell to about 15 percent in FY14-15). IEG will continue with the pilot launched in FY15 to
conduct a small number of PPARs on IFC and MIGA investments.

6.     Validation of WBG Self-Evaluations. IEG will continue to validate WBG project
completion reports, and review options to improve and streamline the validation of Bank
Implementation Completion and Results Reports with CODE and Bank Management in FY17,
based on the recently completed evaluation of the WBG self-evaluation system. IEG will also
continue to review and validate the completion reports of country strategies.
                                                 - iii -


7.       Learning and Knowledge Sharing. IEG proposes to revamp this business line, based on the
recently completed stocktaking of the pilot experience with learning products over the past two
years. Key changes include: shifting from preparation of lengthy reports to short, timely, and more
user-friendly formats that respond to high priority staff demands; strengthening WBG engagement
and ownership by requiring upfront “joint ownership” with an operational counterpart that spells
out purpose, audience, scope, engagement plan, and actual use; deepening IEG staff skills related to
adult learning pedagogy; and creating a more streamlined and nimble process for effective delivery
of learning activities while ensuring strong managerial accountability for results and value for money.

8.      Evaluation Capacity Development (ECD). In line with earlier CODE guidance, IEG will
seek opportunities to deepen our contribution to ECD while ensuring that we maintain our focus
and resources on the independent evaluation mandate and support to WBG development
effectiveness. Our main engagement on ECD will continue to be the two ongoing large partnership
programs: Centers for Learning on Evaluation and Results (CLEAR), and the International Program
for Development Evaluation Training (IPDET). In addition, we will scale up the use of local
evaluation expertise on IEG evaluation teams where feasible, and promote increased attention to
ECD issues in WBG country strategy work, in collaboration with the relevant operational units.

Budget Request

9.      IEG’s FY17 work program is based on a total budget request of $34.6 million, comprising a
$33.8 million regular budget to be approved by the Board, and $0.8 million in trust funds. This
resource envelope is consistent with the flat budget framework agreed with the Board in FY12, and
adjusted to reflect the planned savings from IEG’s Expenditure Review that was approved by
CODE in FY14.

10.     In FY17-19, about 80 percent of resources will support the first objective of deepening
evidence about the results of WBG programs and activities; and about 20 percent will focus on the
second objective of generating evidence on the early implementation experience of the WBG
Strategy. The proposed spending trends are fully aligned with IEG’s strategic directions: the
proportion of spending on major evaluations declines from 25 percent in FY13 to 23 percent in
FY17-19, while the proportion of spending on other evaluation products increases from 11 to 13
percent, reflecting the increased selectivity on major evaluations, and corresponding scale up of
learning engagements and PPARs.

11.     In response to the earlier independent review of the FY13 work program and budget, IEG
has strengthened internal work programming and budget practices, and monitoring of expenditures
and outputs. These measures have contributed to reduction of cost over-runs on major evaluations
and achievement of the cost savings targets set out in IEG’s Expenditure Review. Nonetheless,
slippages and bunching of reports have persisted in FY15-16. IEG has put in place a firm program
to reduce bunching in FY17. Key measures include allocating more resources in the year before
delivery so that field work and data collection will be done earlier, better upfront planning of tasks,
and more effective tracking and reporting.

12.     The current independent review of the FY17 work program and budget is being finalized.
IEG will implement appropriate measures following the CODE and Budget Committee review and
discussion of the findings.
                                        I.    Strategic Context


1. Changing Internal and External Landscape

1.     IEG’s strategic directions in FY17-19 build on the recommendations of the External Review
of IEG completed in June 2015, and respond to significant changes that are underway internally in
the WBG and externally in the broader development community.

2.      During the past year, the WBG launched “Forward Look” discussions about the long-term
future of the WBG institutions. The Forward Look has identified five areas where the WBG must
evolve to remain fit for purpose for the coming 15 years:

      Improve its ability to meet the needs of all its client groups, including FCS, HICs, and
       supporting clients at subnational levels, and innovate to deliver better country solutions;
      Reinforce its leadership on global and regional issues and fulfill its potential for reducing the
       impact and cost of crises such as pandemics, natural disasters, and forced displacement, and
       bring new instruments to bear to mitigate or shorten protracted crises;
      Expand customized knowledge services, particularly South-South learning;
      Renew efforts to become more efficient and flexible to address client interest in a faster and
       more agile development partner; and
      Make the billions-to-trillions agenda a reality through significantly increasing mobilization,
       especially from the private sector, while also maintaining global leadership in mobilizing
       concessional finance and ensuring that it goes to those who most need it.

3.       As part of the Strategic Planning, Budgeting, and Performance Review (W) process, WBG
Management has identified the highest priority development issues facing country clients. For FY
17-19, Management has established the following strategic priorities to frame the focus of WBG
activities:

      Enhance effectiveness of core physical, human, institutional and natural capital investments
       to reach the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) through interventions that traditionally
       have had high poverty alleviation impacts including among others, energy, water and
       sanitation, infrastructure, health services, agriculture, macroeconomic stability, private sector
       participation, jobs, and fragility;
      Support clients’ efforts to mitigate and bolster resilience to climate change;
      Help clients diversify their economies away from commodities and build resilience systems
       to respond to the global economic slowdown;
      Reduce root causes of and promote resilience to prevent fragility, conflict, and violence;
      Reduce involuntary migration, and develop solutions to respond to disruptions that such
       migration causes;
                                                         -2-


        Support efforts to attract private sector resources to developing country clients and sectors
         that have traditionally not benefitted from them, helping to de-risk investment environments
         and support public-private partnerships; and
        Promote the economic inclusion of women and other traditionally disadvantaged groups.

4.       Within these broad directions, the IFC Strategy and Business Outlook FY17-19 emphasizes
industries and themes that contribute to productivity growth and address sources of risk. Priority
industries include infrastructure, agribusiness, financial and social inclusion, and technology. The
social inclusion elements, anchored in joint WBG strategies, are focused on universal access goals.
The priority cross-cutting themes (responding to the downturn, climate finance, and fragile and
conflict situations), and focus regions (Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and Middle East and North
Africa) represent areas of highest risk and opportunity.

5.       The first meeting of the IDA18 replenishment called for strong coherence between the
ongoing Forward Look discussions and IDA18. It agreed to carry forward and deepen the IDA17
focus on Climate Change, Gender Equality, and Fragility, Conflict and Violence. It also endorsed an
additional theme on Economic Transformation and Jobs, with an emphasis on new and upgraded
infrastructure, spatial economic transformation, private sector development, job creation, and
regional economic cooperation and integration. The meeting also endorsed the proposal to add a
fifth special theme on Governance and Institution Building, which could include an emphasis on
improving domestic resource mobilization, curbing illicit financial flows, strengthening public
financial management and improving public sector capacity.

6.      Externally, the global community is now focused on implementing an ambitious agenda
agreed in 2015 – the SDGs, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for Development, the
COP21 agreement on climate change, and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. At
the same time, it is confronting severe global challenges: weak global growth, increasing refugee
flows and rise in violent extremism, climate change, natural disasters, and health crises and
pandemics. Despite overall progress in poverty reduction over the past decade, progress at the
country level has been uneven. The goal of eliminating extreme poverty by 2030 will not be
achieved given the current global context without significant shifts in within-country inequalities.

7.      Global risks and volatility will continue to affect the financing and implementation of this
ambitious global agenda. Global growth disappointed again in 2015, slowing to 2.4 percent, and is
expected to recover at a slower pace than previously envisioned. A more protracted slowdown
across large emerging markets would have substantial spillovers to other developing economies, and
eventually hold back the recovery in advanced economies. A broad-based slowdown across
developing countries would pose a threat to hard-won gains in raising people out of poverty.

2. IEG Strategic Directions

8.        Against this backdrop, IEG faces a unique opportunity to deepen its impact, and make a
significant contribution to the successful implementation of the new WBG strategic directions. To
achieve the twin goals in a sustainable manner, the WBG need to better understand what works and
the reasons why, and draw lessons and good practices from experience to inform decision making
and future action. As the External Review noted, “The success of the Bank’s strategy depends heavily on
creating a results-oriented culture of learning within the WBG, and on the steady flow and use of high-quality, timely
                                                         -3-


and context-sensitive self and independent evaluation evidence about what does and does not work for cycles of course
corrections, continuous improvement and accountability across the larger Bank system….”

9.      Over the past two years, IEG has taken several important steps to better align our work with
the new WBG strategic directions, and more effectively generate relevant evaluation evidence to
accelerate WBG development effectiveness.

10.       First, we introduced two new strategic objectives in FY15 to guide our work:

         What Works: Deepening evidence about the results of WBG program and activities – and
          their effectiveness for accelerating growth, inclusiveness, and sustainability – to contribute
          to the achievement of the WBG’s interim target of 9 percent poverty and progress on
          shared prosperity by 2020; and
         Real-Time Learning: Generating evidence on the early implementation experience of the
          WBG Strategy to enable mid-course corrections and promote a stronger internal culture for
          results, accountability, and learning, with a focus on three areas: (1) Helping Clients Tackle
          the Most Important Development Challenges, (2) Becoming the Solutions Bank, and (3)
          Working in Partnership.

11.     Second, we developed a new Results Framework in FY15 to map out how we intend to
achieve these objectives – one of the first MDB evaluation agencies to do so. The Results
Framework includes a “chain of logic” on how the deliverables set out in the work program feed
into intermediate (1-3 years) and medium-term (4-6 years) outcomes. It also introduced key
performance indicators to assess both intermediate progress (have inputs and outputs been delivered
effectively, and are they generating the expected short-term outcomes?) and medium-term impact
(are the intermediate outcomes leading to the expected results required to achieve the objective?).

12.       The External Review provides several helpful suggestions to enhance the usefulness and
effectiveness of the Results Framework: “IEG’s current Results Framework assumes utilization; it does not
explain specifically how its products contribute to the achievement of the WBG’s goals or how the WBG could
optimally use its products or how its processes serve to achieve outcomes. IEG’s Results Framework, as it stands now,
is too heavily product focused (deliverables are almost all written reports) and lacks attention to the end-user. We
agree that utility lies as the heart of IEG’s theory of change, and plan to revise and strengthen the
Results Framework, and develop more meaningful key performance indicators, in early-FY17 as part
of the broader process of updating the IEG Mandate and TOR that CODE has endorsed. The
revised Results Framework will provide a stronger basis for CODE oversight of IEG results and
performance over the course of the fiscal year.

13.      Third, we introduced new Strategic Engagement Areas in FY16 to help develop a more
selective and coordinated program of work that will leverage IEG resources on “game changers”
where we can have maximum impact on the overall challenge of meeting the twin goals in a
sustainable manner. This new approach is designed to create a stronger platform for medium-term
strategic engagement with Management on critical development challenges. Following consultations
with internal and external stakeholders, we selected three Strategic Engagement Areas to underpin
the FY16-18 work program: Inclusive Growth, Sustained Service Delivery for the Poor, and
Environmental Sustainability (see Annex 2 for detailed descriptions). We propose to continue and
                                                -4-


deepen our focus on these strategic directions in FY17-19, as they align closely with the
WBG strategic priorities.

14.    Our strategic focus on Inclusive Growth and Environmental Sustainability will continue
beyond FY19, in view of the complexity of the issues and large scope of WBG assistance in these
areas. We expect to complete evaluation work on Service Delivery in FY18, and discuss options for
new Strategic Engagement Areas in FY17. These options may include Urban Development or
Resilience to address the nexus of growing challenges related to migration, resilience, disaster risk
management, and sustainable infrastructure development. These themes are well aligned with those
the WBG has identified as key priorities in the Forward Look and W Process.
                                                       -5-


                                       II.     Enhancing IEG Impact

1. Challenges and Opportunities

15.    The External Review of IEG provided a careful and thoughtful analysis of our performance
and impact. It stressed the importance of examining IEG within the larger WBG system of CODE,
the Board, and Management and staff – and found:


        “Many parts of this system are broken. As a result, the WBG does not have the robust cycles of learning,
        course corrections, continuous improvement and accountability necessary for progress towards achieving key
        development goals. IEG alone cannot change the larger WBG system and processes. We find that the
        WBG needs an overarching evaluation policy and stronger CODE oversight of IEG to enhance learning and
        accountability.”

The External Review noted that “IEG is an essential corporate asset” and “helps ensure the WBG’s
accountability and promotes learning by addressing questions about whether the WBG is doing things right and doing
the right things.” However, the panel emphasizes that “while IEG is evolving and is at the beginning of a
period of innovation and renewal, it is critically important that IEG make more substantive changes and develop a
more comprehensive renewal strategy.” In particular, IEG was urged to pay greater attention to utilization
of its work, and the value of fewer, shorter, and sharper products that build in “double loop
learning.”

16.     To enhance IEG’s impact, the External Review recommended: increased emphasis on
learning in IEG’s work; improvements in the quality, timing, volume, length, and utility of IEG
evaluations; deeper engagement with external experts and stakeholders; more and better strategic
engagement with Management, particularly during the process of developing recommendations;
more attention to capacity development; the need for regular independent reviews of IEG; clarity on
the Director General’s term; and more CODE oversight of IEG. CODE has put in place a road
map and action plan process to review each recommendation, and identify appropriate and time-
bound follow-up steps.

17.     The 2015 Client Survey also provides helpful data to review the relevance, quality, and impact
of IEG’s work. The findings, summarized below, show improvement with respect to the use and
influence of IEG products over the past four years.

       Independence: Perceived independence of IEG is rated very high across all audiences
        (around 85 percent of positive ratings), and has remained mostly stable for Staff and
        Externals, but has dropped a few points over the past two years among Board members.

       Relevance: IEG’s work continues to be perceived as very relevant to WBG’s mission
        across all three audiences of Board, Staff, and Externals, with topline ratings ranging
        between 85 and 95 percent.

       Quality: Among Staff who are reading IEG’s reports, topline satisfaction with the overall
        quality of IEG’s products (only asked to Staff) remains very high and fairly stable, at 74
        percent.
                                                   -6-


       Utility: Use of IEG’s products is most frequent among Board members: over three quarters
        have used one in the past year; compared with just over half among Staff.

       Impact: While solid majorities across the three audiences consider IEG’s work as having an
        impact on the WBG’s effectiveness, the proportions have decreased and are now nearing the
        2012 survey. Among Board members, perceived impact of IEG on effectiveness of the
        WBG’s activities is at its lowest in 2015, compared against the last four surveys.

       Influence: Influence of IEG’s reports in improving understanding of specific development
        topics continues to be viewed very positively among Board and Externals (about 85%
        overall), and is also well regarded among Staff (ranging from about 65 to 75%). However,
        influence ratings in helping to understand what works in development, and development
        results of projects/operations have declined among Board members.

18.     As with previous client surveys, WBG staff ratings are consistently less favorable than the
Board and external clients -- though there is significant variation, with lower grades and country-
based staff generally responding more favorably than higher grades and DC-based staff.

19.     Deepening the influence of IEG’s work and increasing WBG staff use of IEG products
remains a top priority. To this end, IEG continues to focus on three key issues: (1) innovation and
realignment of IEG business lines, (2) enhancing the quality and credibility of IEG work, and (3)
enhancing knowledge and communications.

2. Innovating and Realigning Business Lines

Sector and Thematic Evaluations

20.     IEG is continuing to introduce more innovative evaluation topics and approaches to be able
to respond more rapidly to the evolving business needs of the WBG, and support mid-course
corrections. Examples include the process evaluations to facilitate real-time learning of the early
implementation experiences of the new WBG country engagement model and the IFC client
engagement model in FY17, and the GP/CCSAs in FY19. Likewise, we are addressing the early
implementation experience with the twin goals. The FY17 WBG Support for Shared Prosperity in
Country Programs will assess how effectively the Bank is incorporating and implementing
distributional goals into operational programs – it complements the FY15 Poverty Focus of Country
Programs: Lessons from World Bank Experience.

21.     In line with the WBG shift to a development solutions culture, the major evaluations are also
focusing much more on: multi-sectoral themes that cut across GPs and CCSAs; full integration of
lending, knowledge, and convening services; and WBG collaboration and synergy – not only across
the three institutions, but also among operational units within each institution. For example, the
FY17 World Bank Support to Growing the Rural Non- Farm Economy, FY18 Public Finance for Investment and
Jobs, and FY18 Engaging Citizens illustrate this stronger “solutions” approach.

22.     In addition to making strategic choices on evaluation coverage and aligning topics with key
WBG priorities, IEG has been focusing on improving the process of engaging with Management
and building in more feedback loops during evaluation work. The External Review rightly notes
that “the current process of producing an evaluation and addressing evaluation recommendations creates an
                                                    -7-


unproductive, confrontational and adversarial dynamic between IEG and Management and diminishes learning and
accountability.” IEG therefore piloted a new engagement step in two evaluations in FY16 called
“ReACT Workhsops,” designed to create more conversation and debate around evaluation findings
and the formulation of recommendations. The ReACT Workshops have led to more strategic and
solutions-based dialogue -- Management has been able to focus more on absorbing the findings and
identifying appropriate solutions, and IEG has been able to craft more effective recommendations
that will produce better outcomes.

23.      In line with the CODE Road Map and Action Plan to follow up the External Review, IEG
will scale up the use of ReACT Workshops as well as test other processes in FY17 to deepen
Management engagement in evaluation work. IEG and Management have established a working
group to develop an action plan on next steps, which will be shared with CODE for information.
IEG and Management will then prepare a stock-taking report on the experience of the pilot
activities in end-FY17, including suggestions for any proposed changes to the current process for
recommendations, action plans, and the Management Action Record, for CODE review and
endorsement.

24.     IEG is putting in place new processes and incentives to ensure shorter and more concise
reports. As of July 1, 2016, strict page limits will be introduced for all products: 15 pages for the
approach paper, 5 pages for the executive summary, and 50 pages for the main text of an evaluation
(with relevant analytical material included in annexes).

Country Evaluations

25.    IEG has piloted a new “Clustered Country Program Evaluation” (CCPE) instrument,
designed to improve cost effectiveness, broaden country coverage, and promote cross-country and
South-South learning on certain common themes. The first pilot on resource rich countries was
completed in FY15, and the second one on small states will be distributed to CODE in end-FY16.

26.     As agreed in last year’s work program, IEG is undertaking a stocktaking to assess the
relevance, effectiveness, and efficiency of the CCPE pilot. The stocktaking will be finalized in early-
FY17, after CODE has reviewed the second pilot and shared its feedback. The initial work for the
stocktaking has highlighted the following issues:

       The clustered approach needs to be better understood and articulated, particularly the
        differences between what can be learned from a full country evaluation on the one hand,
        within a clustered approach, and from a series of country case studies in a thematic
        evaluation;
       There are some advantages to individual country CPEs, particularly to cover large countries;
       The clustered CPE approach is most likely to add value when there is a well-defined set of
        common characteristics that define the cluster to facilitate synthesis of cross-cutting lessons;
       The selection of countries is important and an option to consider in future is a regional
        cluster; and
       There is value in having a single analytical framework on the cluster theme when planning a
        group of CPEs.
                                                 -8-


27.     One possible way forward is to supplement the CCPE approach with a limited number of
case studies and desk studies during the synthesis phase, to provide a richer and broader perspective,
and to bring in some of the advantages of a thematic approach while also retaining a whole country
perspective in how the analysis is conducted. The use of additional case studies was a positive
aspect of the resource rich CCPE, as the Chile and Botswana case studies were referred frequently
to during the lesson learning process.

Project-Level Evaluations

28.      IEG reviewed and updated the methodology and procedures for World Bank Project
Performance Assessment Reports (PPARs) in FY16 to make this a more relevant, rigorous and self-
standing analysis that can bring deeper insights and lessons to Bank management and operational
staff. The revisions drew upon a range of pilot PPARs carried out in FY15 in which innovative use
of technology and local evaluators was made. IEG has also invested in more effective ways of
disseminating the lessons and findings from this product line. IEG plans to continue improvements
in FY17, with continued use of more rigorous methods, improved PPAR template to enhance
readability and accessibility, and greater emphasis on outreach.

29.    IEG launched a pilot in FY15-16 to apply the World Bank PPAR methodology to a small
number of IFC and MIGA operations, in line with our objective for harmonization of evaluation
instruments across the three institutions. Six PPARs were completed in FY15 and eight are
expected for FY16. As agreed in last year’s work program, IEG has completed a stocktaking of the
experience, and implications for accountability and learning of this new product in IFC and MIGA.
Key findings include:

      The PPARs have added a new element of transparency and accountability by sharing
       project-level evaluation information with the Board (who otherwise receive no individual
       assessments of project-level results and performance of IFC and MIGA operations, unlike
       with World Bank operations, but only aggregated performance data).

      The PPARs -- and their distribution to the Board -- have incentivized increased
       learning and reflection on development effectiveness between IFC operational teams
       and IEG. Issues of discussion have included: how the structure of investments may affect
       IFC’s incentives to pursue project development objectives; the timing and speed of building
       the client’s environmental and social capacity in the case of large, complex and modular
       investments with significant environmental and social risks; and the role and use of
       economic analysis in projects that benefit from government subsidies.

      Independent, field-based evaluations can provide a deeper and more accurate
       assessment of development effects compared to desk reviews (which form the basis for
       IEG’s validation of IFC and MIGA’s project completion reports). Field work allows for
       independently collected data and information on stakeholders and beneficiaries perspective
       to better understand broader impacts of IFC and MIGA projects.

30.      The stocktaking flagged that the “first generation” of PPARs had high transaction costs, as
IEG and IFC spent time developing and discussing the overall approach and methodology, and
addressing confidentiality concerns about client and project information and the security
classification for each PPAR. IEG, IFC, and MIGA have now clarified the protocol for selecting,
                                                 -9-


conducting, and disclosing PPARs, which will contribute to lower transaction cost and increased
efficiency. IEG proposes to continue with IFC and MIGA PPARs in the FY17-19 work program,
and will seek opportunities to engage IFC and MIGA Management in discussion of selected PPARs
that raise important policy dimensions.

Project Validation

31.     As reviewed in the recent completed Behind the Mirror – A Report on the Self-Evaluation Systems
of the World Bank Group, there is need to reform the Implementation Completion and Results Report
(ICR) system to correct the incentives and signals surrounding self-evaluation. Staff perceive that
the prevailing interpretation of the IEG/OPCS harmonized objectives-based approach to rating and
validating ICRs limits the appetite for innovation and causes inflexibility for project management.
The ICR system should better account for unintended positive and negative outcomes, beneficiaries'
perspectives, and unforeseeable shocks in how results are measured and projects are rated. There is
a need to promote more constructive interactions between IEG and operational departments over
project validations without losing sight of IEG’s accountability function.

32.     Following CODE’s review of Behind the Mirror, Management will develop its Action Plan to
implement the agreed recommendations – and IEG will develop complementary actions to improve
the validation process within IEG. These actions will be reviewed with CODE in FY17, including
the scope for streamlining the system and options for moving to sampling of ICR Reviews, rather
than the current 100 percent coverage. The analysis of options will take into account the data
requirements of the Corporate Scorecard and the corporate goal of tracking unit-level performance.

33.     IEG has eliminated its backlog of reviews of the World Bank Implementation Completion
and Results Reports (ICRRs) after implementing the agreed actions spelled out in last year’s work
program. This resulted in 93 percent of the FY15 ICRR portfolio informing the 2015 RAP. More
recently, there has been a temporary slippage in the processing of ICRRs due to delays and technical
problems with the new ICRR IT platform; however, we expect the system to be functioning
smoothly soon, leading to the same level of ICRR completion for the 2016 RAP.

34.     To ensure that ICR Reviews generate the key data to assess WBG progress on the twin
goals, IEG is introducing a system of markers in the ICR Review process to identify project
relevance to, and measurement of, impact with respect to gender in development, poverty targeting,
and distributional goals. These will be formulated to provide quick guidance on the extent to which
projects address these issues, and facilitate more in-depth analysis through screening the relevant
portfolio.

35.     IEG continued to update the framework for the self-evaluation system of IFC and MIGA
projects. We completed discussions with IFC on the guidelines for revised advisory Project
Completion Reports (PCRs) and investment Expanded Project Supervision Reports (XPSRs). The
new PCR guidelines were introduced in January 2016, supported by joint IFC-IEG training. The
launch of online training is planned in FY17. The revised XPSR guidelines were piloted in FY16
and will be fully implemented in FY17, with training planned in the coming year. IEG and MIGA
completed and tested guidance for a new MIGA product (non-honoring of financial obligations).
This guidance will be included into the revision of Project Evaluation Reports (PERs) in MIGA,
planned to start in FY17. In the process of the guidelines revision, progress was made in aligning
                                                - 10 -


the private sector project evaluation frameworks with those of the Bank, while reflecting the
differences in their business models and approaches.

Learning Products

36.     In line with the earlier guidance from CODE, IEG has accelerated its focus on learning and
knowledge sharing. After a period of piloting in FY14-15, IEG developed in FY15 guidelines for
the definition, selection, and processing of learning products. In FY16, IEG delivered twelve major
learning products that synthesized IEG evaluation findings. Examples include Maximizing
Development Impact for IDA, WBG Transformational Engagements, and a series on operational
dimensions of Development Policy Financing (see Annex 5 for full list).

37.     In addition to these major products, IEG continued to deliver a wide range of brief, “just-in-
time” learning products, often at the request of WBG technical units. Recent examples include
lessons for WBG response to humanitarian crises; synthesis of IEG findings for the Financing for
Development Conference in Addis, and the United Nations Sustainable Development Summit; IFC
Sector Highlights; and new IEG websites for each GP/CCSA that provide “one stop” information
on relevant evaluations, IEG contacts, and upcoming work relevant for that group. IEG also
delivered a large number of informal learning and knowledge sharing activities for WBG operational
staff and external stakeholders (see Annex 6 for an indicative list of activities in FY16).

38.     As agreed in last year’s work program, IEG has conducted a stock-taking on the use and
influence of IEG learning products. The review found that the potential of learning products has
not been fully realized. While there have been some successes, there has been confusion over the
scope and purpose of learning products within IEG and WBG, leading to a perception of learning
products as “evaluations in disguise.” Key weaknesses include: inadequate clarity on the purpose
and essentials of good practice learning and knowledge sharing; insufficient attention to demand and
learning needs of WBG staff in the selection of topics; a focus on long reports (which have triggered
lengthy review processes within IEG and WBG) rather than short, focused, and user-friendly
formats; and lack of sustained engagement and collaborative learning processes with target
audiences.

39.     In response to the stock-taking, IEG recommends a substantial redesign of our current
approach to learning and knowledge sharing. We propose to focus on four critical steps (the
specific activities and their costs are reviewed in paras. 72-74 in the work program section).

      Clarify IEG’s Learning Objectives and Strategy – including developing a clear vision and
       guidance on purpose, principles, and good practices of IEG learning work. The renewed
       vision will focus much more on: the process of learning rather than delivering a product,
       demand not supply-driven topics, and sustained rather than single engagement with users.

      Move from “Product” to “Learning” Mindset -- including (1) shifting from preparation
       of lengthy reports to short, timely, and focused products in more user-friendly formats that
       respond to high priority, real time learning demands from operational staff (i.e. more “just-
       in-time” notes on urgent issues, presentations and workshops on sector and theme portfolio
       performance, practical “how to” advice, notes on good practices); and (2) establish more
       effective mechanisms and procedures to assess and prioritize WBG demand for learning
       topics, and engage WBG operational staff in preparation and use of products.
                                                  - 11 -


         Redesign Process for More Nimble and Effective Delivery – including (1) shift from
          pre-identification of topics in annual work program to ex poste reporting of actual deliveries
          in CODE Quarterly Report; (2) streamline current learning product typology and associated
          processing paths, shift WBG engagement point from corporate stakeholders to actual
          operational partners, and agree upfront with Management on appropriate review process for
          specific products; and (3) improve communication, branding, and knowledge-management
          around learning deliveries, including building better on-line repository of knowledge.

         Strengthen IEG Staff Capacity and Incentives for Effective Adult Learning – including
          (1) deepening IEG staff skills for adult learning pedagogy and collaborative client
          engagement behaviors through provision of expert coaching, advice, training, and toolkits;
          (2) establish a quality assurance process where learning experts provide “peer review” for
          effective adult learning; and (3) strengthen incentives and recognition to promote agreed
          learning objectives, use of new toolkits, and effective learning behaviors.

3. Enhancing Quality and Credibility

Quality Assurance Framework.

40.     Over the past few years, IEG has put in place a comprehensive quality assurance framework.
Good quality starts with the selection of the right evaluation issues, so IEG has continued to refine
its process for selectivity and prioritization of the work program, as described in Annex 3. During
evaluation preparation and implementation, key quality elements include: quality standards for
approach papers, “demand-driven” quality enhancement reviews as requested by TTLs, internal
IEG review meetings on the draft approach paper and evaluation report with external peer
reviewers, and review and feedback by WBG Management on the draft approach paper and
evaluation report. As reviewed in para. 22, we have introduced ReACT Workshops as an additional
feedback loop to deepen engagement with Management on the findings of a draft report and the
formulation of recommendations. After the completion of the report, IEG conducts an “after-
action review” where IEG staff have a structured debrief process to analyze what happened, why,
and how the work could have been done better.

41.       In FY16, IEG took several steps to further enhance the quality assurance framework.

42.      First, the pilot exercise of meta-evaluation launched in FY14 was completed, whereby an
independent panel of four external experts provided an assessment of the utility, validity, feasibility,
and propriety of recent IEG evaluations. The process took longer than originally envisioned but has
proved useful in validating IEG’s self-assessment of strengths and areas for improvement of IEG
product quality. The meta-evaluations found that the IEG reports were generally satisfactory in
terms of relevance, timeliness, identifying intended use, and overall feasibility and propriety. They
flagged the need for stronger theories of change to adequately guide the design of data collection
and analysis, stronger linkages between findings and recommendations, and enhanced focus on
validity, particularly with regard to selecting country case studies more strategically, and ensuring that
causal questions are explicitly included in evaluations and systematically answered using appropriate
designs and methods. IEG found the meta-evaluation framework developed by the panel to be an
extremely helpful tool, which we intend to internalize in the design and implementation of our work.
                                                 - 12 -


43.     Second, drawing on the feedback of the meta-evaluation exercise, IEG updated the quality
standards for approach papers, which had last been revised in 2012. These changes are designed to
(1) sharpen the theory of change underpinning the evaluation and the formulation of specific
evaluation questions linked to the subject and stakeholder needs; (2) better link the selection of
methods and data to the specific evaluation questions, with more focus on how any gaps in existing
data (for example, about impact and results) will be addressed; and (3) ensure robust and consistent
focus across all evaluations on WBG performance related to twin goals and cross-cutting issues such
as gender, inclusion, social and environmental risks, safeguards and performance standards. We also
issued new guidance notes and reference materials, including a note on the design and use of
country case studies in evaluations.

Methods and Data

44.     IEG has continued to invest in testing, adapting, and developing new methods and data to
ensure that we maintain cutting-edge rigor and quality in the evaluation of WBG development
effectiveness.

45.      First, we have established a new methods function under the Director General to provide
strategic leadership to refine and improve IEG evaluation methods and data. A new Methods
Advisor has been recruited, who will focus on: (1) strengthening evaluation methods in IEG
products and services, including piloting of new and innovative evaluation techniques, with a focus
on helping IEG staff select the best available evaluation methods and design to address specific
evaluation questions; (2) ensuring consistent and efficient collection, use, and presentation of data in
IEG evaluation work, including leading the community of practice of IEG portfolio and data
analysts; and (3) supporting the development of IEG staff evaluation skills, and IEG’s global
presence in professional fora on evaluation methods and data. The Methods Advisor will draw on
existing staff technical expertise from across IEG, and bring in external global experts on specific
topics as needed.

46.     Second, we have continued to focus on improving methods to assess WBG contributions to
the achievement of the twin goals, particularly with regard to shared prosperity and sustainability
dimensions. On shared prosperity, we are deepening our understanding and refining our
approaches to growth analytics and decomposition, household survey evidence of project incidence,
and qualitative evidence on participation, voice and accountability among excluded communities at
the local level. On sustainability, we are continuing to ensure a strong and integrated review of
environmental and social risk management in evaluation and validation work.

47.     Third, IEG has completed significant work on integrating gender into all IEG evaluation
work. New guidance materials have been issued that provide practical guidelines and tools to assess
gender equality in project level validations, country program evaluations, Project Performance
Assessment Reports, and major evaluations, as well as a “gender resource database” to help
evaluators. New gender flags are being introduced in IEG reviews of ICRs, as well as for the review
the Completion and Learning Reviews (CLR) of Country Partnership Frameworks (CPF), to ensure
stronger monitoring of gender outcomes in WBG programs. Going forward, our work stream on
gender will focus on continued training for evaluators, an updated intranet page for easy retrieval of
the new tools, continued knowledge sharing and close collaboration with the Gender CCSA and the
Results Measurement and Evidence Stream (RMES), and outreach to external partners, who have
expressed great interest in these new tools.
                                                - 13 -


48.     Fourth, in response to CODE’s feedback in last year’s work program discussions, IEG
launched a new work stream on value for money (VFM) in FY16. VFM analysis aims to provide
decision makers with the tools to ensure accountability and transparency in spending by first seeking
and evaluating whether available resources have been allocated as efficiently as possible to generate
the maximum impact. The WBG has never formalized a definition of VFM, and its corporate and
sectoral guidelines apply the term in different ways to different concepts. The purpose of this work
stream is to develop guidelines and tools for VFM analysis, pilot the application of more rigorous
assessment of VFM in IEG’s work, and continue learning and knowledge sharing on VFM with
OPCS, DEC, RMES, and other relevant WBG stakeholders.

49.      Finally, IEG continues to update standards and tools for data, and ensure consistency in
processes and analyses across IEG products and services. We have launched several pilots to tap
into large internal and external data sets (“big data”) and beneficiary feedback mechanisms to
deepen and diversify the sources of evidence we use in evaluations. New standards and protocols
for data collection and sharing have been established to make our evaluation data more accessible to
stakeholders. We have developed a new web-based handbook for IEG staff on data analysis and
portfolio review, designed to ensure high and uniform standards of quality across IEG evaluation
work, foster staff exchange across departments, and harmonize our internal processes.

4. Enhancing Knowledge and Communications

50.     IEG has continued to enhance the accessibility and usability of its knowledge, with the
ultimate goal of enhancing influence across its key target groups, and improve the effectiveness of its
processes and systems. Key actions include:

      LessonFinder (earlier called ELearn) continued to be populated in FY16, with new lessons
       from XPSRs, PERs and PCRs; a new portal has been introduced to facilitate the analysis of
       results by sectors, regions or topic, and provide “one-stop” learning from all private sector
       project evaluations; and all lessons have been reclassified to match IFC’s new lesson
       classification system. Portal usage and experience will be closely monitored, and the
       feasibility and cost/benefit to expand the database to include lessons from World Bank
       PPARs and ICR Reviews will be assessed, in partnership with some GPs/CCSAs.
      Continued championing of the new Results Measurements and Evidence Stream in
       partnership with Management, so that it can become an effective network of professionals
       across the Bank Group; IEG will focus on scaling up use of the evaluation competencies
       approved in FY15, and development of a new “RMES Academy,” a clearinghouse on results
       measurement and evidence good practices.
      Workflow automation for PPARs and ICR Reviews, funded by the capital budget, have been
       implemented, with further refinements planned in FY17; work on disclosure tracking system
       is underway.
      New text analysis methods continue to be piloted that make it easier to explore and search
       massive document collections, and provide faster insights into relevant portions of the
       operations portfolio.
      IEG will launch a new revamped website in FY17 with improved search capabilities,
       enhanced user interaction features, improved MAR sub-site, and a new online consultation
       system to enable stakeholders keep abreast with and contribute to ongoing IEG evaluations.
                                              - 14 -


51.    To successfully deliver an expanded learning and knowledge sharing program, IEG will
continue to focus on enhancing its strategic communications function.

     In FY16, IEG introduced new strategic communication tools and processes to help better
      plan and execute efficient and cost-effective outreach strategies for IEG products.
     IEG’s outreach events, external website, and social media channels are the primary vehicles
      for engaging internal and external stakeholders. In FY16, IEG hosted 20 major internal
      dissemination events and three external events in support of key evaluations. IEG also
      continued to grow its online presence and outreach.
     IEG continued to test innovative formats and templates to make IEG reports more readable
      and accessible. For example, a new interactive version of the FY15 Social Safety Nets and
      Gender report was piloted, which enables end-users to rapidly search for and locate specific
      content on the most common topics of interest (see: http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/ssn/).
     IEG continued to scale up use of Constituent Relationship Management technologies to
      build a network of IEG users, and deliver more targeted and meaningful engagement
      experiences with staff, development practitioners, and external stakeholders.
                                                - 15 -


                          III.    Proposed Work Program for FY17-19


1. Major Evaluations

52.     As reviewed in last year’s work program, IEG follows a comprehensive screening process to
identify strategic evaluation priorities for the work program (the process is summarized in Annex 3).
Key steps include:
      Conducting work program consultations with CODE, WBG Management, and external
       stakeholders;
      Identifying knowledge gaps within the three Strategic Engagement Areas where IEG
       evaluation work would add value;
      Reviewing evaluation coverage over the past six years related to the size of WBG lending
       (summary tables are included in Annex 4);
      Mapping existing and planned work against the IEG Results Framework; and
      Assessing all proposed topics against the IEG selectivity framework.

53.     Based on this analysis, IEG has developed the three-year work program, included in Annex
5. The work program tables are presented with three different lens: (1) by IEG business lines; (2) by
the objectives and results areas of the IEG Results Framework; and (3) by WBG institution and
WBG strategic focus areas (as set out in the FY14 World Bank Group Strategy, FY16 Forward
Look, FY17-19 IFC Business Strategy and Outlook, and provisional IDA18 Special Themes).

      As earlier agreed with CODE, IEG has reduced the number of major evaluations to
       promote enhanced selectivity and focus on the critical issues; we will continue to deliver
       eight major new evaluations, and one annual synthesis of results and performance each year.
      The proposed evaluations provide strong coverage of most of the strategic focus areas of (1)
       the WBG Strategy and Forward Look (with less coverage of leadership on global and
       regional issues, which we intend to review through PPARs), (2) the IFC focus industries
       (with less coverage of agribusiness and disruptive technologies), and (3) provisional IDA
       Special Themes (with less coverage of fragility, conflict, and violence, since we have recently
       completed two major evaluations in this area).

      The evaluations that CODE approved for FY17-18 in last year’s work program have all been
       retained, with the exception that the earlier proposed evaluation on Informal Sector has been
       dropped, as this portfolio has now been largely covered in the FY14 SME evaluation and
       FY17 Rural Non-Farm Economy evaluation. However, the timing of some of the earlier
       approved evaluations has shifted, in response to programming suggestions from CODE and
       WBG Management, and as part of IEG’s focus to reduce the bunching of deliverables.

      In line with CODE’s guidance for a “One WBG” perspective, two-thirds of the evaluations
       cover all three WBG institutions, and 80 percent cover both World Bank and IFC.
                                                 - 16 -


54.     Evaluations Related to Objective 1: What Works. About three-quarters of the major
evaluations in the FY17-19 work program will contribute to the first objective of the IEG Results
Framework, related to deepening evidence about the results of WBG programs and activities.

55.      Eight evaluations will focus on the Strategic Engagement Area related to Inclusive Growth,
reflecting the critical importance of this area for the twin goals:

      FY17 Accelerating Prosperity through Higher Education (which had been called Tertiary Education
       and planned for FY16 in last year’s work program) will assess the performance and results of
       World Bank support to higher education, particularly with regard to quality, financing
       mechanisms, equality of access, and contributions to improved productivity and labor
       market outcomes, economic diversification and growth, and poverty reduction;
      FY17 WBG Support for Shared Prosperity in Country Programs will serve as a companion piece to
       the FY15 poverty reduction evaluation and assess early evidence on how well the Bank has
       pursued distributional objectives in its strategies, projects and key knowledge products, and
       how it has recently reoriented its country strategies and lending and knowledge instruments
       towards the corporate goal of shared prosperity;
      FY17 Rural Non-Farm Economy will assess how successfully the WBG has linked the rural
       poor to productive opportunities in the rural non-farm economy (comprising trading, agro-
       processing, manufacturing, and service activities) and the impact of these efforts on reducing
       poverty, economic growth and diversification, and decreasing inequality;
      FY18 Public Finance, Jobs, and Growth will assess public finance policies and tools (primarily
       public revenue policy and expenditure allocation measures) that WBG supports through
       operational and analytic work to foster investment, growth and jobs; it will address the
       consistency of their use, the evidence of direct and indirect impacts, and the effectiveness of
       these tools across client countries, including fragile and conflict states, low and mid-income,
       and extractive industry dependent countries where leveraging resource endowments to foster
       sustainable long-term growth is particularly challenging;
      FY18 Mobilization of Private Capital will assess the relevance, efficacy, efficiency, and
       additionality of WBG core mobilization programs and other de-risking mechanisms designed
       to help the WBG strategically enhance its role towards mobilization of private capital for
       development, and achievement of the goals set out in the “billions to trillions” strategy;
      FY19 Sustainable and Inclusive Business (which had been called Corporate Sustainability and
       Development and planned for FY18 in last year’s work program) will review IFC’s efforts to
       increase the developmental impact of private sector interventions, including economic
       diversification, and enhance the inclusiveness, sustainability, accountability and transparency
       of private sector work via efforts to promote inclusive business models;
      FY19 Facilitating Trade will assess the results and performance of WBG support for trade
       policy reform and market access, trade facilitation, and efficient trade logistics, with a focus
       on assessing the pro-poor impact of WBG trade work; and
      FY19 Decentralization and Support to Local and Subnational Governments will look at the large and
       growing portfolio of lending, knowledge, and partnerships at the subnational level, including
       how well WBG support to subnational programs supported service delivery in practice, the
                                               - 17 -


       cross-cutting challenges of decentralization, lessons from different entry points and models,
       how well does the support fit with local governance and promote efficiency, and effects on
       participation of citizens and accountability of local officials.

56.    Three evaluations will address the Strategic Engagement Area related to Sustained Service
Delivery to the Poor:

      FY17 Sustaining Water Supply and Sanitation Services will assess the extent to which WBG
       support has been effective in helping countries sustain water supply and sanitation services
       to the poor, with a focus on what has and has not worked, scalability and replicability of
       interventions;
      FY17 Sustainable Urban Transport Services will assess to what extent the WBG has supported
       sustainable urban transport development in client countries that contributed to economic
       efficiency and growth of cities, environmental quality, the welfare of the poor and vulnerable
       groups, and road/traffic safety;
      FY18 Essential Health Care Services (which had been called Scaling Up Nutrition in last year’s
       work program) will update IEG’s FY09 health sector evaluation and focus on the
       effectiveness and outcomes of World Bank and IFC support for essential health care for the
       poor, in line with the new SDG target for universal access to quality essential health-care
       services; and
      In FY19, a synthesis of the findings of the three evaluations will be prepared as we conclude
       the work in this Strategic Engagement Area, with a focus on identifying the key service
       delivery and behavior change interventions that have resulted in sustained service delivery
       for the poor.

57.    Five evaluations will address the Strategic Engagement Area related to Environmental
Sustainability (in addition to the thematic focus of the FY18 RAP, as noted in para. 60):

      FY18 Toward a Clean World for All (which had been called Environmental Management of Air and
       Water Resources and planned for FY17 in last year’s work program) will assess to what extent
       the WBG has been relevant, effective, and efficient in addressing pollution concerns in client
       countries through targeted interventions, and the use of safeguards and performance
       standards in pollution-heavy industries.
      FY18 WBG Support to Carbon Finance will review the extent to which WBG carbon finance
       programs have been effective in supporting emission reductions, increasing access to energy
       for the poor, helping to protect forests and farmers by introducing smarter land
       management practices, building readiness for market-based initiatives, and influencing global
       policy and standards setting, thereby providing lessons for the next generation of climate
       finance starting in 2020;
      FY18 Renewable Energy will review WBG support to promote the development of renewable
       sources of energy, including institutional and technical capacity, policy environment,
       availability of financing for cost differences, and trade-offs between financial and
       environmental costs;
                                                - 18 -


       FY19 Environmental Degradation will assess how the WBG is assisting country clients to
        understand the drivers and effects of resource scarcity and design appropriate interventions,
        with a focus on dryland management, sustainable land and water management, and impacts
        of migration and disaster risks; and

       FY19 Sustainable Cities (which had been planned for FY18 in last year’s work program) will
        assess implementation of the “green cities” focus of the WBG urban development strategy,
        with a focus on support for low carbon livable cities, climate resilient growth, improved solid
        waste management systems, and sustainable financing and planning that addresses pollution
        and livability challenges.

58.     Country Program Evaluations will remain a cornerstone of the work program, designed to
enhance accountability and learning for results in country programs. Subject to further discussion
with CODE in early-FY17 about the stocktaking of the Clustered CPE approach (see paras. 25-27),
we propose to conduct four individual CPEs of dynamic middle income countries (MICs) in FY18-19, and
then produce a synthesis report. The design of the overall approach, the best way to achieve
synthesis and lesson learning, and the criteria for selecting the countries will be decided once the
stocktaking is completed. IEG will seek to build on some of the advantages of a clustered approach
but also respond to the initial issues raised during the first two Clustered CPE pilots, including
getting the right tradeoff between depth of analysis for each single country (which is useful to the
Board, the WBG country team, and the country authorities), and learning across the cluster (which
has added a new dimension to IEG’s country evaluations and has also received positive feedback).

59.       In addition, IEG proposes to do a small pilot country study in FY17 on Reimbursable Advisory
Services (RAS) in Saudi Arabia, the Bank’s oldest RAS Program, in response to a request by Bank
Management and country authorities. RAS has become an increasingly important instrument to
meet country demand beyond what the World Bank’s administrative budget or relevant trust funds
can support, particularly in middle- and high-income country clients, including non-borrowing
members. This case study would be prepared as a learning engagement and would help IEG
develop a methodological framework for a possible future evaluation of RAS.

60.    The annual Results and Performance Report will continue to provide a summary of
aggregate WBG performance, a special thematic chapter, and updates covering the Regional and
Global Practice Vice-Presidencies. The following thematic chapters are proposed:

       FY17 Managing for Results, which would assess how effectively the WBG has developed and
        implemented a “managing for results” system that is conducive to achieving the results
        articulated in the corporate scorecard;
       FY18 Environmental Sustainability in Operations, which would review how WBG has integrated
        environment, climate change, and disaster risk considerations into the design of WBG
        country strategies and operations; and
       FY19 Working in Partnership, which would review WBG performance in global and regional
        partnership programs as well as country-level partnership activities.

61.    Evaluations Related to Objective 2: Real-Time Learning. About one-quarter of the
major evaluations in FY17-19 will contribute to the second objective of the IEG Results
Framework, related to generating independent evaluation evidence to assess the early
                                                - 19 -


implementation experience of the WBG Strategy. These evaluations are designed to enable real-time
learning and mid-course corrections, and promote a stronger internal culture for results,
accountabilities, and learning.

62.   Two evaluations will focus on the WBG Strategy pillar related to Helping Clients Tackle
the Most Important Development Challenges.

      FY17 SCD/CPF Process Evaluation (which has shifted from FY16 to FY17 in order to capture
       a sufficient number of SCD/CPF experiences) will assess the early implementation
       experience of the SCD/CPF process and identify areas that can be strengthened to enhance
       country engagement. The work on SCD will focus on: evidence basis and framing of the
       issues; growth, poverty, shared prosperity, and sustainability; identification of priorities for
       achieving the twin goals; and WBG integration. The work on CPF will focus on: alignment
       with country development priorities, the twin goals, and sustainability; country ownership,
       selectivity, realism, and systematic accounting of risks; quality of results frameworks; and
       WBG integration.

      FY17 IFC Client Engagement Model will assess the extent to which IFC’s recently launched
       enhanced client engagement model is contributing to the achievement of increased
       development impact and contributing to the WBG twin goals; and if the assumed benefits of
       the model – an expanded client base, more effective client relationships, and a stronger
       position as trusted advisor – have contributed to developmental success.

63.      A second set of evaluations will focus on the WBG Strategy pillar related to Becoming a
Solution Bank. These will review the effectiveness of learning and knowledge in operations,
including the early implementation experience of the GPs and CCSAs, and assess the relevance,
efficiency, and effectiveness of operational instruments. We reviewed P4R and DPF in FY15-16,
and are proposing to look at the remaining instruments in FY17-19: Investment Project Financing
(as a learning engagement under our new approach to learning) and Guarantees (as part of the FY18
Mobilization of Private Capital Evaluation).

      FY17 Data for Development will review the effectiveness of Bank support to country clients in
       producing, disseminating, and using development data, in line with the new WBG
       Development Data Framework, and provide early reflections on the extent to which the
       establishment of the Data Council in 2014 and the launch of the Strategic Actions Program
       for Addressing Development Data Gaps 2016 – 2030 are beginning to, or are likely to, help
       address the gaps and challenges surrounding development data;
      FY19 Process Evaluation of GP/CCSAs (which had been planned for FY18 in last year’s work
       program, but now shifted to FY19 in view of the continued evolution of the GP/CCSA
       business model) will review the clarity of roles, efficiency of delivery, interface with country
       engagement model, level of “jointness,” process to deploy expertise and knowledge to meet
       client needs, and process to collect, curate, and share knowledge.

64.    Several evaluations will focus on the WBG Strategy pillar related to Working in
Partnership (in addition to the thematic chapter of the FY19 RAP, as noted in para. 60). This work
stream will assess the effectiveness with which partnerships support the mission of the WBG and its
                                                  - 20 -


relevant global commitments, the performance of the WBG as a development partner, and how
effectively the WBG plays its convening role.

      FY18 Engaging Citizens will address WBG support for transparency, accountability and
       participation to enhance citizen voice, beneficiary feedback loops that contribute to mid-
       course corrections in implementation of operations, and partnership with civil society
       organizations in order to strengthen the demand side of governance and complement service
       delivery through public and private institutions.
      IEG will continue to integrate the review of individual partnership programs into the major
       thematic evaluations. For example, in FY17, Rural Non-Farm Economy will review Global
       Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP); Sustaining Water Supply and Sanitation
       Services will review the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), Water Partnership Program
       (WPP), and water related activities of the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
       (PPIAF) and the Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA); Sustainable Urban
       Transport Services will review the Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Policy Program (SSATP); and
       Data for Development will review the Partnership in Statistics for Development in the 21st
       Century (Paris 21) and Statistics for Results Facility (SRF).
      IEG will continue to review WBG performance in donor coordination and convening at the
       country-level as part of country program evaluations, including whether potential donor
       coordination and harmonization opportunities were properly identified in the CPF, and the
       effectiveness of WBG participation in key donor coordination and harmonization
       mechanisms.

65.     Monitoring Implementation of Evaluation Recommendations. The Management
Action Record (MAR) reform process has been an important step to enhance the quality and impact
of major evaluations as well as strengthen monitoring and accountability related to implementation
of agreed actions in the Management Action Plan. Key outcomes include:

      Improved quality of IEG recommendations, including clearer links to findings,
       prioritization, better clarity and specificity, and considerations of feasibility and cost
       effectiveness;
      Stronger engagement with WBG management while drafting the recommendations;
      More specific actions to be taken to implement IEG recommendations in Management
       Response, and clearer timeline and monitoring arrangements; and
      Enhanced assessment of progress on implementation and reduced inconsistencies in ratings
       between IEG and Management.

66.     The on-line MAR system that was introduced in FY14 provides a central repository of
findings, recommendations, management responses, detailed action plans and implementation, for
use by all key stakeholders. The MAR data set is now available on the external website – an
important step in the WBG’s commitment to transparency and Open Data.

67.      As part of our focus on Strategic Engagement Areas, IEG will review implementation of
evaluation recommendations related to each Strategic Engagement Area, to ensure that our
collective recommendations are strategic and coherent, and provide a platform for effective dialogue
                                                - 21 -


with Management. Other process changes related to MAR in FY17 include: (1) improving the
engagement process with Management on evaluation recommendations and findings; (2) conducting
a stock-taking of the MAR process over the past two years in partnership with Management, and
identifying steps to enhance the impact and effectiveness of the MAR process; and (3) continued
system enhancements based on the experiences over the past two years. IEG will continue outreach
efforts to familiarize Executive Directors’ staff, WBG Management, and other stakeholders on the
use of the on-line system and enhanced MAR website.

2. Project Evaluations

68.      In the past, IEG has aimed to conduct PPARs on about 20-25 percent of closed World
Bank projects, in order to ensure (1) a robust assessment of actual project performance (particularly
with regard to sustainability of project impacts over time and client feedback), and (2) an
independent review of the quality and accuracy of the self-evaluation system. However, in recent
years, the PPAR coverage rate has dropped to about 15 percent, for two reasons: (1) we maintained
production of 40-45 PPARs per year despite an increase in the overall volume of lending, and (2) we
redeployed staff time from PPARs to the priority task of eliminating the backlog of Bank ICR
Reviews. As reviewed in last year’s work program, IEG proposes to increase the annual delivery of
PPARs, from 50 in FY15 to about 68 in FY19, thereby covering about 20 percent of closed projects.

3. Validation Products

69.     Country Completion and Learning Review Validations. IEG will continue to review 100
percent of all CLRs in FY17 – 19. About 22 CLRs are expected to be reviewed in FY17. In
addition, as the new country engagement is rolled out, IEG is continuing to review and discuss with
CODE how to provide useful evaluative input for the initial round of PLRs.

70.     Project Validations. IEG will continue to review WBG project completion reports, to foster
both accountability and learning in the self-evaluation system. In FY17, IEG will continue to review
100 percent of completed IDA/IBRD lending operations with available self-evaluations, as well as
100 percent of completed recipient-executed trust funded projects greater than or equal to $5
million with available self-evaluations. Looking forward, IEG will review with WBG Management
and CODE the scope for streamlining the system and the options for moving towards a strategic
sampling basis, as reviewed in paras. 31-32.

71.     IFC will prepare self-evaluations for 40 percent of randomly selected mature investments, all
validated by IEG. For closed projects, IEG will prepare independent project evaluation summaries
(PES) in lieu of XPSRs. In case of Advisory Services, IEG will validate 51 percent of project
completion reports, based on random representative sampling. For MIGA, the self-evaluation
accompanied by IEG's validation and independent evaluation by IEG will together cover 100
percent of MIGA's mature guarantees.

4. Learning and Knowledge Sharing

72.     As reviewed in paras. 36-39, IEG proposes to significantly redesign our current approach to
learning and knowledge sharing. Instead of focusing on the production of a dozen lengthy reports,
we will shift to short, timely, and focused products in more user-friendly formats that respond to
high priority, real time learning requests from operational staff.
                                                - 22 -


73.     To achieve this new direction, we propose to pilot in FY17 a new Rapid Results Learning
Fund of $750,000 under the Director General, which would approve and fund larger IEG learning
engagements on a rolling basis, based on clear eligibility criteria. All proposals for funding would
require upfront “joint ownership” with a relevant Bank Group operational unit, and would spell out
the purpose, audience, scope, engagement plan, and intended use of the work. In addition, we
would provide a small allocation to each of the four IEG units as part of their core budgets to
support nimble preparation of small, fast, just-in-time learning work in response to opportunities or
issues as they arise, as we did in FY16. We will also provide additional support for expanded
coaching, training, and quality assurance process to deepen IEG staff capacity for effective adult
learning solutions.

74.      IEG will develop a robust system to monitor the delivery, cost, and use of all learning
activities, to ensure managerial accountability for results, value for money, and effective reporting.
We will provide a summary of activities delivered through the new Rapid Results Learning Fund in
the CODE Quarterly Report to keep CODE apprised of implementation, and will complete a stock-
taking with Management in end-FY17 to assess the effectiveness of this new approach.

5. Other Evaluation Work

75.     DGE Statements to Board and Management. IEG will continue to issue DGE Statements
to the Executive Directors that summarize relevant evaluation evidence, to help inform their review
of WBG thematic and sector strategies, operational policies, and other issues related to WBG
development effectiveness. In addition, IEG will continue to provide early feedback directly to
Management on these issues prior to their submission of the documents to the Board (a list of DGE
Statements provided to the Board and Management in FY16 is included as Annex 7).

76.      Joint Evaluation Work. IEG will collaborate with the European Commission (EC) and
other development partners on a joint evaluation of all donor budget support operations to Ghana
from 2006 to 2015, in line with the suggestion for more joint evaluation work in CODE’s Proposed
Road Map and Action Plan in response to the External Review. The work will involve two outputs:
(1) a series of PPARs prepared by IEG on World Bank development policy operations in Ghana;
and (2) a joint evaluation report produced in partnership with the EC, which will incorporate the
findings of IEG’s PPAR series as well as other evaluative evidence. The joint report, which will
follow OECD/DAC methodology for budget support evaluation analysis, will not be a formal IEG
product (and will carry the relevant proviso that the opinions expressed in joint report do not
necessarily represent official views of IEG).

77.     Impact Evaluations. IEG views impact evaluation methods as an important tool to produce
and synthesize evidence on the effectiveness of specific development interventions. IEG will not
produce prospective impact evaluations since they require early project engagement, which could
compromise IEG’s ability to independently evaluate the projects at closure. However, retrospective
impact evaluations that generate treatment and comparison groups’ ex-post and are lower cost will
continue to be part of IEG’s toolkit. This work would be fully aligned with and feed into the major
evaluations and learning products in the work program, to ensure strategic relevance.

78.     In FY17, IEG will produce two impact evaluations that will feed into the FY18 evaluation
on citizen engagement. The first will cover a community monitoring project in Burkina Faso, and
the second will be on a community driven development project in Nepal. We will also continue to
                                                   - 23 -


produce systematic reviews of the impact evaluation literature to accompany major evaluations when
there is an evidence-gap to fill by doing so. These systematic reviews will also provide value-added
for the WBG where there is considerable unmet demand for harvesting the evidence-base on
specific development questions.

79.      Working Papers on Methods. IEG will prepare working papers on key methodological
issues, as part of our focus on clarifying and updating IEG’s methods in line with global best
practices. In FY17, IEG will prepare two sets of working papers covering: (1) our recent analytical
work on Value for Money (see para. 48), and (2) the methodological frameworks to assess service
delivery models and behavior change interventions for our work on Sustained Service Delivery to
the Poor (other topics for working papers on methods will be identified after the arrival of the
Methods Advisor).

6. Evaluation Capacity Development

80.     As requested by CODE, IEG has reviewed the strategy and work program for Evaluation
Capacity Development (ECD), following the recommendation of the External Review that “IEG’s
work should be broadened to build M&E capacity in client countries, in partnership with the WBG, other MDBs,
development organizations and the countries themselves.” We propose the following four strategic directions
in FY17-19, building on CODE’s guidance for a balanced approach that deepens IEG’s work in
capacity development while maintaining our core focus on the independent evaluation mandate.

81.     First, the main thrust of IEG’s work in broadening ECD efforts will continue to be
carried out in collaboration with partners through the two ongoing major initiatives: Centers
for Learning on Evaluation and Results (CLEAR), and the International Program for Development
Evaluation Training (IPDET).

       Continued strengthening of the CLEAR partnership and preparing for Phase III. With
        “phase II” currently under implementation (FY16-19) and fully funded, IEG will focus in
        FY17 on: (1) introducing a stronger business-oriented management approach to the choice
        and delivery of service offerings – allowing the Center partners to complement the initially
        more opportunistic service strategies with a more purposefully selective approach; (2)
        developing, jointly across the CLEAR community, global knowledge on the “how to” and
        “what works” in ECD and identifying avenues for effectively sharing this knowledge with
        other providers of ECD services; and (3) developing jointly delivered “global” services, such
        as standardized courses on specific evaluation topics that would be available at several
        CLEAR locations. In addition, IEG will set out strategic directions for CLEAR’s Phase III
        towards a more sustainable and decentralized model.

       Bringing IPDET to developing countries, and updating its curriculum. A strategic review of
        IPDET was conducted in FY16, which indicated a growing demand for high quality,
        IPDET-type, executive learning offerings in developing countries. The review
        recommended a renewal of IPDET’s curriculum and expansion of IPDET course delivery to
        the “global south.” In FY17, IEG, in coordination with Carleton University, will complete a
        curriculum review for IPDET that will lead to updated content – in particular with regard to
        developing country experiences, adopting more modern pedagogical approaches, and
        developing better and more opportunities for off-site accessibility of IPDET knowledge and
        the IPDET community. IEG will then engage all IPDET partners and other important
                                                - 24 -


        ECD stakeholders to explore options and agree on how best to scale up IPDET course
        offering to developing countries.

82.     Second, IEG will continue to deepen our direct M&E capacity building efforts,
building on the suggestions included in the Proposed Road Map and Action Plan prepared by
CODE in response to the External Review. Key steps include:

       Review the availability of existing data bases of local talent currently managed by other
        external ECD partners, and see how IEG might make better use of, or build on, these
        existing resources;
       Scale up the use of local talent in IEG evaluation work, both as members of evaluation
        teams and peer reviewers, when feasible; we will first analyze how much local expertise we
        currently employ in our evaluation work to establish a benchmark, and then we will set
        meaningful targets for FY17-19; and
       Continue to provide good practice notes and other relevant toolkits drawn from IEG
        evaluation work, and broaden our learning engagements with operational staff (through
        RMES, GP clinics, the “DPO Academy,” the “CPF Academy,” IFC credit courses, etc.), to
        help strengthen M&E systems in WBG operations.

83.      Third, we will promote increased attention to ECD issues in the Bank’s country
strategy work. The first step will be to discuss options with WBG Management and do a
stocktaking with the relevant GPs, OPCS, DEC, and the Regions about the adequacy of existing
tools and guidance for diagnosing existing evaluation capacities and their constraints at the country
level. If there is a gap, IEG would then work with internal WBG partners as well as the many
external stakeholders working on ECD, to help develop appropriate tools and guidance as needed.
These diagnostic tools would then be available to country teams and country authorities to use as
part of the SCD process, to help identify the critical gaps in countries’ capacity to produce and use
evaluation evidence to achieve their development goals. These assessments would enable country
teams and country authorities to identify the priority capacity building investments and technical
assistance to strengthen the quality, relevance, and timeliness of national monitoring and evaluation
functions. If there is traction and engagement with operational staff to scale up ECD in country
programs, IEG would explore developing a network or community of practice of relevant partners –
similar to what we have done with RMES.

84.      Fourth, IEG will continue to promote evaluation capacity in the global public
agenda, spurring dialogue and action. We will focus on strengthening the relevance, coherence and
impact of development partners’ investments in capacity development, through continued
collaboration with key ECD players like EvalPartners (a global initiative set up in 2012 by the
International Organization for Cooperation in Evaluation and UNICEF), the OECD DAC EvalNet
Task Group, the Evaluation Cooperation Group, and UNEG. We will continue to focus on “what
works” in ECD, sharing and identifying opportunities for collaboration, and developing joint
initiatives as appropriate.

85.     IEG will provide an update on the implementation of these four strategic directions in next
year’s work program.
                                                 - 25 -


                                     IV.     Staffing and Budget


1. Human Resources

86.      IEG will continue to manage its staff levels and skills mix to support the strategic directions
set out in the IEG results framework and work program. In line with WBG HR reforms, IEG is
focusing on the following steps.

87.      Driving Strategic Staffing. IEG completed a strategic staffing exercise in FY15, in parallel
to the process followed in the WBG, and will continue with implementation of the agreed strategic
staffing directions in FY17-19. We will remain focused on three core issues: (1) What skills does
IEG have and need? (2) What are current workforce levels and plans? and (3) How can we best
align staffing levels and skills mix with our strategic business needs in FY17-19? Recent and on-
going actions include:

       Recruiting new staff in areas where we need to deepen our skills, including agriculture and
        environment, health, urban development, methodologies, and knowledge management;
       Shifting from the use of Extended Term Consultants to term appointments for GE/GF
        level skills, in line with the changing contract architecture of the Bank Group; and
       Redeploying resources from “backline” functions to “frontline” evaluation work, including
        reducing the number of Director, Advisor, and other sustaining cost positions.

88.      Renewing the Organization. IEG implemented an organizational change process in
FY15-16 to deepen collaboration and synergy within IEG, and ensure that IEG’s products,
processes, and structure are “fit for purpose.” We followed a systematic and participatory process
of organizational diagnosis and change, supported by external leadership consultants. In January
2016, we completed the transition to a new organizational structure, designed to reduce overhead,
better align with WBG norms for managerial span of control, ensure clearer interface and
engagement with the new WBG units, and facilitate increased staff collaboration and mobility in
larger labor pools. As part of the change process, we have (1) created a new Methods Adviser, (2)
established new Cluster Coordinators who will provide leadership vis-à-vis our clients in the WBG
and lead communities of practice within IEG, and (3) focused intensely on strengthening the
underlying collaborative behaviors of managers and staff – “moving the boxes” without
corresponding changes in behaviors and incentives will not lead to successful change.

89.      Creating Career Opportunities. The annual review of talent has been conducted and its
recommendations are being implemented. This exercise will ensure there is a right mix of formal
training, mentoring, and on-the-job development opportunities to equip staff at all levels with the
evaluation knowledge and skills they need to grow professionally. In addition, IEG is regularly using
the evaluation competencies developed in FY15 to help enrich professional development by giving
staff a clearer view of what is needed in a job at different levels. IEG continues to run special
mentoring, onboarding, and technical training program for its staff, and is participating in the GE
Readiness Program, a ten-month professional development program to build GE Analyst skills.

90.     Fostering a More Diverse and Inclusive Workplace. IEG is strengthening its focus on
diversity and inclusion (D&I). While IEG scores higher than the overall WBG on diversity
                                                - 26 -


indicators related to women representation in GF+ technical staff and in management, it scores
below on Part II representation in management and significantly below on Sub-Saharan African and
Caribbean representation in GF+ technical staff. Generally, IEG scores the same as or slightly
higher than the overall WBG on inclusion indicators from the 2015 Employee Engagement Survey.
IEG continues to implement the D&I Compact approved in FY15, with a focus on: (1) ensuring
D&I issues are mainstreamed throughout IEG, (2) improving managerial accountability and
promoting transparency, and (3) strengthening mechanisms for openness, voice, dignity and respect.
IEG has focused heavily on ensuring more diverse longlists and shortlists during recruitment
processes, including outreach by IEG leadership in Africa to build a pipeline of future candidates
and get IEG better known in potential recruitment markets.

91.     As of end-March 2016, staffing levels in IEG declined to 101 people (compared to 105 one
year earlier), in line with natural turnover and our specific strategic staffing decisions. We are now
focusing on recruitment to address skill gaps and the phase out of ETC appointments, and expect to
return to the historical range of 105-110 in FY17.

92.    IEG compares favorably relative to the Bank Group in terms of internal mobility of staff,
which allows for active management of the staff skills base. IEG management is conscious of the
need to draw both on Bank Group experience and on external experience from other organizations.
The proportion of professional staff (GE+) at end-March 2016 that were recruited from outside the
WBG stood at 49 percent, close to the 48 percent a year before. IEG will continue to maintain staff
and other fixed costs at a level consistent with a fixed cost ratio of around 75 percent to allow for
adequate flexibility.

2. Budget Proposal

93.    Sources. IEG’s projected resources to deliver its FY17 work program total $34.6 million,
comprising a $33.8 million regular budget to be approved by the Board, and $0.8 million in trust
funds. This resource envelope is consistent with the flat budget framework agreed with the Board in
FY12 and adjusted to reflect planned savings from the third year of IEG’s Expenditure Review.

94.      The regular budget is set out in Table 1, which shows recent trends as well as projections. In
line with the most recent practice of the Bank Group, the figures are presented in nominal terms.
There is no change in the proposed contributions from individual institutions, each will maintain its
relative proportion of funding of IEG. As the nominal budget of IEG decreases in FY17, so do the
individual contributions in absolute terms. The percentages relative to the total budget of each
institution are broadly constant in line with the changing envelopes of the respective institutions.
IEG’s regular budget remains flat in real terms since FY05.
                                                                          - 27 -


                                       Table 1: IEG Institution Contributions, FY14–19

                                                           FY14               FY15              FY16             FY17              FY18         FY19
    (in nominal dollars)                                  Budget             Budget            Budget          Proposed          Indicative   Indicative
                                                            $m                 $m                $m               $m                 $m           $m
    WB Contribution                                           26.6               26.5             26.4              26.3              27.1        27.9
    IFC Contribution                                          7.0                7.0              7.0               6.9               7.1         7.4
    MIGA Contribution                                         0.6                0.6              0.6               0.6               0.6         0.6
    Total IEG                                                 34.2               34.1             34.0              33.8              34.8        35.9


    Contribution as % of IEG funding
         WB                                                   78%                78%              78%               78%               78%         78%
         IFC                                                  20%                20%              20%               20%               20%         20%
         MIGA                                                 2%                 2%               2%                2%                2%          2%
         Total                                                100%               100%             100%              100%              100%        100%
    IEG as % of parent institution budget
         WB 1/                                                1.0%               1.0%             1.0%              1.1%              1.2%        1.2%
         IFC 2/                                               0.8%               0.7%             0.7%              0.7%              0.7%        0.7%
                  3/
         MIGA                                                 1.3%               1.1%             1.1%              1.0%              1.0%        1.0%
         Total                                                1.0%               1.0%             1.0%              1.0%              1.0%        1.0%
    1/ WB: Net Administrative BB Budget, FY16 World Bank Budget document, page 11, table 2.2
    2/ IFC: Total Administrative Budget, IFC FY16 Budget document, page 42, table 14
    3/ MIGA: Total Administrative Budget, MIGA Three Year Business Plan (FY15-17) and FY16 Administrative Budget document, page 23, table 4



95.     Trust funds. IEG expects to receive $0.8 million in trust funds in FY17, including: (1) $0.6
million from the multi-donor trust fund that was established in FY10 to support IEG’s evaluation
capacity development program, including the CLEAR secretariat; and (2) $0.2 million continuing
from a Japan Policy and Human Resource staff grant. As described in last year’s work program,
IEG updated its procedures in FY16 on the use of trust funds, to align with evolving Bank Group
guidance set out in the revised Trust Fund Handbook.

96.     Capital budget. No new capital budget is requested for FY17. The most recent capital
budget allocation was approved in FY14 and the project closed in December 2015. The project
established a high-quality search function covering all document collections relevant to IEG’s
evaluation research; introduced new electronic process automation for streamlining complex and
labor-intensive document production; and expanded the use of text analytics for greater insight and
productivity.

97.     Expenditure Review. IEG completed an internal Expenditure Review in FY14 to identify
opportunities to enhance efficiency and reduce costs, in parallel to the WBG initiative. Four key
findings emerged from the Review:

         Benchmarking data confirmed that IEG’s budget share (0.9 percent of total WBG budget)
          falls in the lower range of comparable multilateral institutions;1
         IEG continues to experience some weaknesses in budget management and bunching of
          deliverables, in particular effective tracking of expenditures against task plans;



1 Comparator institutions include: Asian Development Bank (evaluation budget share of 1.8 percent), African
Development Bank (1.7 percent), Inter-American Development Bank and Islamic Development Bank (1.3
percent), and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (1.2 percent).
                                                 - 28 -


      IEG performs better than the Bank on some variable cost efficiency measures, but compares
       unfavorably on specific measures in the travel and consultant areas; and
      IEG’s share of sustaining and indirect costs stands above comparable units in the WBG,
       reflecting a relatively large share of GI/GH staff as well as high office-space-to-staff ratio.

98.     Based on the analysis, IEG made several recommendations that would generate net cost
savings of 8 percent of IEG’s budget in FY15-17, which were reviewed and endorsed by CODE and
the Board. These include reduction in GI/GH staffing levels, improvements in variable cost
management (particularly related to consultant fees and travel costs), efficiency gains from ongoing
IT investments, reductions in office space, and other measures. In addition, IEG is continuing to
focus on redeploying resources from “backline” functions to “frontline” evaluation work. In FY17,
the total savings from the implementation of the Expenditure Review are projected to stand at $2.7
million and have been reflected in the spending trends, described below.

99.     Spending trends. Table 2 sets out trends in resource use over the FY13 - 19 period,
including regular budget resources, trust funds, and other income. IEG’s strategic directions are
reflected in the spending proposals, as follows:

      The proportion of spending on Major Evaluations declines from 25 percent in FY13 to 23
       percent in FY17-19, in line with the earlier decision agreed with CODE to reduce the number
       of major evaluations and redeploy the savings to other product lines like learning and PPARs.

      The proportion of spending on Other Evaluation Products increases from 11 percent in FY13
       to 13 percent in FY17-19. This reflects:

           o The earlier agreement with CODE to scale up the delivery of learning and knowledge
             products, which increase from $0.5 million in FY13 to $1.6 million in FY17-19;

           o The agreement in last year’s work program to increase the coverage of PPARs, as
             reviewed in para. 68, which increases from $1.5 million in FY15 to $3.0 million by
             FY19;

           o The corresponding decrease in Other Evaluations, from $1.5 million in FY13 to $0.1
             million in FY17-19, as IEG is not planning any freestanding global program reviews in
             FY17-19.

      Spending on validation products has been projected at roughly the same level in FY17-19.
       The spending plans for outer-years will be revised pending further analysis and discussions
       about the scope for (1) streamlining of the ICRR and CLR validation process (which would
       reduce costs), and (2) possible piloting the validation of World Bank AAA products (which
       would increase costs).

      Spending on Knowledge and Communications Services is projected at roughly the same level
       in FY17-19 (this budget item includes publications and outreach, internal knowledge
       management, internal methods work, and internal staff learning costs). Within this category,
       we are assuming (1) cost-efficiencies arising from the shift from printed reports to e-reports,
       and from face-to-face learning delivery to e-learning, and the introduction of new text analytic
                                                - 29 -


       tools that will reduce staff time in research, made possible by the capital budget program; and
       (ii) increased expenditures for methods work.

      Sustaining costs remain broadly even in nominal terms, with savings corresponding to the
       phased reduction of GI/GH positions and backline functions offset by annual staff salary
       increases.

                        Table 2. Summary of Sources and Uses, FY13–19




100. Table 3 sets out spending trends by expense categories for regular budget resources. From
FY14 to FY19, staff costs are projected to increase by 10 percent in nominal terms, reflecting annual
price increases and the replacement of ETCs with term appointments, in line with strategic staffing
plans. Consultant costs largely remain the same, as annual prices increases have been offset by
reduction in rates, in line with our Expenditure Review targets. In line with the Expenditure Review
measures, travel cost, reduced both in volume and rate, are expected to rise in line with the increased
cost of travel.
                                                     - 30 -


             Table 3: Expenditure Trends by Expense Category, FY14-19 (BB only)




3. Accountability Framework

101. IEG adheres to WBG budget rules and procedures. IEG is subject to Controller’s Quality
Assurance reviews of selected expenses and has consistently received favorable ratings on adherence
to budget rules, procedures, and policies. IEG’s control environment continues to be ranked as one
of the strongest in its peer group.

102. In regard to external audit, the contributions by World Bank, IFC, and MIGA are audited as
part of regular external audits of those institutions.

103. In November 2006 the Board approved a procedure formalizing CODE’s role in overseeing
IEG’s budget and safeguarding its independence in the governance structure of the WBG. This
procedure includes the periodic review of IEG’s budget proposal every 2-3 years by an independent
external budget analyst, validating the adequacy of IEG’s annual budget proposal as well as its
consistency with the overall WBG budgetary principles.

104. The earlier independent review was conducted for FY13 and concluded: “IEG’s budget
formulation and management is broadly satisfactory as there have been no major changes from budget practice,
expenditures, and outputs achieved in the recent past.” Specific recommendations were made to reduce
bunching, improve costing and monitoring of deliverables, and introduce stronger tracking of
expenditures against plans, all of which IEG has been implementing.

105. Slippages and bunching of major evaluations were a significant problem in FY16,
exacerbated by the internal reorganization that contributed to some delays in launching work on
                                                - 31 -


evaluations and learning products. IEG has put in place a firm program to reduce bunching in
FY17 (though four evaluations are still expected to be delivered in the fourth quarter), and eliminate
bunching in FY18, where there will be an even distribution of evaluations by quarter. Key measures
include: allocating more resources in the year before delivery so that field work and data collection
will be done earlier, better upfront planning of tasks, more effective tracking and reporting, and
periodic management reviews and coordination of deliveries across all IEG products. In addition to
real time technical tracking of milestones, IEG management conducts a Quarterly Business Review
Meetings with Department Management Teams, focusing on individual products and tasks and
troubleshooting delivery bottlenecks.

106. Budget management has improved, as IEG Management has implemented several measures
in response to the earlier budget review to strengthen budget management:

      Greater realism in developing robust budgets in Approach Papers;
      Instilling stronger budget discipline among TTLs, adhering to task budgets and prioritizing
       individual components;
      Systematic monitoring by TTLs and Managers of actual costs against Approach Paper
       budgets and a resolution mechanism should new developments arise;
      Closer focus by TTLs and Managers on managing elapsed time, and staff and consultant
       costs, between the Approach Paper and Final Report Review Meetings; and
      Regular IEG Leadership Team oversight of elapsed time and costs, and more proactive
       decisions on corrective actions, where needed.

107. The current independent review of the FY17 work program and budget is being finalized.
IEG will implement appropriate measures following the CODE and Budget Committee review and
discussion of the findings.
                                                                                            - 32 -
                                                                        Annex 1: IEG Results Framework

Objective 1: What Works – Deepening evidence about the results of WBG program and activities – and their effectiveness for accelerating growth,
inclusiveness, and sustainability – to contribute to the WBG’s interim target of 9% poverty and progress on shared prosperity by 2020
                                                             Intermediate (1-3 years)                                                      Medium Term (4-6 years)
         Deliverables
                                                 Outcomes                                  Indicators                           Outcomes                          Indicators
                                                                             -   Overall feedback on quality of                                      - IEG influence on client results
Major sector, thematic, and
                                   - Greater understanding of:                   IEG work from Client Survey         - Better informed policy and       supported by WBG operations
country evaluations and
                                      - When and how WBG activities          -   External assessment of quality         operational choices by the   - Client feedback on IEG
learning products focused on
                                        lead to growth, inclusiveness,           of major evaluations                   Board, Management, and          influence and impact
WBG contributions to twin
                                        and sustainability (learning)        -   Self-assessment of strategic           Clients                      - External assessment of actual use
goals –with particular reference
                                      - Whether WBG activities are               alignment of major evaluations                                         and impact of evaluations
to:                                                                                                                  - Enhanced WBG
                                        aligned with the twin goals and      -   Efficiency measure of elapsed                                       - Level of adoption of evaluation
- WBG Scorecard categories                                                                                              development effectiveness in
                                        effective in contributing to their       time in evaluation processing                                          recommendations and
- IDA Special Themes                                                                                                    terms of contributing to the
                                        achievement (accountability)         -   Value for money measure                                                Management actions in MAR
- IFC Areas of Strategic                                                                                                attainment of twin goals.
                                      - IDA Performance                      -   Measures of usage of IEG work                                       - Measure of IEG knowledge
   Emphasis
                                                                                 by Board and WBG staff                                                 flows
Corporate performance data for      Timely delivery of high quality          -   Compliance with service             Stronger portfolio performance - IEG portfolio performance
WBG Scorecard and IDA RMS           performance data                             standards for validation delivery   from improved M&E               ratings
Stronger methods for evaluating
                                    New methods mainstreamed in IEG          - Completion of Methods Action          Increased relevance and quality   - External assessment of accuracy
WBG contributions to inclusive
                                    evaluation work                            Plan                                  of evaluation evidence            and validity of evaluations
growth, gender, sustainability
Objective 2: Real-Time Learning – Generating evidence on the early implementation experience of the WBG Strategy to enable mid-course corrections,
and promote a stronger internal culture for results, accountability, and learning
   Helping Clients Tackle the Most Important Development Challenges
                                                                   Intermediate                                                                    Medium Term
         Deliverables
                                                Outcomes                                Indicators                               Outcomes                           Indicators
Process evaluation of early        Adjustments to the country                - Feedback on quality of IEG            - Enhanced country-level           - Client feedback on WB
implementation of new country      engagement model to increase                work from country clients in            performance (ownership,            effectiveness and impact on
engagement model                   effectiveness, if needed                    Client Survey                           selectivity, results focus)        results
Country-level learning products    Use of IEG evaluation evidence in         - Coverage of IEG evaluation            - Stronger country-level results - IEG ratings on outcomes of
                                   SCD, CPF, PLR, and CLR                      evidence in SCD, CPF, PLR,              (outcomes, growth,                 country strategies
                                                                               CLR                                     inclusiveness, and               - IEG ratings of WB performance
                                                                                                                       sustainability)                    on country strategies
                                                                                                                     - Enhanced quality of SCD,         - Coverage of evaluation capacity
                                                                                                                       CPF, PLR, and CLR                  development in country strategy
System for validation of self-     Self-evaluation system is incentivized    - Compliance with service                 Learning cycles lead to
evaluation in PLR/CLR              to serve learning and accountability        standards for validation delivery       continuous improvement
Support evaluation capacity        Mainstreaming of ECD in country           - Stakeholder feedback on ECD             Client-driven demand for
development in client countries    engagement model and enhanced               product quality and use                 high quality WBG support for
                                   coordination with WBG SCB work                                                      ECD
                                                                                      - 33 -


   Becoming a Solutions Bank Group
                                                           Intermediate (1-3 years)                                                      Medium Term (4-6 years)
         Deliverables
                                               Outcomes                              Indicators                             Outcomes                           Indicators
Evaluations of lending and        Adjustments to lending and            - Feedback from GP/CCSA,                -   GP/CCSA, IFC, MIGA             - Stakeholder feedback on WBG
knowledge services and            knowledge services and instruments         IFC, MIGA on quality of IEG            marshal best knowledge to        knowledge
instruments, including early      to increase efficiency and                 work in Client Survey                  provide world class,           - IEG ratings on outcomes of
implementation experience of      effectiveness, and alignment if       - Coverage of IEG evaluation                integrated, evidenced-based      WBG operations
GP/CCSA and IFC reforms           needed                                     evidence in major GP/CCSA,             solutions                      - Level of adoption of relevant
Sector and thematic learning      Use of knowledge from IEG                  IFC, MIGA knowledge                -   Teams work on cross-             evaluation recommendations and
products supporting global        evaluations in the work of                 products                               practice and public-private      Management actions in MAR
knowledge flows in GP/CCSA,       GP/CCSA, IFC, MIGA                    - Coverage of IEG evaluation                solutions                      - IEG ratings of quality at entry
IFC, MIGA                                                                    evidence in WBG operations         -   Improved quality and impact      and quality of supervision of WB
Appraisals of operational self-   Adjustments as needed to enhance      - Level of adoption of relevant             of investment, knowledge,        and IFC projects
evaluation and development        efficiency and effectiveness of            evaluation recommendations             and convening services
risk management systems           systems                                    and Management actions in          -   Stronger internal culture and
Operational learning products     Use of IEG lessons learned and             MAR                                    competencies around results
to strengthen results and         good practices in operations                                                      delivery for clients
evidenced-based operations
System for validation of self-    Self-evaluation system is             -   Compliance with service             Learning cycles lead to
evaluation of lending and         incentivized to serve learning and        standards for validation delivery   continuous improvement
knowledge                         accountability                        -   Completion of action plan to
                                                                            restructure ICR validation
                                                                            system
   Working in Partnership
                                                           Intermediate (1-3 years)                                                     Medium Term (4-6 years)
         Deliverables
                                               Outcomes                              Indicators                              Outcomes                         Indicators
Evaluations of WBG                Adjustments to partnership and TF     - Coverage of partnerships in           -   Alignment of TFs and          - Alignment of WBG partnerships
partnership and trust fund        arrangements to increase efficiency,      IEG evaluation work                     Partnerships with twin goals    with Strategy
programs                          effectiveness and alignment, if       - Feedback from partners on             -   Leverage external knowledge, - Level of adoption of relevant
                                  needed                                    quality of IEG work in Client           resources, and collaboration    evaluation recommendations and
Evaluations of collaboration      Learning and accountability on            Survey                                  for greater development         Management action in MAR
with development partners,        effectiveness on collaboration and    - Level of adoption of relevant             effectiveness                 - Use of beneficiary feedback
particularly private sector and   leveraging stakeholders’                  evaluation recommendations          -   Increased efficiency and        during project implementation
citizens                          contributions for inclusive growth        and Management action in                effectiveness of partnerships
Learning products                 Use of knowledge from IEG                 MAR                                 -   Citizens engaged in design
                                  evaluations to improve partnership                                                and monitoring of operations
                                  arrangements
                                                 - 34 -


                   Annex 2: Description of IEG Strategic Engagement Areas

                                        1. Inclusive Growth

Overview

Economic opportunity and productive jobs are atop the development agenda in all countries. It is
the cornerstone of development, generating the resources for growth, providing pathways out of
poverty, and improving living standards for all. Realizing economic potential requires a vibrant
private sector and capable government. But models that have worked for development success
stories, such as China and Korea, are proving elusive. Many countries face jobless growth, growing
inequality, environmental degradation and persistent unemployment or under-employment that
impede prosperity and poverty reduction. A key development challenge is generating growth that is
inclusive, resilient and sustainable and that creates jobs.

Factors central to addressing this challenge include: macroeconomic stability, an enabling business
environment, and the rule of law; capable public and private institutions; access to productive assets
(land, knowledge, capital, infrastructure) and to markets; harnessing the powers of economic
integration and technological change; and policies for creating jobs that are good for development
and transformational for people’s lives. Sustainably addressing these challenges will be ephemeral
without reducing vulnerability to crises. While these issues are wide ranging, much else is needed to
eliminate extreme poverty and share prosperity, including access to basic services, security, investing
in human development, voice and empowerment, and good stewardship of natural capital—global,
regional and local. These issues will be covered in other strategic engagement areas.

Several recent IEG evaluations focus on issues that are central for inclusive growth: evaluations of
WBG activities in Investment Climate, SMEs, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, PPPs, Trade
Finance, and Youth Employment. Ongoing work covers the areas of Inclusive Finance, Jobs and
Competitiveness, Supporting Tertiary Education for Growth and Opportunity; Capital Market
Development, and Rural and Urban Development Strategies.

Both formal and informal sector job creation hinges on mobilizing public and private investment,
and developing effective public and private institutions. This Strategic Engagement Area squarely
addresses the public-private interface necessary for inclusive growth that creates jobs. Four priority
evaluations have been identified for the next three years: (1) The critical importance of the informal
sector for the poor in many countries, both lower and middle income, is often overlooked and
forms the core of this evaluation; (2) The effective role of the private sector in supporting
development priorities relies on good corporate governance and corporate social responsibility and
form the core of the second topic; (3) the third topic addresses the effectiveness and role of public
financial instruments (tax and expenditure policies) to mobilize and direct private investment flows,
both foreign and domestic, to priority areas; and finally (4) how has the WBG supported shared
prosperity and reduced inequality through country engagement, a topic squarely aligned with
economic opportunity, but touching also on issues central to the other Strategic Engagement Areas
with respect to equality in access to basic services and sharing in sustainable access to land, clean
water, forests, and other natural resources.
                                                 - 35 -


Potential Impact

Promoting inclusive and shared growth is one of the most daunting and pressing global challenges.
It is at the center of the World Bank Group Strategy and critical for the twin goals. Addressing this
challenge requires strong partnership between the public and the private sectors and, within the
World Bank Group, integration of the Group’s public and private sector capabilities. With its focus
on the public-private interface, this Strategic Engagement Area connects directly with the agenda of
“One World Bank Group”. Evaluation of the private-public interface--fostering investment
opportunity, improving the ‘quality of growth’, and promoting broad participation in the economy--
holds the promise of being transformational, lifting Bank effectiveness.

                            2. Sustained Service Delivery for the Poor

Overview

Access to social services are essential for poverty eradication. The 2004 World Development
Report illustrated that illiteracy, ill health, gender inequality, and environmental degradation are all
aspects of being poor. Going back to Robert Chambers rapid rural appraisal and participation, the
development community has recognized that access to services to enhance human capital is essential
to escape poverty.

Looking back at more than ten years of delivering services to the poor. Progress has been made
against some of the relevant MDGs, such as equity and enrolment rates, but the WDR equally
emphasized access, quantity, and quality of health, education, water, sanitation, and electricity
services. While this definition has broadened in the Social Inclusion Strategy of the World Bank
Group to include other services than these (adding social protection, information, transport, and
credit markets), the model for service delivery suggested in the WDR 2004 remains an important
entry point to understand whether the poor have access to the quantity and quality of services that
helps them live decent lives and participate in economic opportunities.

Remaining challenges. Governments devote about a third of their budgets to health and
education, yet it is unclear how much reaches poor people. Even when public spending can be
reallocated toward poor people, the resources do not always reach the frontline service provider and,
if it does, quality is not assured: the incentives for effective service delivery are often weak, wages
may not be paid or service-delivery monitored. Other problems that can undermine services include
corruption, political patronage, lack of social accountability, and a lack of demand (due to real or
perceived poor quality of service, lack of time to seek the service, cultural barriers or lack of
knowledge). The WDR suggested a three-pronged model of accountability in the 'service delivery chain':

    i)      poor people who require voice in policy making, provide feedback on services received,
            and participate in monitoring and accountability, using modern technology or other
            means of participation;

    ii)     government who must contract and govern service provision, including promoting
            models that ensure services reach the poor, secure quantity and quality over time, weigh
            trade-offs between different sectors (local and national governments thinking about
            options in service provisions across sectors), develop models that allow various providers
                                                  - 36 -


            to participate in cost-effective ways (RBF, pay-on-demand, and other schemes), and
            institute systems that allow monitoring, feedback and learning over time; and

    iii)    providers who must be responsive to people and fulfill contracts, involving diverse
            service providers from public, private, and community sectors.

Questions of political economy and service delivery in difficult contexts – fragile, remote, low
population density, socially excluded minorities – play an overarching role across these dimensions of
accountability.

The focus of this Strategic Engagement Area over the next 3 years. This Strategic Engagement
Area will deliver a series of three evaluations, each focusing on a specific sector or sub-sector: urban
transport; water supply and sanitation; and nutrition. A common framework, to be developed and
published in a Working Paper, will be applied in the three service delivery evaluations. Using this
comprehensive framework, each evaluation will be able to describe the models most commonly
supported in that particular sector, and compare effectiveness of the models in terms of reaching the
poor, in terms of quality, behavior change and impact, and in terms of sustaining the services over
time. The findings are likely to differ across political, cultural and implementation capacity realities.

Using this common approach, IEG will then produce a “chapeau” or synthesis product that draws
upon and contrasts findings from the three sectors, as well as other relevant existing evaluative
material in IEG. This product will also be able to identify service delivery models that may have
been used (successfully or not) in certain sectors supported by the Bank Group but not in others,
thus potentially uncovering gaps where innovation can occur.

Potential Impact

Evaluations will tell us what works and what doesn’t in service delivery, so the first way we will have
an impact is in identifying more comprehensively what works under what circumstances and in which
sectors in relation to all four dimensions of service delivery - access, quantity, quality and sustainability
of services. A focus on evaluating whether systems have been built to continuously monitor, provide
feedback, take corrective action, and learn, will help understand whether and how service delivery has
been built to be sustained.

As the GPs and CCSAs are developing their strategies to tackle development challenges, IEG’s
findings on whether and how service delivery has been sustainable can have a transformational
impact on Bank operations. Most GPs which involve service delivery such as health, education, social
protection, transport, water, energy, Social, Urban, Rural, (and Resilience), agriculture, etc. are likely
to be involved in the proposed topic most directly.

Gap Analysis

Support to service delivery to the poor is, directly or indirectly, at the heart of most of the WBG’s
business. IEG has carried out a few evaluations that address specific services, e.g. transport,
electricity access, financial services. These have to varying degrees assessed targeting of the poor and
financial sustainability, but have not been able to assess sustained outcomes. A number of services
such as water and sanitation, nutrition, and urban services have not been assessed recently. IEG has
previously not considered ‘the science of sustained delivery’ with a cross-sectoral perspective, has
                                                - 37 -


not addressed the role of citizen engagement and social accountability in ensuring successful service
delivery to the poor, and has not assessed service delivery with a social inclusion or environmental
sustainability lens.

                                 3. Environmental Sustainability

Overview

Growth and poverty reduction requires sustainable management of natural resources, and mitigation
of environmental externalities. Sustainable environmental management is both difficult, and critical
for poor people because of well-known problems of collective action. In many cases, natural capital
is over-exploited, with non-sustainable growth patterns. It is difficult for those affected – poor,
diffuse, and without effective voice – to organize for more efficient and equitable resource
management. So the poor are disproportionately affected.

Climate change is a prominent example. But others include:

      air pollution, which kills over 3 million people annually, mostly in the developing world
      unsustainable exploitation of groundwater, imperiling the livelihoods of hundreds of millions
      overexploitation and destruction of fisheries
      rural and urban flooding due to deforestation, loss of wetlands, urban paving and poor
       drainage
      land degradation from overgrazing

Promoting sustainable patterns of consumption and production and protecting and managing the
natural resource base, including sustainable approaches to landscape management, water resources,
energy efficiency, and climate change, are at the core of the twin goals. Natural resources and
ecosystem services are fundamental to meeting basic needs (e.g. providing livelihoods, shelter, food
and fresh water) and reducing income inequalities, both in rural and urban settings. They are also a
key component of the inclusion and shared prosperity agenda, particularly regarding traditionally
marginalized and disempowered communities, such as women, children and indigenous
communities. Natural resource degradation or contention also contributes to violent conflicts in
many IDA and IBRD countries.

Signaling the centrality of this issue, more than one third of the 16 SDGs make direct reference to
actions that would improve the sustainability of the environment and natural resource base.
Examples of these goals include:

      Ensure availability and sustainable management of water [and sanitation] for all (Goal 6)
      Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all (Goal 7)
      Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns (Goal 12)
      Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts (Goal 13)
      Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas, and marine resources for sustainable
       development (Goal 14)
      Protect, restore, and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage
       forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity
       loos (Goal 15).
                                                 - 38 -


While each country has primary responsibility for the management of its own natural resource
base, because of the global common nature of much of this base, global partnership and therefore
global mobilization of financing from a variety of sources are demanded in order to promote
environment and natural capital sustainability. In sum, delivering evaluation evidence in this area is
not only of high priority for domestic and global policy making but urgent and indispensable for
eradicating extreme poverty and improving the lives of the bottom 40 percent of the population.

Potential Impact

While climate change has risen in attention over recent years, less attention has been paid to some of
the other urgent environmental issues. Making this issue a focal point for IEG will help galvanize
the profile of environmental sustainability issues, including their key role in addressing the twin
goals.

Gap Analysis

While IEG has extensively evaluated climate change, and has done an evaluation of forestry issues,
there has been no comprehensive evaluation of environmental issues since 2008, and environmental
issues have had limited treatment in sectoral evaluations. The issues mentioned above – air
pollution, water basin management, fisheries, urban environmental management – are ripe for
examination.
                                               - 39 -


                  Annex 3: Selectivity Framework for IEG Evaluation Topics

To identify the specific evaluation topics for the work program, IEG followed five steps.

First, as reviewed in Chapter 1, we have prioritized three cross-cutting Strategic Engagement Areas
to (1) enhance IEG’s focus on “game changers,”(2) better leverage IEG resources across product
lines, and (3) maximize influence and impact. These areas are designed to build a robust and
integrated knowledge base about WBG contribution to the twin goals – and generate strategic
findings to help the Board and Bank Group make informed decisions about WBG programs.

Second, we reviewed and updated the “gap analysis” that was introduced three years ago to assess
the coverage of IEG evaluations over the past six years, and identify knowledge gaps within the
Strategic Engagement Areas where IEG evaluation work would add value. The analysis looked at
gaps in the evidence base related to the strategic directions of the WBG (as set out in the FY14
World Bank Group Strategy, FY16 Forward Look, FY17-19 IFC Business Strategy and Outlook,
and provisional IDA18 Special Themes). We also reviewed our evaluation coverage related to the
size and spend of WBG lending (summary tables are included in Annex 4).

Third, we mapped existing and planned evaluation work against the two objectives of the IEG
Results Framework to identify pressing knowledge areas where additional evaluation evidence was
needed to achieve the intermediate and medium term outcomes that we have set out.

Fourth, work program discussions were held with CODE, the senior leadership teams of the three
institutions, GPs and CCSAs, IFC industry groups, and other internal partners, to solicit their
recommendations for evaluation priorities. External consultations were held with civil society
organizations, think tanks, and other global partners. Overall, there was strong endorsement for
alignment of the IEG work program with the WBG Strategy and reform agenda, and the value of
the three Strategic Engagement Areas to enhance selectivity and influence.

Fifth, all proposed topics were subject to the IEG selectivity framework, which focused on the
following key questions:

1. What is the scope and purpose of the product?
      How does the product contribute to the IEG Results Framework and the three Strategic
       Engagement Areas?
      How does the product relate to the twin goals, the strategic priorities set out in new WBG
       Strategy, and corporate reform agenda?
      How does it connect to other external strategic directions such as Sustainable Development
       Goals, and country client priorities?
      How is the timing of the product aligned with key WBG corporate deliverables and decision
       points?

2. How is this a game changer?
      How is this a transformational topic that will maximize impact?
                                               - 40 -


      Who is the specific audience that we seek to influence?
      What is the level of Board, WBG Management, and GP/CCSA interest in this area?

3. Why IEG?
      What makes IEG uniquely positioned to conduct this work?
      What is the value added that an independent evaluation perspective would bring, compared
       with WBG self-evaluation, DEC research, existing external evaluations, etc.
      Will the product address a knowledge gap in IEG, follow up an earlier evaluation, or follow
       up an important and unresolved MAR issue?

4. What are the challenges and risks?
      What are the key implementation challenges or risks for IEG working on this product and
       achieving impact (internal skills and knowledge, methodology and data, political economy,
       level of client commitment and engagement, etc)?
                                                   - 41 -

                     Annex 4: Gap Analysis of Recent IEG Evaluations

                       Recent IEG Evaluations by Sector (FY10-16)
                      % of WB
      Sector          Lending                                    Evaluations
                       (FY15)
                                Global Food Crisis Response (FY13)
                                Managing Forest Resources for Sustainable Development (FY13)
                                Impact Evaluations in Agriculture (FY11)
Agriculture and
Rural                   7.6     Growth and Productivity in Agriculture and Agribusiness (FY11)
Development
                                GPR: Forest Carbon Partnership (FY12)
                                GPR: International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science, and
                                Technology for Development (FY10)

Education               9.5     World Bank Support to Education Since 2001 (FY11)
                                Electricity Access (FY15)
                                Clustered CPE on Resource Rich Countries (FY15)
Energy and Mining      10.1
                                Challenge of Low-Carbon Dev.: Climate Change and WBG - Phase II (FY10)
                                Climate Change and WBG: Win-Win Energy Policy Reforms - Phase I (FY09)
                                GPR: EITI (FY11)
                                Capital Market Development (FY16)
                                Inclusive Financing (FY15)
Finance                 9.4
                                WBG Response to the Global Economic Crisis - Phase II (FY12)
                                WBG Response to the Global Economic Crisis - Phase I (FY10)
                                Health Systems Financing (FY14)
                                Social Safety Nets and Gender Equality (FY14)
                                Maternal and Child Health Care Systematic Review (FY13)
                                What Can We Learn from Nutrition Impact Evaluations? (FY10)
Health and Other
                       16.0     Social Safety Nets (FY11)
Social Services
                                Improving Effectiveness and Outcomes for the Poor in Health, Nutrition and
                                Population (FY09)

                                GPR: GAVI (FY14)
                                GPR: The Global Fund to Fight AIDs, Tuberculosis and Malaria (FY12)
                                Jobs and Competiveness (FY16)
                                Support to SMEs (FY14)
                                Public-Private Partnerships (FY14)
Industry and                    Investment Climate Reform (FY14)
                        5.3
Trade
                                Trade Finance (FY13)
                                Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and Competitiveness (FY13)
                                Support to SMEs (FY13)

ICT                     0.8     Capturing Technology for Development (FY11)
                                World Bank Country-Level Engagement on Governance and Anticorruption
Public                          (FY11)
Administration,        18.3
                                World Bank Engagement at the State Level (FY10)
Law, and Justice
                                Improving Municipal Management for Cities to Succeed (FY10)

Transportation         11.9     Improving Capability and Financial Viability to Sustain Transport (FY13)
Water, Sanitation,
and Flood              11.2     GPR: Global Water Partnership (FY10)
Protection
                                             - 42 -
                          Recent IEG Evaluations by Theme (FY10-16)


                % of WB
   Theme        Lending                                           Evaluations
                 (FY15)

                            Clustered CPE on Resource Rich Countries (FY15)
Economic
                  1.7       WBG Response to the Global Economic Crisis - Phase II (FY12)
Management
                            WBG Response to the Global Economic Crisis - Phase I (FY10)
                            Adapting to Climate Change: Assessing WBG Experience - Phase III (FY13)
                            Managing Forest Resources for Sustainable Development (FY13)
Environment
and Natural                 The Challenge of Low-Carbon Dev.: Climate Change and WBG - Phase II (FY10)
                  8.0
Resources                   GPR: GEF (FY14)
Management
                            GPR: Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FY13)
                            GPR: Global Water Partnership (FY10)
                            Capital Market Development (FY16)
                            Jobs and Competitiveness (FY16)
                            Inclusive Finance (FY15)
                            Support to SMEs (FY14)
Financial and               Investment Climate Reform (FY14)
Private
                 19.3       Public-Private Partnerships (FY14)
Sector
Development                 Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and Competitiveness (FY13)
                            Assessing IFC's Poverty Focus and Results (FY11)
                            GPR: EITI (FY11)
                            Earnings and Growth and Employment Creation in 3 MICs (FY11)
                            MIGA Financial Guarantees (FY11)
                            Early Childhood Development (FY15)
                            Health Systems Financing (FY14)
                            Maternal and Child Health Care IE Review (FY13)
Human                       World Bank Support to Education Since 2001 (FY11)
                 16.0
Development                 What Can We Learn from Nutrition Impact Evaluations? (FY10)
                            GPR: GAVI (FY14)
                            GPR: The Global Fund to Fight AIDs, Tuberculosis and Malaria (FY12)
                            GPR: Stop TB Partnership (FY10)

Public Sector               World Bank Country-Level Engagement on Governance and Anticorruption (FY11)
                  6.6
Governance                  World Bank Engagement at the State Level (FY10)
Rule of Law       1.9
                            Global Food Crisis Response (FY13)
Rural
                 11.9       Impact Evaluations in Agriculture (FY11)
Development
                            Growth and Productivity in Agriculture and Agribusiness (FY11)
                            2015 Results and Performance Report – Gender Chapter (FY16)
Social
Development,                Social Safety Nets and Gender Equality (FY14)
                  4.1
Gender, and                 Social Safety Nets (FY11)
Inclusion
                            Analyzing the Effects of Policy Reforms on the Poor (FY10)
                            Poverty Focus of Country Programs (FY15)
Social Prot.
and Risk         15.3       Youth Employment Programs (FY12)
Management                  Social Safety Nets (FY11)

Trade and                   Trade Finance (FY13)
                  4.0
Integration                 WB Involvement in Global and Regional Partnership Programs (FY11)
Urban Dev.       11.2       Improving Municipal Management for Cities to Succeed (FY10)
                                                         - 43 -


                           Annex 5: Proposed Work Program for FY17-19

                               Table 1: Work Program by Business Line



Business Line              FY16 Actual                    FY17                         FY18                      FY19
1. Major Evaluations
Thematic and Sector 1. Capital Market             1. Higher Education       1.    Clean World for      1. Sustainable Cities
Evaluations            Development                                                All
                                                  2. Shared Prosperity in                              2. Facilitating Trade
                       2. Jobs and                   Country Programs       2.    Public Finance
                          Competitiveness                                         for Investment       3. Sustainable and
                                                  3. Rural Non-Farm               and Jobs                Inclusive Business
                                                     Economy
                                                                                                       4. Environmental
                                                                            3.    Mobilization of
                                                  4. Water Supply and             Private Capital         Degradation
                                                     Sanitation
                                                                            4.    Essential Health     5. Decentralization
                                                  5. Urban Transport              Care Services
                                                     Services
                                                                            5.    Carbon Finance
                                                                            6.    Renewable Energy
Corporate and          3. Review of P4R           6. Process Evaluation     7.    Engaging Citizens    6.    Process
Process Evaluations                                  of SCD and CPF                                          Evaluation of
                       4. Assessment of                                                                      GP/CCSAs
                          WBG’s Self-             7. Data for
                          Evaluation Systems         Development
                                                  8. IFC Client
                                                     Engagement Model
Country-Focused        5. Fragile Situations in                             8. CPEs on MICs            7.    CPEs on MICs
Evaluations               Non-FCS Countries
                                                                                                       8.    CPE MIC
                       6. Clustered CPE on                                                                   Synthesis Report
                          Small States (2
                          country reports plus
                          synthesis report)


Results and            7. RAP 2015: Gender        9. RAP 2016:              9. RAP 2017:               9. RAP 2018:
Performance Report        Equality                   Managing for              Sustainability in          Working in
                                                     Results                   Operations                 Partnership
2. Other Evaluation Products
PPARs                     World Bank: 50              World Bank: 55             World Bank: 60             World Bank: 60
                           IFC/MIGA: 8                IFC/MIGA: 8                 IFC/MIGA: 8                IFC/MIGA: 8
Systematic Reviews     2 impact evaluations         2 impact evaluations         [TBD in prior year]        TBD in prior year]
and Impact
Evaluations
                                                         - 44 -

Business Line               FY16 Actual                    FY17                      FY18                         FY19
Learning Products       Maximizing                  [TBD -- selected in     [TBD -- selected in          [TBD -- selected in
                        Development Impact         consultation with        consultation with            consultation with
                        in IDA (LP II)             Management, based on     Management, based on         Management, based on
                        Lessons from Joint         operational needs]       operational needs]           operational needs]
                        WBG Projects (LP I)
                        WBG
                        Transformational
                        Engagements (LP II)
                        Domestic Resource
                        Mobilization in WBG
                        Instruments (LP I)
                        Financial Sustainability
                        of Electricity Sector
                        (LP I)
                        Gender Impacts of
                        CDD (LP I)
                        Land Administration
                        (LP I)
                        DPO: Political
                        Economy Analysis (LP
                        I)
                        DPO: Environment
                        Sector (LP I)
                        Off-Grid Electricity
                        (LP I)
                        Housing Financing
                        (LP I)
                        Learning in IFC (LP I)
3. Validation Products
 Country Strategy      22 estimate                 22 expected              [TBD in prior year, based    [TBD in prior year, based
 Completion Report                                                          on expected CAS/CPF          on expected CAS/CPF
 Validations                                                                delivery]                    delivery]
 Project Completion    IFC XPSR: 40%               IFC XPSR: 40%            [TBD in prior year, based    [TBD in prior year, based
 Report Validations    coverage (80 projects       coverage (96 projects    on actual project closure]   on actual project closure]
                       estimate)                   expected)
                        MIGA PER: (14              MIGA PER: (20
                        estimate)                  expected)
                        WB ICRR: 100%              WB ICRR: 100%
                        coverage (275 projects     coverage (250 projects
                        estimate)                  expected)
AAA/AS Completion       IFC PCR: 51%               IFC PCR: 51%             [TBD in prior year, based    [TBD in prior year, based
Report Validations      coverage (45 projects      coverage (87 projects    on actual project closure]   on actual project closure]
                        estimate)                  expected)
                                                           - 45 -


                              Annex 5: Proposed Work Program for FY17-19

                   Table 2: Major Evaluations and Learning Products by Objectives


 Objective 1: What Works – Deepening evidence about the results of WBG program and activities –
 and their effectiveness for accelerating growth, inclusiveness, and sustainability – to contribute to the
 achievement of WBG’s interim target of 9% poverty and progress on shared prosperity by 2020

    Results Area               FY16 Actual                    FY17                   FY18                     FY19
 Major sector and thematic evaluations and learning products
      Inclusive          - Capital Market             - Higher Education     - Public Finance for   - Facilitating Trade
       Growth               Development                                         Investment and
                                                        - Shared Prosperity     Jobs                 - Sustainable and
                          - Jobs and                      in Country                                   Inclusive Business
                            Competitiveness               Programs            - Mobilization of
                                                                                Private Capital      - Decentralization
                          - Domestic Resource           - Rural Non-Farm
                            Mobilization                  Economy
                          - Housing Finance
      Sustained          - Gender Impacts of CDD      - Water Supply and     - Essential Health     - Synthesis of FY16-18
       Service                                           Sanitation             Care Services          Work on Service
                          - Financial Sustainability                                                   Delivery
       Delivery for the
                            of Electricity Sector      - Urban Transport
       Poor
                                                         Services
                          - Off-Grid Electricity
                                                       - Working Papers on
                                                         Methodological
                                                         Framework for
                                                         Service Delivery
      Environmental      - Land Administration        -                      - Clean World for      - Environmental
       Sustainability                                                           All                    Degradation
                          - DPO: Environment
                            Sector                                            - Carbon Finance       - Sustainable Cities
                                                                              - Renewable
                                                                                Energy
                                                                              - RAP 2017:
                                                                                Environmental
                                                                                Sustainability in
                                                                                Operations
 Country evaluations      - Fragile Situations in                             - CPEs on MICs         - CPEs on MICs
                            Non-FCS Countries
                                                                                                     - CPE MIC Synthesis
                          - CCPE on Small                                                              Report
                            States
 Corporate                - RAP 2015: Gender           - RAP 2016:            - RAP 2017:            - RAP 2018: Working
 performance data           Equality                     Managing for           Environmental          in Partnership
                                                         Results                Sustainability in
                          - Maximizing Impact in                                Operations
                            IDA

[Note: Deliverables in italics are learning products]
                                                       - 46 -

 Objective 2: Real-Time Learning – Generating evidence to assess the early implementation
 experience of the WBG Strategy to enable mid-course corrections, and promote a stronger internal
 culture for results, accountability, and learning

   Results Area              FY16 Actual                  FY17                    FY18                     FY19
  Helping Clients Tackle the Most Important Development Challenges
 Evaluations of                                    - SCD/CPF Process
 country and client                                  Evaluation
 engagement
                                                   - IFC Client
                                                     Engagement
                                                     Model
 Country-level                                      [TBD -- selected in   [TBD -- selected in        [TBD -- selected in
 learning products                                 consultation with        consultation with         consultation with
                                                   Management, based on     Management, based on      Management, based on
                                                   operational needs]       operational needs         operational needs]
Becoming a Solutions Bank
 Evaluations of        - Review of P4R             - Data for                                      - Process Evaluation
 lending and                                         Development                                     of GP/CCSAs
 knowledge services    - Learning in IFC
 and instruments                                   - RAP Chapter on
                       - DPO: Political Economy      Managing for
                         Analysis                    Results
 Appraisals of self-   - Assessment of WBG
 evaluation and risk     Self-Evaluation Systems
 management
 systems
 Operational           - Transformational           [TBD -- selected in   [TBD -- selected in      [TBD -- selected in
 learning products       Engagements               consultation with        consultation with      consultation with
                                                   Management, based on     Management, based on   Management, based on
                       - Lessons from WBG Joint    operational needs]       operational needs]     operational needs]
                         Projects
 Working in Partnership
 Evaluation of                                                            - Engaging Citizens      - RAP 2018: Working
 partnerships                                                                                        in Partnership

 Learning products                                  [TBD -- selected in   [TBD -- selected in      [TBD -- selected in
 on partnerships                                   consultation with        consultation with      consultation with
                                                   Management, based on     Management, based on   Management, based on
                                                   operational needs]       operational needs]     operational needs]


[Note: Deliverables in italics are learning and knowledge sharing products]
                                                                                                               - 47 -

                                                            Annex 5: Proposed Work Program for FY17-19
                                       Table 3: Major Evaluations by Institution, WBG Strategic Focus, and IDA Special Theme
                                                                                     Institution                                            WBG Forw ard Look                                                                                                                                                WBG Strategy                                                                                      IFC Focus                                                                                     IDA Special




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Increase Mobilization from Private Sector
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Improve WBG Efficiency & Effectiveness
                                                                                                                                              Lead on Global and Regional Issues
    IEG Objective




                                                                                                                                                                                   Expand Knowledge Services




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Econ Transformation & Jobs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Governance & Inst Building
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Financial & Social Inclusion




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fragility, Conflict, Violence
                                                                                                                Meet Needs of All Clients
                                Evaluations and Major Learning Products         FY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Disruptive Technology
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Country Engagement


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Work in Partnership




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Gender Equality
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Climate Change
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Solutions WBG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Inclusiveness




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Infrastructure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sustainability




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Agribusiness
                                                                                     World Bank




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Growth
                                                                                                        MIGA
                                                                                                  IFC
                              Higher Education                                  17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                              Shared Prosperity in Country Programs             17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                              Rural Non-Farm Economy                            17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                              Public Finance for Investment and Jobs            18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                              Mobilization of Private Capital                   18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                              Facilitating Trade                                19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                              Sustainable and Inclusive Business                19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
    Objective 1: What Works




                              Decentralization                                  19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                              Water Supply and Sanitation                       17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                              Urban Transport Services                          17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                              Essential Health Care Services                    18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                              Clean World for All                               18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                              Carbon Finance                                    18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                              Renew able Energy                                 18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                              Sustainable Cities                                19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                              Environmental Degradation                         19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                              CPEs on MICs (Part 1)                             18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                              CPEs on MICs (Part 2)                             19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                              Synthesis Report on MIC CPEs                      19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                              Results and Performance Report - Results          17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                              Results and Performance Report - Sustainability   18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                              Results and Performance Report - Partnership      19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                              SCD/CPF Process Evaluation                        17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Objective 2:
Real-Time
 Learning




                              IFC Client Engagement                             17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                              Data for Development                              17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                              Engaging Citizens                                 18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                              Process Evaluation of GP/CCSAs                    19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                   - 48 -


    Annex 6: Indicative List of IEG Learning and Knowledge Sharing Activities in FY16

First Quarter
   Taking the Pulse: [How] Can IFC and MIGA Bring Profitability and Impact Together? (IEG launched its
    Results and Performance of the World Bank Group 2014 report with a panel of IFC and MIGA
    leaders).
   A Dialogue with IEG on Early Childhood Development (IEG hosted this session for members of the
    Bank Group ECD Community of Practice to discuss key findings from IEG’s two recent
    evaluations on ECD).
   [Are We] Making the Right Choices? Informing Our Work to Reduce Poverty (IEG launched its
    evaluation The Poverty Focus on Country Programs at this debate featuring panelists from across the
    Bank Group).
   Wilton Park Meeting: New Frontiers for Evaluation in an Era of Market-Oriented Development (IEG
    presented, moderated and acted as host/facilitator in this event in United Kingdom).
   IEG developed special synthesis publications for: (i) the Third International Conference on
    Financing for Development in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia: Financing for Development; (ii) SDGs for the
    World Bank Group Annual Meetings: Transforming Our World – Aiming for Sustainable Development;
    and (iii) how the World Bank Group learns and adapts for the World Bank Group Annual
    Meetings: [Informed] Solutions from a Solutions Bank? Getting More Bank for the Buck.
   IEG developed a new product called IEG Insights – a two-page information sheet that presents
    lessons from major evaluations and make them applicable for users in the development field.
    Topics covered: Women in Fragile and Conflict-Affected States, and Natural Resources in Fragile and
    Conflict-Affected States.
   MAS “Know More” Series: Strong Results in Manufacturing—Drivers and Lessons from XPSRs (IEG staff
    presented to IFC MAS staff).
Second Quarter
   [Getting to] Informed Solutions from the Solutions Bank (At the Annual Meetings in Lima, IEG
    conducted a session, presenting lessons from its evaluations Learning and Results in World Bank
    Operations, Phase I; Results and Performance of the World Bank Group 2015; and The Poverty Focus of
    Country Programs.)
   Towards Young Children Thriving: Addressing the Intersectorial Challenges to Child Development (IEG held
    a session for Bank Group staff and live-streamed to external stakeholders to present findings
    from its maternal health impact evaluation).
   Resource-Rich Developing Countries: How the World Bank Group Engages (IEG held a session for Bank
    Group staff to discuss findings from this cluster of country evaluations).
   Making Financial Inclusion Work for the Poor (IEG presented the findings from its evaluation
    Financial Inclusion: A Foothold on the Ladder to Prosperity? to Bank Group staff and moderated the
    subsequent panel discussion.)
                                                 - 49 -


   Lessons for MIGA from World Bank Group Support to Electricity Access (IEG held a session for MIGA
    staff to present findings and lessons from this evaluation.)
   Knowledge and Innovation Workshop (IEG staff presented a talk at the Warwick Business School’s
    Knowledge and Innovation Network winter workshop in Coventry, UK on the lessons learned
    agenda.)
   Online Educa 2015 (IEG made a keynote presentation in Berlin to more than 2,000 participants
    at the world’s largest conference for learning and knowledge sharing, with a focus on service
    providers in the knowledge management and learning areas.)
   IEG and African Development Bank on Electricity Access (IEG and AfDB sponsored a joint event in
    Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, to share findings of World Bank Group Support to Electricity Access.)
   IFC Additionality (IEG staff presented the lessons from this learning product at a meeting of the
    Strategy Officers Network at IFC )
Third Quarter
   Using Evaluation Evidence to Improve the Effectiveness of Partnership Programs (IEG organized a
    workshop that brought together M&E representatives of partnership programs, independent
    evaluators, bi-lateral and multilateral development partners, and private foundations evaluation
    offices who commission and conduct partnership evaluations).
   IEG presented findings from its evaluations at three panel discussions during the World Bank
    Group Fragility, Conflict and Violence Forum 2016.
   Financial Inclusion Workshop in Tanzania (Organized jointly by WBG Finance & Markets GP, IEG,
    and the Bank of Tanzania, the workshop highlighted findings from the IEG Evaluation-
    Financial Inclusion: A Foothold on the Ladder Toward Prosperity).
   Environmental and Natural Resources Global Business Meeting (IEG co-sponsored 3 sessions for WBG
    staff and external participants).
Fourth Quarter (as of May 25, 2016)
   Sustaining Early Childhood Development Impacts (IEG hosted a Webinar for the CPC Learning
    Network, Columbia University, New York).

   IFI Development Policy Operations: How Environmental and Social Standards Apply (Seminar co-hosted
    by IEG during the WBG Spring Meetings along with the Bank Information Center and World
    Bank).

   RMES Together 2016 (IEG co-sponsored, along with OPCS and IFC, the annual learning event
    for the Results, Measurement and Evidence community of practice in the World Bank Group).

   Launch Bridging the Gap: How to Finance Universal Access to Financing (IEG launched its learning
    product on World Bank Group Support for Housing Finance with a panel including WB, IFC,
    Bank of Mexico and George Washington University speakers).
                                              - 50 -


 Annex 7: List of DGE Statements to WBG Executive Directors and Management in FY16

DGE Statements to Executive Directors
   Statement on External Review of IEG, July 8, 2015, (CODE)
   WBG Support for the 2013 Agenda for Sustainable Development, September 15, 2015
     (CoW)
   2015 Development Policy Financing Retrospective: September 21, 2015 (CODE)
   Update to CODE on IFC's Management of E&S Risks in its FI Business, October 2, 2015
     (CODE)
   Statement on WBG Gender Strategy (FY16-23) Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and
     Inclusive Growth, December 8, 2015 (Board)
   Update on IFC Asset Management Compact, December 10, 2015 (Board)
   World Bank Group Forest Action Plan FY16-20: World Bank Contribution to the Forest
     Agenda, April 6, 2016 (CODE)

DGE Statements to WBG Management
   First Quarter
      IDA Mid Term Review Progress Report: Climate Change, September 1, 2015
      IDA Mid-Term Review Progress Report: Gender Equality, September 1, 2015
      IDA Mid Term Review Progress Report: Inclusive Growth, September 18, 2015
      IDA Mid Term Review Progress Report: Inclusive Growth and Fragile and Conflict
       Affected States, September 18, 2015
      WBG Gender Strategy, September 25, 2015
   Second Quarter
      Draft IDA FY15 Annual Report, October 9, 2015
      IDA 16 Retrospective: Delivering Development Results, October 19, 2015
      IDA 17 Mid Term Review Technical Paper: Options for an IDA Non-Concessional
       Financing Facility, October 30, 2015
      IDA 17 Mid-term Review Paper: Maximizing Development Impact, November 4, 2015
      WBG Gender Strategy, November 6, 2015
   Third Quarter
      Development Committee Progress Report on Mainstreaming DRM in the WBG, February
       5, 2016
      Development Committee Paper: Fragility, Forced Displacement, Humanitarian –
       Development Nexus and Migration, February 12, 2016
      A Stock-Taking of the WBG’s response to Illicit Financial Flows, February 24, 2016
      WBG Climate Change Action Plan, March 7, 2016
      WBG Forest Action Plan, March 17, 2016
   Fourth Quarter (as of May 25, 2016)
      Draft Proposal to establish a Pandemic Emergency Financing Facility, April 1, 2016
      Concept Note Poverty and Shared Prosperity Report 2016, April 6, 2016
