Fecal Sludge Management: Diagnostics
for Service Delivery in Urban Areas

Summary Report




Final

6 May 2016
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas



Preface / Acknowledgements
This ‘Summary Report’ is the main output of a World Bank Economic and Sector Work, on Fecal
Sludge Management: Diagnostics for Service Delivery in Urban Areas (P146128). The task team
leaders were Isabel Blackett and Peter Hawkins and the task team members were Zael Sanz
Uriarte, Ravikumar Joseph, Chris Heymans and Guy Hutton.

This report is based on work conducted under a consultancy between January 2014 and February
2016, led by Oxford Policy Management (OPM) in partnership with the Water, Engineering and
Development Centre (WEDC) at Loughborough University.

This report was authored by Ian Ross (OPM), Rebecca Scott (WEDC), Isabel Blackett (WB) and
Peter Hawkins (WB). The broader research team who contributed to the study included Ana
Mujica, Zach White, Rashid Zaman and Simon Brook from OPM, as well as Mike Smith, Andy
Cotton and Sam Kayaga from WEDC. Andy Peal (independent consultant) also contributed to
certain aspects of the methodology.

The inputs of many other World Bank staff, consultants and data collection firms are acknowledged
with thanks from the task team. They have all contributed to the research, findings, analysis and
reviews but are too numerous to mention.




                                                                                                i
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas



Executive summary
Context

Urban sanitation remains a significant challenge for most low- and middle-income countries. The
urban population of the group of Least Developed Countries (LDCs) more than tripled between
1990 and 2015. While access to sanitation in LDCs has increased in relative terms, in absolute
terms the number of people using unimproved sanitation has increased. Under the post-2015
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), there is now a focus on the whole sanitation service
chain from containment through to disposal. The challenge for urban sanitation under the SDGs is
therefore not only to achieve universal access to toilets, but also that all excreta is safely managed
along the whole sanitation service chain.

Safely managed excreta and non-networked sanitation

A range of technologies exist for safely managing excreta along the sanitation service chain. Pit
latrines, septic tanks and sewered systems can all ‘safely manage’ excreta as per the SDG
definition. For over 100 years networked sewerage, whereby excreta and associated wastewater
are conveyed through a network of pipes to treatment, has been widely considered to be the
preferred solution – but is expensive and unaffordable in many cases. As a result, access to a
sewerage system is low or non-existent in many developing country towns and cities. Most people
are using ‘non-networked’ (on-site) sanitation options in urban settings, where excreta and
wastewater discharges either into a septic tank or pit, or directly into a drain, river, sea or open
ground.

Estimates of the number of people relying on non-networked sanitation solutions in low- and
middle-income countries are typically between 60-100% depending on the city and country. These
systems contain fecal sludge (FS) which is a highly variable mix of raw and partially-digested feces
and urine, along with different amounts of contaminated wastewater, and in some places solid
waste and other materials.

Fecal sludge management services

In many cities, even where improved on-site facilities are used to contain excreta, the level of
quality and access to services for the emptying, conveyance, treatment and disposal of the
resulting fecal sludge is usually limited. These services are collectively called fecal sludge
management (FSM) services. FSM services are the focus of this study, within the broader context
of urban sanitation and integrated urban water management (IUWM).

The fecal sludge which is removed from non-networked facilities rarely reaches a treatment plant
for safe reuse or satisfactory disposal in accordance with local environmental standards, if they
exist. In general, safe management of fecal sludge downstream of the household is severely
neglected by utilities, local governments and households alike.

Purpose of this report

This document provides a summary of the diagnostic tools developed for assessing FSM services
and is based on field work carried out in the five cities of Balikpapan in Indonesia, Dhaka in
Bangladesh, Hawassa in Ethiopia, Lima in Peru and Santa Cruz in Bolivia. It summarizes the tools
themselves, lessons learnt about their use, and general policy recommendations. The target



                                                                                                     ii
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas



audience is those advocating for or implementing city-wide, poor-inclusive urban sanitation
services.

This report is complemented by a detailed report on the tools, which includes as annexes generic
terms of reference and survey instruments which can be adapted for use in specific situations, and
the five case studies.

The tools

Three key diagnostic tools were developed under this project.

        Firstly, the Fecal Waste Flow Diagram (SFD) represents where fecal waste goes, what
         proportion is managed and where the unmanaged portion ends up.

        Secondly, the City Service Delivery Assessment considers the enabling environment and
         quality of service delivery along the service chain, identifying areas for attention.

        Thirdly, the Prognosis for Change (Political Economy Analysis) identifies the interests and
         incentives that could block action, and possible entry points for overcoming them.

    Together, the outputs of these tools give a diagnosis of problem areas and provide data and
    information for developing an appropriate response.

Two decision-support tools then help guide a practical response to the problems.

        Firstly, the Service Delivery Action Framework guides the identification of actions in relation
         to the enabling environment.

        Secondly, the Intervention Options Assessment is a guide for identification of technical
         interventions along the service chain.

Other tools, which can play an important role but were not developed as part of this initiative, are
also discussed in the report.

The case studies

The aim of the city case studies was to test existing and new tools in real-world settings using
primary data, so as to inform both their development and their application. The immediate
objectives of the five city case studies were to field test the tools to capture quantitative and
qualitative data on the sanitation situation in the city from a socio-economic perspective,
specifically as it relates to FSM services. Such work was linked to a World Bank investment
project, wherever possible. The data is representative of the city as a whole and also provides a
separate picture of the situation in low-income areas. The studies also provided initial
recommendations to guide discussions around future interventions in the sanitation sector in the
city, by contributing credible data and analysis of findings.
A two-page summary of each city case study is provided in this report, as well as a synthesis of the
most significant experiences and lessons gained from deploying the tools in the five cities. It aligns
these experiences and lessons with the typical project cycle of a financing institution, such as a
development bank. Furthermore estimates of costs and resources needed for using the tools are
provided.



                                                                                                      iii
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas



Policy recommendations

Policy recommendations were developed based on an analysis of the lessons emerging from the
five FSM case study cities, with additional evidence from studies undertaken by team members
under other World Bank sanitation projects and technical assistance. Key areas are

(i) FSM in national policy and legislation
FSM services are an essential component of urban sanitation: On-site sanitation systems are
the norm for both rich and poor in cities and towns of many developing countries, and are often the
only form of sanitation available to poor people. However, they have been largely neglected by the
institutions responsible for sanitation, and the construction and servicing of on-site facilities is
typically left to an unregulated informal sector. This is compounded in many cases by outdated
legislation that may outlaw pit latrines or other non-sewered sanitation options.

FSM services need to be included in national sanitation policies: In order to manage on-site
sanitation and FSM effectively, they must be included in national policy and funding arrangements,
and any assessment of sanitation services needs to include a focus on how the poorest
communities can best be served. This must be complemented with city-level sanitation planning
systems, and byelaws that allow the authorities to oblige both households and service providers to
play their part in delivering a full sanitation service chain.

(ii) Drivers of improved urban fecal sludge management services
The private sector needs incentives to stimulate and meet demand for affordable FSM services,
while also ensuring safe practices, and requires access to safe disposal sites at economical
distances from collection areas.

Bury and forget is common practice but is not sustainable over time as houses are extended,
rental units constructed, and back yards get smaller. Rebuilding latrines every few years also
discourages investment in a permanent structure and perpetuates a perception that pit latrines are
unsatisfactory. Improved water supplies often lead to the gradual adoption of manual or cistern
flush toilets requiring more sophisticated facilities, which are cheaper to empty than to rebuild.

Protection of groundwater requires consideration of all options: Discouraging the use of
shallow wells by providing clean piped water is invariably a cheaper, more effective solution, and
more popular than installing sewerage to ‘protect’ the ground water – which it usually fails to
achieve in any case. Shallow groundwater is also contaminated by industrial and commercial
wastes, leaking drainage channels and leachate, making investments in sewerage alone of little
use unless they are part of an integrated urban water management approach.

(iii) Institutional, regulatory, legal and financial matters,
Clear institutional roles are needed for FSM at local level: While there is no ‘one model fits all’,
the utility, together with the private sector, may be best placed to manage FSM services where
piped water access is substantial. Where local government has responsibility for FSM, the
municipality will often be a service provider, which also provides capacity to deal with public
emergencies and sends price signals into the market through a limited service for paying
customers.

Effective and enforceable regulations for FSM: Clear local byelaws or ordinances are a
necessary element in the extension of institutional responsibilities to cover FSM. Regulations need
not be overly complex to start with, especially when transitioning from informal services. The

                                                                                                  iv
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas



increased recognition and formality also often results in emptiers feeling less marginalized and
stigmatized.

Planning and budgeting processes for FSM: FSM service targets in city development plans,
viable service funding arrangements and an FSM component in city-wide sanitation investment
plans are all essential, but often missing. Well-designed national plans, funding windows and
reporting mechanisms can also be critical to achieving success at scale.

Monitoring FSM service outcomes requires seeing FSM as an end-to-end system, with the key
outcome being that people do not and cannot interact with fecal sludge. This is hard to measure
so a useful proxy indicator is the proportion of fecal sludge discharged to a proper treatment or
safe disposal facility.

Equity in subsidizing the sanitation chain is needed to realize the public good element of
sanitation. It is a strong argument for subsidizing urban sanitation, and especially for smart,
targeted subsidies for poor FSM customers. Innovative subsidy mechanisms need to be
developed, that target specific cost elements through the entire service chain and are not
necessarily limited to conveyance (as for sewerage) without compromising the sustainability and
inclusiveness of the services.

(iv) Planning for incremental change
While sewerage will be the preferred long term sanitation solution in many cities, it will not be
possible to make the change at once for both financial and logistical reasons, so an incremental
approach to improving sanitation is needed. Several sanitation options will be in use at any time,
and these will change differently over time in different areas. The responsible authorities need to
identify and prioritize the type and location of interventions to optimize public health and
environmental outcomes. Even when the long term vision is for widespread sewerage, it will still
also be appropriate to invest in improving on-site sanitation, rather than channeling all available
resources into sewerage and leaving the population using on-site systems to fend for themselves.

Knowledge gaps

Knowledge gaps on city-wide urban sanitation and specifically FSM include:
The need for inclusive delivery of effective sanitation facilities to specific user groups such
as: for tenants of low-cost rental accommodation; sanitation in challenging environments such as
high water table and flood-prone areas, rocky ground and steep hillsides, settlements over water,
cold climates, etc; upgrading on-site facilities at scale to improve emptiability and user hygiene;
modalities and timing for effective urban sanitation and hygiene promotional campaigns; and
ensuring that the institutions responsible for health centers, schools, etc. provide adequate
sanitation for users.
Institutional issues such as developing the community engagement capability of utilities (or other
responsible authorities) to enable effective planning and community mobilization for both sewerage
and non-networked sanitation; complementary roles and collaboration modalities for utilities, local
government and the private sector in diverse governance environments; financing of capital and
operating costs, including subsidies where appropriate; the design of institutional incentives; and
the development of better political economy analysis tools.
Institutional aspects of fecal sludge management such as developing viable business models
for FSM, including considerations of scale, linkages with solid waste management services, on-
demand vs. scheduled emptying, etc; the elimination of manual emptying and introduction of
improved methods and/or alternative sources of income for manual emptiers; use of charging

                                                                                                  v
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas



systems that promote fecal sludge discharge at approved sites; and PPPs for production and
marketing of end-use products derived from sludge.
Technical aspects of fecal sludge management including the use of transfer stations or
alternatives; improved technologies for dealing with thick pit latrine sludge; fecal sludge treatment
plant design; and specific arrangements for greywater management where there is no sewerage.




                                                                                                   vi
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas



Table of contents
Preface / Acknowledgements                                                                i
Executive summary                                                                        ii
Table of contents                                                                       vii
List of tables and figures                                                              ix
List of abbreviations                                                                    x
1       Background and introduction                                                      1
    1.1     The urban sanitation challenge                                               1
    1.2     ‘Safely managed excreta’ along the service chain                             2
    1.3     Fecal sludge management within urban sanitation                              4
        1.3.1 FSM in context                                                             4
        1.3.2 Urban sanitation as a suite of services                                    5
    1.4     About this report and its structure                                          7
2       Purpose of this study and application of findings                                9
    2.1     Overall purpose of this study                                                9
    2.2     Outputs and how they can be used                                             9
        2.2.1 Overview of outputs of the study                                           9
        2.2.2 Audiences for the outputs and how they are intended to be used            10
        2.2.3 Limitations of the tools and guidelines                                   11
    2.3     Overview of the diagnostic tools                                            11
    2.4     Tool 1: Fecal Waste Flow Diagram                                            14
    2.5     Tool 2: City Service Delivery Assessment                                    16
    2.6     Tool 3: Prognosis for Change assessment                                     17
    2.7     Tool 4: Service Delivery Action Framework                                   18
    2.8     Tool 5: Intervention Options Assessment                                     21
    2.9     Other tools, including those developed by partners                          22
        2.9.1 FSM costing tool                                                          22
        2.9.2 TrackFin                                                                  22
        2.9.3 Public Health Risk Assessment Tools                                       23
        2.9.4 Fecal Sludge Technical Tools                                              24
        2.9.5 Urban Sanitation Status Index                                             25
        2.9.6 SFD promotion initiative                                                  26
    2.10 When to apply the tools                                                        27
3       Case Study Overview and Methodology                                             28
    3.1    Rationale and objectives of case studies                                     28
    3.2    Case study methodology                                                       28
    3.3    Overview of city-specific data                                               29
    3.4    Lima, Peru                                                                   30
    3.5    Dhaka, Bangladesh                                                            32
    3.6    Hawassa, Ethiopia                                                            34
    3.7    Santa Cruz, Bolivia                                                          37
    3.1    Balikpapan, Indonesia                                                        39
4       Experiences and lessons from case studies in applying the tools                 42
    4.1    Introduction                                                                 42

                                                                                        vii
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas



    4.2     Using tools within the project cycle                                          42
    4.3     General lessons learned in using the tools                                    45
    4.4     Specific lessons learned in using the tools                                   47
        4.4.1 Fecal waste flow diagram                                                    47
        4.4.2 City Service Delivery Assessment for FSM                                    48
        4.4.3 Prognosis for Change assessment (Political Economy Analysis)                49
        4.4.4 Service Delivery Action Framework                                           50
        4.4.5 Intervention Options Assessment                                             51
    4.5     Estimates of cost, time and resources needed for using the tools              51
        4.5.1 Cost                                                                        51
        4.5.2 Time                                                                        52
        4.5.3 Consultant resources                                                        52
5         Integrating FSM into the Urban Sanitation Agenda                                55
    5.1       The FSM tools in the urban sanitation context                               55
    5.2       Knowledge gaps on city-wide urban sanitation                                56
6       Findings and Recommendations                                                      59
    6.1    The importance of FSM in national policy and legislation                       59
    6.2    Drivers of improved urban fecal sludge management services                     60
    6.3    Institutional, regulatory, legal and financial matters                         61
    6.4    Planning for incremental changes over time                                     64
7         Conclusion                                                                      66
References / Bibliography                                                                 67
Annex A         Links to other key documents                                              69
   A.1        Tools and guidelines for improving fecal sludge management (FSM) services   69
   A.2        Data collection instruments and terms of reference                          69
   A.3        City case studies                                                           71




                                                                                          viii
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas



List of tables and figures
Figure 1          Urban sanitation use in 1990 and 2015 ........................................................................ 1
Figure 2          The sanitation service chain .......................................................................................... 2
Figure 3          Urban sanitation as a suite of services ......................................................................... 6
Figure 4          Diagram of how the tools fit together .......................................................................... 13
Figure 5          City-wide fecal waste flow diagram for Lima, Peru ..................................................... 15
Figure 6          Fecal waste flow diagram for informal settlements in Lima, Peru .............................. 15
Figure 7          CSDA scorecard for Balikpapan Indonesia ................................................................ 16
Figure 8          Interlinked CSDA and PFC process ............................................................................ 16
Figure 9          Three key concepts in PFC assessment .................................................................... 17
Figure 10         Process map for Dhaka ............................................................................................... 17
Figure 11         TrackFin results for Ghana by subsector in millions of Ghana Cedis ........................ 23
Figure 12         Relationship between open defecation and stunting .................................................. 23
Figure 13         Examples of USSI output maps from Maputo, Mozambique...................................... 25
Figure 14         SFD SuSanA Website (see http://sfd.susana.org/) .................................................... 26
Figure 15         Fecal Waste Flow Diagram for Dhaka – city-wide sample ......................................... 33
Figure 16         Fecal Waste Flow Diagram for Hawassa – city-wide sample..................................... 36
Figure 17         Fecal Waste Flow Diagram for Santa Cruz – city-wide sample ................................. 38
Figure 18         Fecal Waste Flow Diagram for Balikpapan – city-wide .............................................. 40
Figure 19         Typical project cycle .................................................................................................... 43
Figure 20         Scope of FSM within City-Wide Sanitation ................................................................. 55
Figure 21         Evolution over time of the sanitation mix in a city ....................................................... 65
Figure 22         Effect of improved water supply on sanitation in Nhlamankulo, Maputo .................... 65

Table 1       Outputs from this study .................................................................................................... 10
Table 2       Service Delivery Action Framework ................................................................................. 19
Table 3       Prioritized actions: illustrative example for Dhaka city .................................................... 20
Table 4       Intervention options for different system types: FSM in Dhaka slums ............................ 21
Table 5       Components and indicators in the USSI.......................................................................... 25
Table 6       Summary table of data collection instruments ................................................................. 29
Table 7       Headline data for each city .............................................................................................. 30
Table 8       Broad lessons applicable across the tools ...................................................................... 45
Table 9       Cost of studies in a range of cities ................................................................................... 52
Table 10      Relevance of the tools used in this study to FSM only or City-wide Sanitation .............. 56
Table 11      The difference between Tools, Instruments and Terms of reference ............................. 69
Table 12      Research methods and associated instruments ............................................................. 70




                                                                                                                                             ix
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas



List of abbreviations
CSDA       City Service Delivery Assessment

FS         Fecal sludge

FSM        Fecal sludge management

IUWM       Integrated urban water management

OSS        On-site sanitation

PEA        Political economy analysis

PFC        Prognosis for change

USSI       Urban Sanitation Status Index




                                                                                        x
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


1          Background and introduction

1.1        The urban sanitation challenge
Urban sanitation remains a significant challenge for most low- and middle-income countries.
Figure 1 below shows the situation, which is compounded by population growth and rapid
urbanization. As shown in Figure 1(a), while sanitation coverage has been increasing across
both the 48 Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and developing regions as a whole, progress
has been relatively slow. Around 53% of the urban population in the least developed countries
are still using unimproved sanitation. As shown in Figure 1(b), in absolute terms the number of
urban dwellers in LDCs using improved sanitation increased between 1990 and 2015.
However, the population using shared and other unimproved sanitation facilities also increased
significantly.

Figure 1          Urban sanitation use in 1990 and 2015
         (a) Proportions of the urban                  (b) Numbers of urban population in Least Developed
             population using different                     Countries using different sanitation options
                sanitation options




            Source: (a) WHO / UNICEF (2015), (b) calculations based on WHO / UNICEF (2015)

The data above only refer to the type of containment facility used, which was the focus of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The MDGs did not monitor where the toilet discharged
to – whether this was to sewer, septic tank, pit, open ground or drain – nor what happened
finally to the liquid and solid products. Under the post-2015 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), there is now a focus on the whole sanitation service chain, as shown in Figure 2
below.1




1
 Further details and examples of the sanitation service chain can be found in other publications, such as Strande et
al (2014) and Tilley et al (2014)




                                                                                                                       1
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas

Figure 2          The sanitation service chain

                                                                                                   End-use/
 Containment                Emptying                  Conveyance                 Treatment
                                                                                                   Disposal

Under the post-2015 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), there is now a focus on the
whole sanitation service chain from containment through to disposal. The challenge for urban
sanitation under the SDGs is therefore not only to achieve universal access to toilets, but also
that all excreta is safely managed along the whole sanitation service chain.


1.2         ‘Safely managed excreta’ along the service chain
A range of technologies exists for safely managing excreta along the sanitation service chain.
Pit latrines, septic tanks and sewered systems can all ‘safely manage’ excreta as per the SDG
definition (Box 1). However, for over 100 years networked sewerage, whereby excreta and
associated wastewater are conveyed through a network of pipes to treatment, has been widely
considered as the preferred solution. The term “sewerage system” covers a number of options
(e.g. decentralized, conventional, small-bore, shallow, condominial, etc.) and components
(tertiary, secondary and trunk sewers, associated infrastructure and treatment facilities). When
functioning together through the service chain, these are considered as ‘networked’ sanitation
options. However, access to a sewerage system is low or non-existent in many developing
country towns and cities. Some utilities have succeeded in increasing access to sewerage
networks, but universal access to sewerage in urban areas is a long way off in most of the
developing world and may not, in any case, be the most cost-effective solution in many
situations.

Box 1             WHO/UNICEF definition of ‘safely managed’ excreta

Safe management of household excreta is defined as the containment, extraction and transport of excreta
to a designated disposal or treatment site, or the safe re-use of excreta at the household or community
level, as appropriate to the local context. The share of households with safely managed excreta is
defined as the fraction of households whose excreta:

        Are carried through a sewer network to a designated location (e.g. treatment facility);
        Are hygienically collected from septic tanks or latrine pits by a suction truck (or similar equipment
         that limits human contact) and transported to a designated location (e.g. treatment facility or solid
         waste collection site); or
        Are stored on site (e.g. in a sealed latrine pit) until they are safe to handle and re-use (e.g. as an
         agricultural input).

Source: WHO / UNICEF (2015a)

In the meantime, most people are using ‘non -networked’ sanitation options in urban settings,
where excreta and wastewater discharges either into a septic tank or pit, or directly into a drain,
river, sea or open ground. Furthermore, while urban residents practicing open defecation are in
the minority, they still accounted for 181 million people in developing regions in 2015 (WHO /
UNICEF, 2015).

The WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Program (JMP) does not yet have detailed figures for the
proportion of fecal waste that is safely managed, and estimates are only available at the global
level disaggregated between urban and rural areas. These estimates (which include North
America, Europe, etc.) show that around 60% of urban residents use toilet facilities linked to
sewers, leaving 40% using non-networked solutions. Estimates of the number of people relying




                                                                                                              2
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


on non-networked solutions in low- and middle-income countries are typically 60-100%
depending on the city and country. For instance, among utilities serving the largest cities in
Sub-Saharan Africa, only half report operating a sewerage network, and these mostly serve less
than 10% of the population (Morella et al, 2009). In a recent study of 30 cities and towns in
Africa and Asia, Nairobi was the only African city with close to 50% of the population having
access to a sewer (Chowdhry and Kone, 2012).

Non-networked systems are therefore the norm in the majority of low and middle income
countries, particularly amongst the poorest urban residents. These systems contain fecal
sludge (FS), which is raw or partially-digested feces and urine, along with a variable amount of
contaminated wastewater, often mixed with solid waste, menstrual hygiene materials and other
waste dropped into toilets or directly into pits and tanks. In many cities, even where improved
on-site facilities are used to contain excreta, the level of quality and access to services for the
emptying, conveyance, treatment and disposal of the resulting fecal sludge is usually limited.
These services are collectively called fecal sludge management (FSM) services. FSM services
are the focus of this study, but located within the broader context of urban sanitation and
integrated urban water management (IUWM), as explained in more detail in the next section.

Even in regions doing relatively well in terms of overall sanitation access, for instance in Latin
America and the Caribbean, there is still a substantial reliance on unplanned on-site systems
and even open defecation in many cities. In Brazil, for example, nearly 2 million urban residents
practice open defecation, and a further 28 million rely on unimproved or shared toilets
(WHO/UNICEF, 2015). From East Asia to Latin America, inadequate services are concentrated
principally, but not exclusively, in slums and informal settlements, and among poorer
households.

The fecal sludge which is removed from non-networked facilities rarely reaches a treatment
plant for safe reuse or satisfactory disposal in accordance with local environmental standards. 2
In general, safe management of fecal sludge downstream of the household is severely
neglected by utilities, municipalities and households alike, regardless of the nature (improved or
unimproved) of the household facility. This is a particular challenge in densely occupied urban
environments where sludge removal is necessary for sustained access once the containment
facility becomes full, unlike in low density urban or rural settings, where latrines can be
relocated when full.

The challenge as outlined above, and especially now for the SDG era, is to achieve safe
management of excreta along the whole sanitation service chain , in addition to universal access
to sanitation. While the JMP data in Figure 1 shows progress on the use of improved sanitation,
three important aspects are disguised:
             Sewerage in poor countries, especially Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia, only serves a
              small proportion of the urban population, with the great majority of residents relying
              on non-networked sanitation – which in turn requires some form of FSM services to
              be safely managed;
             The problem of poorly managed excreta from non-networked sanitation is particularly
              acute in large informal settlements and slums, and applies to every developing
              region;


2
 This refers to FS that is intentionally removed, using manual or mechanical emptying arrangements. In reality, FS
generated in urban settings often escapes from poorly-constructed containment into into drains and waterways or
directly into the environment.




                                                                                                                     3
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


             Even when excreta is safely removed from containment in on-site facilities, it is rarely
              safely managed along the whole sanitation service chain.
With this further nuanced challenge in mind, Section 1.3 goes into more detail on how fecal
sludge management services fit within the broader context of urban sanitation and integrated
urban water management.


1.3        Fecal sludge management within urban sanitation

1.3.1      FSM in context

FSM services can constitute an important component amongst the multiple urban sanitation
service chains serving a given city. Achieving sustainable FSM services may therefore be
viewed as a realistic short-, medium- or long-term measure to complement the services
provided through networked sewerage systems, to ensure that all excreta is adequately
managed through the sanitation service chain The service delivery gaps within and between
stages of the chain become a greater challenge as sanitation access increases in poor urban
areas. In all cases, failure to ensure strong links throughout the chain results in untreated fecal
sludge contaminating the environment, with serious implications for public health.

FSM has often been considered an inferior, stop-gap solution compared to conventional
sewerage options, by governments, utilities and urban planners alike. However, they are
increasingly recognizing that it will take many years, or may not be cost-effective, to achieve
safely managed sanitation services via universal access to sewerage. Furthermore, FSM
services are increasingly recognized as part of the solution in areas where sewerage is not
technically feasible (e.g. steep hillsides, rocky soil), or in low-density settlements where there is
sufficient absorption capacity in the soil and limited use of local groundwater. Crucially, FSM
services represent a feasible sanitation solution for many unplanned areas where it is hard to
justify major public investments in underground infrastructure, for example due to the urban
layout undergoing continual change, or to land tenure issues restricting opportunities for
infrastructure development.

Safely managing fecal waste is a particular challenge in unplanned settlements resulting from
rapidly expanding cities. In these areas, fecal sludge is often allowed to accumulate in poorly
designed and built pits, and then discharges directly into storm drains and open water, or is
removed from the pit and dumped into waterways, wasteland and insanitary solid waste
disposal sites. Only a small percentage of fecal sludge generated in such areas is managed
and treated appropriately.3 The problem is significant for many cities and medium and small
towns in developing countries.

Interest in the development of FSM services has increased in recent years amongst WASH
sector organizations, development partners and a growing number of national and local
government agencies. There remains, however, much to be done to develop, pilot and scale up
business models, technologies and evidence of ‘what works’ , and also to fully understand the
nature and quantities of the fecal sludge generated and needing collection and treatment.

The focus of this study is on how to develop sustainable FSM services within the broader
context of inclusive urban sanitation services. The study does not advocate that FSM services

3
  This was a key finding of a review of the status of FSM in 12 cities, using secondary data (Peal et al, 2014). This
study has identified that ineffective management of fecal sludge is not only restricted to unplanned settlements but
can also occur city-wide (such as in Dhaka).




                                                                                                                        4
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


are necessarily the most appropriate or only means to safely manage fecal waste, but they are
likely to be an essential component of sanitation services in most developing country cities. In a
city such as Dhaka (Bangladesh), with dense housing, an only partially functional sewerage
system and a high proportion of latrines discharging to the open drainage system, improving
FSM is a priority. However, in a smaller and less densely populated city such as Hawassa
(Ethiopia) where most residents use pit latrines which are covered after filling, FSM may be less
of an immediate priority, although it may become more important as the city becomes more
densely populated.

In summary, in many cities and small and medium towns across Africa, Asia, Latin America and
the Caribbean, the single most important intervention for improving sanitation for areas served
by non-networked sanitation is to ensure the adequacy of FSM services, to protect both public
health and the environment. At present, few cities have the management structures,
institutional and regulatory arrangements, infrastructure, skills, or financial systems to deliver
adequate FSM services. Consequently it has remained, until very recently (with exceptions
such as Durban, Ouagadougou, Dakar and Malaysia and some cities in the Philippines), a
significant but largely neglected challenge. It has been commonly addressed by a mostly
unregulated private and informal sector, often employing grossly unhygienic emptying methods.

Going beyond the context of improving sanitation, FSM is an issue which sits naturally within the
wider scope of Integrated Urban Water Management (IUWM). IUWM is a holistic approach that
recognizes the inter-linkages between water supply, sanitation, drainage and solid waste
management, and the wider contextual issues of urban land use and water resources
management. FSM affects or is affected by many of these factors, including urban land use
(limited road access, limited space on-plot), groundwater (infiltration into pits, pollution of wells),
surface water (illegal discharges from on-site facilities to drainage system, effluent from
dumping sites and treatment plants), water supply (types of on-site facilities, volume of fecal
sludge), solid waste (disposal in latrine pits, blockage of stormwater drains containing illegally
discharged fecal waste).

IUWM is appropriate where several of these elements present development challenges that can
best be resolved in an integrated way (as in many developing country cities) and where there is
adequate leadership, governance and institutional capacity to drive the process forward. It
typically requires a holistic diagnostic involving all stakeholders, leading to a strategic action
plan/framework that prioritizes interventions to be implemented through a single integrated
project, or a program of single or multi-sectoral interventions which all contribute to the same
overarching goals.

1.3.2      Urban sanitation as a suite of servicestructure.

Figure 3 below shows some examples of routes along the sanitation service chain, with
sewerage and FSM service chain options indicated in different shades of brown. The figure
aims to demonstrate how urban sanitation can be seen as three kinds of services: private
services, public services, and infrastructure development services.

      1. Private services, provided directly to users – these are often viable on a commercial
         basis as they are essentially private goods.

      2. Public services are downstream of the users – these serve the general public by
         keeping the environment clean and healthy. They produce public goods, and as such it
         may not be possible to finance them entirely by direct user charges.




                                                                                                      5
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


      3. Infrastructure development – this is an important component necessary for the public
         services. It is frequently undertaken by a different actor, as the authority responsible for
         service provision may well lack the necessary financial resources for building major
         infrastructure.

Figure 3          Urban sanitation as a suite of services




Figure 3 illustrates how, for the sewerage service chain, the sewer network and pumping
stations are generally seen as public services. However, for the FSM service chain, the
emptying and conveyance stages are generally seen as private services. Following the logic
above, municipalities often implicitly see FSM as a private good and sewerage as a public good,
with the result that sewerage services typically attract far more public finance by way of capital
and recurrent subsidies than FSM services.

For instance, in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, while only 10% of the population is connected to
sewerage networks, 99% of public funds over a three-year period were used to finance these
networks and associated sewage treatment (Trémolet and Binder, 2013). In a specific $165
million WASH project in Dar es Salaam, 70% of funds were allocated to water, 20% to
sewerage and 10% to non-networked sanitation.4 In Nakuru, Kenya, the utility reportedly
charges a sanitation levy at 75% of the water bill, regardless of whether that household is
connected to the sewer (Edwards et al., 2015). However, the levy mainly finances the sewer
system. The wastewater treatment plant is supposed to also treat fecal sludge from non-
networked systems, but this can be detrimental to its operation where significant volumes of FS
are involved as it requires a different type of treatment to sewage. The paper suggests that,
despite weaknesses in the data, the levy benefits only a small number of sewer-connected
customers who are typically richer than average.5 In Nakuru there are 14,000 sewer

4
  The Dar es Salaam Water Supply and Sanitation Project, financed by the World Bank and others (e.g. African
Development Bank and European Investment Bank) between 2002 and 2010.
5
  The Trémolet and Binder (2013) study also found that the CAPEX and OPEX costs of building and maintaining non-
networked sanitation are higher than connecting to the sewerage network (with associated regular charges).




                                                                                                               6
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


connections for a population of between 326,000 and 650,000.6,7 Calculations made in Dakar
Senegal, show that of a total annual per capita cost (including capital) for sewerage of $54.64,
$52.63 is borne by the utility, whilst it only bears $1.86 of the $11.63 annual per capita cost for
non-networked systems (Dodane et al, 2012).

Where municipalities have funding for non-networked sanitation, this is, with few exceptions,
typically allocated for sanitation and hygiene promotion software activities (e.g. demand
promotion and enforcement) rather than supporting FSM services.

The role of the state in urban sanitation service provision, specifically with respect to FSM
services, is a broad topic that this report cannot cover in detail. The section has however
outlined the private/public service distinction as a key issue when comparing different options
for the sanitation service chain, and that there is some evidence that the perception of FSM
services as private services mitigates against public finance for FSM.


1.4          About this report and its structure
This document provides a summary of the key findings and implications from the development
of a suite of FSM diagnostic tools and case studies in five cities around the world. It is part of a
World Bank Economic and Sector Work (ESW) study entitled ‘Fecal Sludge Management:
Diagnostics for Service Delivery in Poor Urban Areas’, hereafter “the global FSM study”. This
work is funded by the World Bank Water and Sanitation Program (WSP). The FSM tools and
findings are based on field work carried out in the five cities of Balikpapan in Indonesia, Dhaka
in Bangladesh, Hawassa in Ethiopia, Lima in Peru and Santa Cruz in Bolivia. More details on
the purpose of the global FSM study are given in Section 2.

This Summary Report is one of a number of documents (see Table 1 in Section 2) arising from
the global FSM study. It summarizes the learning and general policy recommendations that
flow from application of a suite of diagnostic tools and guidelines developed and refined under
this study. The target audience are those advocating for or implementing city-wide, poor-
inclusive urban sanitation.

The specific objectives of this Summary Report are to:
          Present key findings from the case studies
          Assess the lessons learnt from the application of the diagnostic and decision-support
           tools in preparing the case studies; and
          Identify policy recommendations for enhanced FSM service delivery as part of
           developing urban sanitation services.

The report is structured as follows:
          Section 1 has provided the broader context of urban sanitation and the role FSM
           services play;
          Section 2 explains the outputs of the study and introduces the tools and guidelines
           themselves, as well as intended audiences;
          Section 3 summarizes the case study methodology and gives an overview and summary
           of the five case studies;

6
    Official estimate, 2009
7
    Unofficial estimate, 2015




                                                                                                   7
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


        Section 4 briefly describes and explains lessons learned from applying the tools and
         guidelines, and how they can be used in different stages of a typical project cycle;
        Section 5 gives policy recommendations for future development of urban sanitation
         services;
        Section 6 summarizes next steps for developing and adapting the tools to address urban
         sanitation in general;

        Section 7 concludes.

    This report should be read in conjunction with the other documents produced under the
    global FSM study:
        Tools and Guidelines
        Data Collection Instruments
        Terms of Reference
        Case Studies




                                                                                              8
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


2          Purpose of this study and application of findings

2.1        Overall purpose of this study
The objective of the global FSM study was to develop diagnostic tools, decision-support tools
and guidelines for the development of investment projects to improve FSM services as part of
urban sanitation strategies and plans. It considers the factors affecting fecal sludge (sometimes
called septage) management services from a city-wide perspective, but with a clear secondary
focus on how to serve poor urban communities. The findings are based on the collection and
analysis of both primary and secondary data. Five in-depth case studies from different regions
were used to develop the analysis. 8 The study consultants were Oxford Policy Management
(OPM), in partnership with the Water, Engineering and Development Centre (WEDC) at
Loughborough University, UK.

The rationale for this global study came from realizing that there were very few existing tools
and guidelines to help city planners navigate complex FSM situations, despite increasing
demand for them. This study built on some of the existing frameworks and tools, in particular
the City Service Delivery Assessment (CSDA) scorecard, and use of the Fecal Waste Flow
Diagram (also known as a Shit Flow Diagram, or SFD). Some of these were developed in the
context of a preliminary review in 12 cities, using secondary data (WSP, 2012).

The further development of these tools and guidelines was informed through primary data
collection in five cities, supported by interaction with city stakeholders. Acknowledging the
difficulty of reforming FSM services in cities, political economy questions around FSM were
explicitly included as part of the overall analysis. The aim was to produce diagnostic and
decision-support tools and guidelines that are based on real-life examples. Where possible, this
was linked to ongoing World Bank operations, in order to provide insight on their practical
application. Section 2.3 provides an overview of the tools used.

A key principle underlying the study is that city-wide solutions must aim to deliver effective
sanitation to the city as a whole, while ensuring that specific or tailored solutions for poor urban
areas are integrated into the planning and implementation of those solutions. The data
collection, analysis and outputs in the form of the tools and guidelines within the study follow
this principle by deploying analyses for both city-wide and low-income areas in parallel where
possible.


2.2        Outputs and how they can be used

2.2.1      Overview of outputs of the study

Table 1 below summarizes the main outputs of this study, which are each separate documents,
each aimed at a specific group of target audiences.
        This Summary Report primarily aims to collate the lessons learned from developing and
         applying the tools and guidelines in five cities around the world.
        The Tools and Guidelines describe in detail the data and analytical framework used to
         produce the outputs, and how to apply them.


8
  These were: Dhaka (Bangladesh), Hawassa (Ethiopia), Balikpapan (Indonesia), Lima (Peru), and Santa Cruz
(Bolivia).




                                                                                                            9
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


        The Data Collection Instruments are generic instruments covering all key aspects of
         the diagnostics, which should be adapted to each specific local situation.
        The Terms of Reference are generic documents for contracting FSM diagnostics to
         consultants, to be adapted according to the local situation and the scope of studies and
         analysis required.
         The full findings of the city case studies are in five Case Studies.

This Summary Report treats each city study individually, rather than attempting to make any
comparison between them, unless this is instructive for the whole study. It synthesizes the
lessons learned from developing and applying the tools, as well as drawing overarching
conclusions and policy recommendations from the case study findings.


Table 1           Outputs from this study
 Title                                        Content                                   Target Audience
                          The flagship – a full summary report on the           Project managers, national and
 Summary Report           tools and case study findings and what                local government personnel, utility
                          they tell us about urban sanitation                   managers
                                                                                Project managers, consultants or
 Tools and                The ‘how to’ – detailed report on the tools
                                                                                staff using or supervising use of
 Guidelines               with examples and details on their use
                                                                                the tools
                          Generic survey instruments covering all
 Data Collection                                                                Consultants or staff using the
                          aspects necessary for the diagnostics – will
 Instruments                                                                    tools to develop FSM diagnostics
                          require adaptation to local situation
                          Generic terms of reference for contracting            Project managers or consultants
 Terms of
                          FSM diagnostics to consultants – will                 contracting or subcontracting use
 Reference
                          require adaptation to local situation                 of the tools
                                                                                Professionals working on
                          The detail – in-depth studies of individual           sanitation in the given city, or
 Case Studies (5)
                          cities                                                extending the experience to
                                                                                others


2.2.2      Audiences for the outputs and how they are intended to be used

The reports in the table above are tailored to the intended audiences. It is helpful to distinguish
between (i) users of the outputs of the tools (e.g. diagrams and tables), (ii) users of the tools
themselves (e.g. questionnaires and spreadsheets).

        Users of the tool outputs : The reported results and recommendations need to appeal
         to, and be used by, a range of decision-makers working in government, utilities,
         municipal authorities and international development agencies. The outputs of applying
         the tools are therefore designed to be visual, clear and accessible to people with both
         technical and non-technical backgrounds. The outputs would typically be used in project
         or program concept, preparation and design documents.

        Users of the tools: evidence-based project design work is typically outsourced to
         consultants or carried out in-house by city stakeholders or staff of financing institutions.
         The intended users of these tools are therefore consultants or in-house staff with the
         appropriate expertise, capacity and means to apply the tools in a participatory manner.
         The results and recommendations are then intended to be discussed with their clients or
         managers as the principal output.




                                                                                                                    10
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


Various approaches and documents already exist e.g. Sanitation 21 and the Strategic
Sanitation Approach, Community-Led Urban Environmental Sanitation (CLUES) to help
decision-makers identify actions to take at city level. However, these do not to have a specific
focus on FSM services, or address the political economy aspects. They also tend to focus on
municipal and community action, with limited acknowledgement that tackling the problems will
require substantial external support, resources and capacity. This may typically be provided
through other levels of government or under project-type arrangements. The tools set out below
take these factors into account, and aim to help stakeholders consider how to develop urban
sanitation services that safely manage all fecal waste rather than only that which is discharged
to sewers.

2.2.3      Limitations of the tools and guidelines

The five case studies have been developed for the context of the global FSM study. Some
limitations include:
        The tools developed and tested in this study are designed to be globally useful, but will
         need to be adapted to specific country contexts (using local administrative sub-divisions,
         technical nuances, terminology, institutional arrangements, etc.) reflecting the range of
         sanitation, geographical, climate, institutional legal and historical variables in any given
         country or city. In planning such a study, about two weeks should be allowed for the
         adaptations to be made and pretested with local stakeholders before starting the
         diagnostic process.
        The tools require appropriately qualified, experienced and trained people to use them
         and to undertake data collection. Some of the key skills required are shown in Section
         4.3.
        Analysis and interpretation of, or at least dialogue about, the collected data needs to be
         undertaken by people who understand the local context and are sensitive to the political
         economy, as well as having solid experience of urban sanitation issues.
        The household surveys were a relatively small sample and provided 90% confidence,
         whereas academic studies typically aim for a minimum of 95% confidence. The sample
         sizes enabled testing of the FSM tools and provided input to existing World Bank
         investment and technical assistance projects. As such they helped provide a common
         understanding of the existing situation and informed the discussion about which next
         steps and options should be taken. They are not designed for detailed planning of an
         intervention in specific areas, for which tools such as the Urban Sanitation Status Index,
         or USSI (see Section 2.9.5), can be a valuable addition where a geographical focus of
         intervention is required.


2.3        Overview of the diagnostic tools
As explained above, the details of the tools are covered in some of the companion documents
produced by the global FSM study. The tools are divided into two types:

        Diagnostic tools ask questions such as “Where is the waste going?”, “What polic ies,
         laws, institutions, processes and budgets exist for FSM services, and where are there
         gaps?”, or “Why is it like this? Who benefits, who loses out? What factors could facilitate
         improvements?” These tools aim to improve the understanding of the nature of the
         sanitation problem, and from this material identify necessary actions and provide
         evidence-based data for use in decision-making.




                                                                                                   11
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


        Decision-support tools respond to the identified situation, but go further, asking
         questions such as “What should we do next?”, “What legislation and regulation is
         needed?” “What technical options may work?” and “What are the immediate and
         medium term priorities?” These tools aim to structure discussions around possible
         technical interventions and their economic and financial implications, and to bring
         together the outputs of all the tools to guide identification of policy, institutional and
         financial interventions necessary to deliver desired results.

Table 2 below summarizes the tools developed and used in the study and their objectives.
Other related diagnostic tools, which can play an important role, but were not developed as part
of this initiative, are also included in this table for context.

Table 2           FSM Tools and their objectives

                  Tool                             Objective
                                                   Where does the fecal waste go?”
                 1. Fecal Waste Flow
                                                   Represent where fecal waste goes, what proportion is
                    Diagram
                                                   managed and where the unmanaged portion ends up
                                                   “What policies, laws, institutions, processes and budgets
                 2. City Service Delivery          exist for FSM services? Where are there gaps?
 Diagnostic
                    Assessment (CSDA)              Assess the local enabling environment and quality of
 tools
                    for FSM                        service delivery along the sanitation service chain,
                                                   identifying areas for attention
                                                   “Why is it like this? Who benefits, who loses out? What
                 3. Prognosis for Change
                                                   factors could facilitate improvement of the services?”
                    (Political Economy
                                                   Identify the interests and incentives that could block
                    Analysis)
                                                   action, and possible entry points for overcoming them
                                                   “Which aspects of the enabling environment need
                 4. Service Delivery               development next?”
 Decision-          Action Framework               Guide identification of actions in relation to the enabling
 support                                           environment, necessary to deliver desired results
 tools                                             “Which technical options may work?”
                 5. Intervention Options
                                                   Guide for identification of technical interventions along the
                    Assessment
                                                   service chain – linking to program design guidelines
                                                   Quantify volumes and characteristics of sludge, using
                  Fecal sludge technical           standard methods. Assess FS end-products to suit
 Tools
                  tools                            market potential, evaluate collection and transport options
 being
                                                   and optimized treatment processes for resource recovery.
 developed
                  Urban Sanitation Status          Quantify and represent in cartographic form the status of
 by partners
                  Index                            sanitation services, disaggregated by neighborhood
                  FSM finance tools                Estimate the costs of fecal sludge management services


Figure 4 below maps the interrelations between the tools and their findings. The fecal waste
flow diagram (see Section 4.4.1) acts as the starting point for the other tools: each subsequent
tool provides further information on a different aspect of the overall analysis. Each tool is linked
to one of three elements of program design (enabling environment, technical design and
prioritization), while the outputs of all tools provide inputs to the implementation options
assessment framework.




                                                                                                                   12
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


Most of these tools apply to urban sanitation overall. The City Service Delivery Assessment
(CSDA), as applied in this study, is FSM-specific, but could equally be applied, in a modified
form, to urban sanitation in general.

From the Fecal Waste Flow Diagram (SFD - Box 1 in Figure 4) there are three ‘streams’ of
information required for program design. The first relates to institutions and financing (to inform
enabling environment interventions), the second to sludge and wastewater volumes and
characteristics (to inform technical interventions) and the third to spatial data and costs to inform
prioritization of interventions. Information and analysis under all three ‘streams’ should inform a
comprehensive approach to program design.

For the enabling environment stream, the City Service Delivery Assessment (CSDA - Box 2 in
Figure 4) assesses the quality of processes affecting service delivery, intermediate and resulting
service outcomes along the sanitation service chain and diagnoses the main impediments within
the current enabling environment to supporting the development, expansion and sustainability
of FSM services. The Prognosis for Change/Political Economy Analysis (PFC/PEA - Box 2 in
Figure 4) is strongly linked to the CSDA, identifying the interests and incentives that could block
action, and possible entry points for overcoming them. In addition, an emerging FSM finance
tool supports the analysis of different models for who should pay, which must be proposed with
an understanding of the political economy and current financing context. This then feeds into
the Service Delivery Action Framework (SDAF – Box 4 in Figure 4) which suggests appropriate
non-technical (or “soft”) interventions for improving FSM, as a function of the status of the
enabling environment.

Figure 4          Diagram of how the tools fit together




On the technical design stream, intervention options should be based on an understanding of
the predominant characteristics of fecal sludge in the city, including how much of it there is to
manage – which is, perhaps surprisingly, not a simple question. This avoids inappropriate or
ineffective technical options being proposed. SANDEC’s published material on urban sanitation



                                                                                                   13
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


and FSM are state-of-the-art resources for supporting the quantification, characterization and
design of treatment for sludge.

Finally, the prioritization stream helps decision-makers decide where to focus their efforts. The
USSI tool supports this by showing where deficiencies in sanitation are spatially distributed. An
FSM costing tool, currently in the initial stages of application, allows for the comparison of FSM
service and infrastructure options, to support the selection of cost-effective interventions.

Public health risk assessment tools, such as those being developed by the Centre for Global
Safe Water at Emory University, the Development Planning Unit at University College London
(UCL), The Water Institute at the University of North Carolina (UNC) and other universities, can
help identify ‘hot spots’ in the city where the health burden is greatest. However, none of these
tools is as yet in a usable form. When ready they will constitute a valuable addition to the tools
for prioritizing interventions.

Together, the outputs of these tools provide comprehensive information on the physical situation
which feed into the identification of technical intervention options


2.4        Tool 1: Fecal Waste Flow Diagram
A Fecal Waste Flow Diagram is a visualization of how fecal waste (consisting of both fecal
sludge and wastewater) flows along the sanitation service chain for different segments of the
population. The diagram seeks to answer the question “Where does the fecal waste go in the
city?” The proportions of households using different sanitation options are identified according to
where the waste discharges (e.g. sewer, on-site containment etc.). At each stage of the chain,
the proportion of fecal waste that is effectively managed continues as a green arrow, while any
proportion identified as ineffectively managed “escapes” from the service chain and turns into a
brown arrow, representing fecal pollution of the residential and natural environment.
Data sources used to develop the figures for the diagrams include household surveys, key
informant interviews, secondary and grey literature, reports, observation of service provision
and measurements at treatment facilities.




                                                                                                 14
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


Figure 5 and Figure 6 show examples of fecal waste flow diagrams for Lima, Peru. The first
represents a city-wide picture, while the second represents the situation for informal settlements
in the city.
This is made possible by the sampling approach taken in the primary surveys – see link to data
collection instruments below. This separate analysis allows decision-makers to focus on
delivering city-wide services which are also poor-inclusive.
As illustrated in this case, the situation in slums is much worse than the city-wide picture, with
far more fecal waste going directly into the local area, especially via poorly built unlined pits.
This may help inform the development of poor-inclusive intervention options, for example
improvements to on-site containment.




                                                                                                15
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas

Figure 5          City-wide fecal waste flow diagram for Lima, Peru




Figure 6          Fecal waste flow diagram for informal settlements in Lima, Peru




 Important link
     BMGF-funded Fecal Waste Flow (SFD) Promotion Initiative
     For details on quantifying the factors determining fecal waste flows, see Data Collection
        Instruments
                                                                                                  16
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


2.5        Tool 2: City Service Delivery Assessment
The City Service Delivery Assessment (CSDA) for FSM aims to answer overarching questions
about the quality of the enabling environment, the extent of FSM service development and the
commitment to FSM service sustainability. These are questions such as “What policies,
planning processes and budgets exist for FSM services? How are these monitored? Are
services expanded and do they meet the needs of all users?” The CSDA provides a structured
assessment, based on responding to objective questions on FSM service performance through
all stages of the service chain, so as to identify
                                                   Figure 7   CSDA scorecard for Balikpapan
priority areas for action. The current format is
                                                   Indonesia
adapted from that of the FSM 12-city study
(WSP, 2013), which itself was derived from
WSP’s Country Status Overviews for water
and sanitation (see AMCOW, 2011).
A key output from the CSDA process for FSM
is the CSDA scorecard. An example for
Balikpapan, Indonesia is shown in Figure 7.
The process of developing the CSDA is
important, as it requires key stakeholders to
discuss all stages of the service chain and use
the evidence about the current situation to
agree scores. This evidence may have come
from key informant interviews, secondary
literature, field-based observations or focus
group discussions. An initial stakeholder
mapping exercise is necessary to ensure
interviews are targeted at those best placed to                 Figure 8      Interlinked CSDA and PFC process
inform and to generate unbiased scoring.
Details of questions and indicators used in the
process are in the Tools and Guidelines.
The resulting CSDA scorecard shows areas of
strength and weakness for FSM and identify
priority areas for action – which may include a
national dimension (Table 2). As illustrated in
the case of Balikpapan (Figure 7), likely priority
areas for action are: establishing plans and
associated budgets to improve FSM services,
as well as focusing on poor-inclusive technical
interventions to deliver services to all.
The CSDA process does not explain why the situation prevails, nor identify potential obstacles
to progress. The CSDA must be an iterative process which also takes into account the political
economy of FSM in that city. A Prognosis for Change (PFC) assessment (next section) looks at
why the CSDA looks like it does. Figure 8 summarizes this interlinked process, starting with
stakeholder mapping. Once priority areas in the CSDA have been identified, a PFC assessment
is undertaken. This then informs the intervention options assessment (see Section 2.8), so
possible interventions are considered in the context of the city’s political economy realities.


   Important links
       For the CSDA questions and process, see Tools and Guidelines and Data Collection
          Instruments
       For guidance on stakeholder mapping, see p.126ff of the World Bank sourcebook on Tools for
          Institutional, Political, and Social Analysis of Policy Reform


                                                                                                            17
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


2.6        Tool 3: Prognosis for Change assessment
The PFC assessment considers the positions of various stakeholders, in particular the
institutions and incentives at play. It asks questions such as “Why are things like this?”, “What
are the formal and informal interests and incentives?” and “How is influence exerted?”. A PFC
assessment is essentially a political economy analysis in which topics are sensitively
addressed, so that analysis can be shared and discussed among stakeholders.
A PFC assessment aims to understand                    Figure 9 Three key concepts in PFC assessment
three things, as shown in Figure 9.
Firstly, it considers how “institutions”
function. Institutions are defined as “the
rules and norms governing human
interaction”, rather than a narrow
definition of “organizations”. Institutions
can be formal (such as regulatory
standards or byelaws about dumping FS
legally), or informal (such as attitudes to
reusing fecal sludge in agriculture).
Secondly, a PFC considers the
incentives which institutions provide to
stakeholders. In FSM, examples of                      Figure 10            Process map for Dhaka
relevant stakeholders may include
sludge truck companies, the City                         Entry points                Formal Process                      Informal Process

Council, line Ministries, or slum-dwellers.                                   Developer applies to RAJUK for
                                                                                          permit
Finally, a PFC considers how stake-
holders exert influence, defined as the               Improve application
                                                                              RAJUK reviews application and
                                                                                                                   RAJUK expects DCC/DWASA
                                                                             consults other relevant authorities
formal or informal power to cause or                     scrutiny by all
                                                                              linked to FSM service provision
                                                                                                                    to provide services, without
                                                            parties                                                           asking
prevent something. A city council may                                              (e.g. DCCs, DWASA)
have formal legal power, but if their FSM
                                                                               RAJUK approves construction
byelaws are openly flouted, then their
influence is very low.                                                       Developer constructs building with     Developer connects toilets or
                                                                               septic tanks & leach pits not         septic tanks directly to the
The political economy is strongly linked                                           connected to drains                  storm water drains

to a financing dimension. The availability Improve quality of                                 Not enough RAJUK staff to do
                                                              RAJUK inspects during and after
of finance, and the mechanisms through       inspections by
                                                                construction for compliance
                                                                                              proper inspections & enforce
                                                 RaJUK                                                 compliance
which it is distributed, have a profound
impact on what actually happens. In                           Occupants of completed building
                                                                                               Occupants do nothing, as all
order to be practically useful, a PFC                          arrange for emptying of septic
                                                                                                   waste goes to drains
                                                                     tanks when req'd
assessment       should    consider    the
implications of the findings for effective
engagement in a reform or change process. National policy and fiscal approaches are relevant
here. In many cities, local resources are lacking and will continue to require (if not depend on)
some assistance from higher levels of government – which ought to be rooted in national level
policy.

Various tools for PFC assessment are included in the Tools and Guidelines, and an example of
one of them is given in Figure 10. It shows a process map for the construction of a building in
Dhaka. The central column shows the normal process, while the right-hand column shows the
informal process which happens in practice. The left-hand column then shows entry points for
engagement, crucial to getting value out of PFC analysis.

 Important links
     WSP study with OPM on the political economy of sanitation in three countries
     The World Bank sourcebook on Tools for Institutional, Political, and Social Analysis of Policy
        Reform contains many examples of tools for PFC assessment
                                                                                                                                          18
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas


2.7        Tool 4: Service Delivery Action Framework
The diagnostic tools produce a comprehensive set of information and highlight priority areas for
action throughout the service chain. This, in turn, informs a further process of identifying both
technical and non-technical intervention options for improving services. These will guide the
detailed project planning and implementation processes. The Service Delivery Action
Framework makes recommendations on institutional issues, based on the components of the
CSDA. The process for assessing technical intervention options is outlined in the next section.
This tool conceptualizes the range of non-technical or ‘institutional’ interventions that may be
appropriate for a given city, depending on the status of FSM services development. Actions are
grouped according to how well-developed the enabling environment is currently, with three
stages characterized as: Basic, Intermediate or Consolidating. Actions are informed by the
current reality experienced on the ground and are defined to highlight where best to focus
attention for each aspect of the enabling environment, with the goal of improving services.
Table 2 presents actions in an abridged format, in the interests of space. The Tools and
Guidelines includes more comprehensive descriptions. Elements of the enabling environment
are informed by recent research (see below).
For each component of the enabling environment (policy, institutional arrangements, budgets,
etc.), specific activities can be identified. This may result in a range of actions taken from any of
the Basic, Intermediate or Consolidating stages, as appropriate to a given city. Stakeholders
must consider how actions will need to be implemented through pragmatic steps to be
‘actionable’. The result will be a range of actions targeted at national, city and user level, which
can then be considered in more detail to inform project planning and implementation.
Identifying the most appropriate actions must take into account the reality of any given city and
recognize that the stages are essentially sequential – i.e. starting with Basic actions before
moving towards Intermediate, and then Consolidating actions. Thus, if a city has already
addressed Basic actions, Intermediate actions will most likely be the ones to focus on for that
particular component.
This is illustrated by way of an example of a resulting Service Delivery Action Framework for
Dhaka in Table 3. It highlights appropriate actions for each element of the enabling
environment, informed by the extent to which actions have already been achieved in
                                                                                     ‘Action’
the city. Actions to consider are shown in the boxes with bold outline and shading:
Dhaka city’s CSDA scorecard highlighted that progress in the enabling environment is limited to
developing policy around containment and establishing an institutional framework for FSM
services more generally. A focus on Intermediate actions is needed in relation to these areas,
but Basic actions remain the priority in all other areas, including planning, budgeting, promotion
and capacity.
A further step in the process is to take the actions from each of the highlighted areas and
translate them into objectives, targets, indicators and inputs that respond to the specific context
of the given city – at an appropriate scale (e.g. city-wide, or focused on specific locations) to
enable detailed planning. This step must not be overlooked, as it requires a significant
commitment of time, resources and skills to achieve effective results




 Important links
     An Enabling Environment for Urban Sanitation: SPLASH Urban Sanitation Research
        Programme Briefing Note 1




                                                                                                   19
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                                                                                      Version: draft final


Table 2                 Service Delivery Action Framework

                             Basic actions                                         Intermediate actions                                   Consolidating actions
Stages of action
                             Critical interventions for public health protection   Strengthening existing foundations                     Focused on full-chain, sustainable services
                              Review national sanitation policy and ensure         Set norms / standards for public health and
           Policy,                                                                                                                         Require local regulation and its enforcement
                               FSM is included                                       environmental protection
           legislation and                                                                                                                 Develop a policy/regulatory framework to
           regulation         Review regulatory framework around the               Establish legal basis for regulation of FSM
                                                                                                                                            incentivize treatment and re-use options
                               protection of public health & environment             services
                              Review institutional arrangements for sanitation     Establish institutional framework for FSM with        Strengthen institutional framework to enhance
           Institutional       – ensure FSM is included                              defined roles and coordination mechanisms              service outcomes, with fully implemented roles
National




           arrangements       Identify an institutional framework for FSM with     Establish institutional roles for fecal sludge         and coordination
                               clear roles and coordination                          treatment and re-use options                          Consider (dis)incentives for improved FSM
           Planning,          Build awareness of FSM in national planning          Establish monitoring framework for service            Strengthen monitoring of all services
           monitoring and      entities and relevant sector ministries (works,       standards – focus on emptying services                Develop plans to enhance treatment capacity
           evaluation          housing, health, environment, etc.)                  Establish systems to evaluate service quality          and re-use technologies
           Capacity and       Identify scale of the capacity gap and TA            Build public and private sector capacity for city-    Strengthen sector capacity for services,
           TA*                 required to address FSM service needs                 wide FSM services                                      including treatment & re-use markets
           Financing          Build awareness and agreement around the             Develop programs with FSM funding windows             Mobilize finance for FS processing, re-use and
                               budgetary requirements for FSM services               and incentives for cities                              disposal
                                                                                    Strengthen byelaws and their enforcement              Regulate pollution of receiving waters
           Legislation and    Review/establish byelaws, ensuring they
           enforcement                                                              Introduce regulation of service providers             Penalties for indiscriminate FS dumping
                               address on-site systems and FSM services
                                                                                    Incentivize disposal at recognized sites              Enforce use of emptiable facilities
                                                                                    Establish local institutional framework for           Strengthen institutional roles for managing
           Institutional      Review institutional arrangements for sanitation      services – with roles defined and agreed               improved FS management, including treatment
                               – ensure FSM is included
           arrangements                                                             Establish roles for FS treatment and re-use            facilities and re-use options
                              Identify local institutional framework for FSM
                                                                                    Consider (dis)incentives for improved FSM             Implement (dis)incentives for improved FSM
                              Conduct area-based, gender and pro-poor              Establish revenue streams                             Introduce plans to enhance treatment capacity
           Planning,
Local




           monitoring and
                               focused diagnostic studies                           Refine and implement local service plans               and re-use arrangements
           evaluation         Develop plans, finance & institutional needs         Establish monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of          Strengthen M&E of treatment and re-use
                              Plan and design FS treatment options                  service standards                                      arrangements against service standards
           Promotion          Stimulate customer demand/ WTP for FSM               Disseminate public FSM services information           Stimulate market demand for re-use of FS
           Capacity and       Identify capacity gaps and required TA               Promote/support development of improved,              Consolidate/expand services based on
           technical          Promote appropriate private sector services           emptiable containment facilities                       outcome of pilot studies
           assistance*        Implement measures for safer disposal of FS          Strengthen role of service providers                  Build/rehabilitate FS processing plants and
           (TA)                currently dumped in the environment                  Pilot scheduled desludging/ transfer stations          develop business models for re-use of FS
           Financing          Identify the extent of financing required to         Introduce specific pro-poor financial                 Identify opportunities for financial flows
                               address service improvements to the poorest           arrangements (such as targeted subsidies)              generated from the sale of FS end products
           Planning           Consult communities, identify needs & wants          Gain user feedback on improved services               Gain user opinions on re-use options
Users




           Tenant             Engage with / consult landlords and tenants on       Develop assistance and enforcement packages           Focus on enforcement of service quality for
           sanitation          constraints to FSM services                           for landlords                                          landlords




                                                                                                                                                                                            20
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                                                   Version: draft final


Table 3                    Prioritized actions: illustrative example for Dhaka city
                             Basic actions                                                                              Consolidating actions
                                                                          Intermediate actions
Stages of action             Critical interventions for public                                                          Focused on full-chain, sustainable
                                                                          Strengthening existing foundations
                             health protection                                                                          services
           Policy,             Review national sanitation policy and        Set norms / standards for public             Require local regulation and its
           legislation          ensure FSM is included                        health and environmental protection           enforcement
           and                 Review regulatory framework around           Establish legal basis for regulation of      Develop       a      policy/regulatory
           regulation           the protection of public health &             FSM services                                  framework to incentivize treatment
                                environment                                                                                 and re-use options
           Institutional       Review institutional arrangements for        Establish institutional framework for        Strengthen institutional framework to
           arrangements         sanitation – ensure FSM is included           FSM with defined roles and                    enhance service outcomes, with fully
                               Identify an institutional framework for       coordination mechanisms                       implemented roles and coordination
                                FSM with clear roles and coordination        Establish institutional roles for fecal
National




                                                                              sludge treatment and re-use options
           Planning,           Build awareness of FSM in national           Establish monitoring framework for           Strengthen monitoring of all services
           monitoring           planning entities and relevant sector         service standards – focus on                 Develop plans to enhance treatment
           and                  ministries (works, housing, health,           emptying services                             capacity and re-use technologies
           evaluation           environment, etc.)                           Establish systems to evaluate service
                                                                              quality
           Capacity and        Identify scale of the capacity gap and       Build public and private sector              Strengthen sector capacity for
           TA                   TA required to address FSM service            capacity for city-wide FSM services           services, including treatment & re-
                                needs                                                                                       use markets
           Financing           Build awareness and agreement                Develop programs with FSM funding            Mobilize finance for FS processing,
                                around the budgetary requirements             windows and incentives for cities             re-use and disposal
                                for FSM services
           Legislation         Review/establish byelaws, ensuring           Strengthen byelaws and their                 Regulate pollution of receiving
           and                  they address on-site systems and              enforcement                                   waters
           enforcement          FSM services                                 Introduce regulation of service              Penalties for indiscriminate FS
                                                                              providers                                     dumping
                                                                             Incentivize disposal at recognized           Enforce use of emptiable facilities
                                                                              sites
           Institutional       Review institutional arrangements for        Establish local institutional framework      Strengthen institutional roles for
           arrangements         sanitation – ensure FSM is included           for services – with roles defined and         managing           improved    FS
                               Identify local institutional framework        agreed                                        management, including treatment
                                for FSM                                      Establish roles for FS treatment and          facilities and re-use options
                                                                              re-use
           Planning,           Conduct area-based, gender and pro-          Establish revenue streams                    Introduce   plans    to   enhance
           monitoring           poor focused diagnostic studies              Refine and implement local service            treatment capacity and re-use
                               Develop plans, finance & institutional        plans                                         arrangements
Local




           and
           evaluation           needs                                        Establish M&E of service standards           Strengthen M&E of treatment and re-
                               Plan and design FS treatment options                                                        use arrangements against service
                                                                                                                            standards
           Promotion           Stimulate customer demand/ WTP for           Disseminate public FSM services              Stimulate market demand for re-use
                                FSM                                           information                                   of FS
           Capacity and        Identify capacity gaps and required          Promote/support development of               Consolidate/expand services based
           technical            TA                                            improved, emptiable containment               on outcome of pilot studies
           assistance          Promote private sector emptying               facilities                                   Build/rehabilitate  FS     processing
           (TA)                 services                                     Strengthen role of service providers          plants and develop business models
                               Implement measures for safer                 Pilot scheduled desludging/ transfer          for re-use of FS
                                disposal of FS currently dumped in            stations
                                the environment
           Financing           Identify the extent of financing             Introduce specific pro-poor financial        Identify opportunities for financial
                                required    to    address   service           arrangements (such as targeted                flows generated from the sale of FS
                                improvements to the poorest                   subsidies)                                    end products
           Planning            Consult communities, identify needs          Gain user feedback on improved               Gain user opinions on re-use options
                                & wants                                       services
Users




           Tenant              Engage with / consult landlords and          Develop assistance and enforcement           Focus on enforcement of service
           sanitation           tenants on constraints to FSM                 packages for landlords                        quality for landlords
                                services




                                                                                                                                                                  21
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                         Version: draft final



2.8        Tool 5: Intervention Options Assessment
The previous section outlined how actions relating to the enabling environment are identified, while
this section outlines the process for assessing technical intervention options.

The starting point in identifying technical intervention options is the fecal waste flow diagram for the
area under consideration. Taking the diagram, the focus should be around the ineffectively
managed portions of fecal waste flows. The significant problems need to be identified for each
system type shown in the diagram (e.g. flush to a sewer, on-site containment that is not emptied),
to build up a table that ‘maps’ system types against stages of the service chain . Informed by
expertise on good sanitation and fecal sludge management practices appropriate for the target city,
potential technical solutions can be proposed for the various stages. As a technical solution is
identified at a given stage in the service chain, it is essential to consider the implications for the
other stages of the chain and identify the associated interventions required.

Table 4 shows an example of Intervention Options Assessment, based on proposed solutions for
slum areas of Dhaka. In the interests of space, it shows only one or two interventions through the
service chain for each system type and is focused on FSM services. The same table can and
should be applied to other aspects of urban sanitation, including sewered options, as explained in
the Tools and Guidelines. This example highlights how technical interventions will be most varied
at the stages of containment, emptying and conveyance, while treatment, disposal and end-use
options are likely to coalesce into similar interventions.

Table 4            Intervention options for different system types: FSM in Dhaka slums
 System type                            Potential solutions (one or two options for each system type shown here)
  Key problems
   (only one example
   per system given      Containment            Emptying          Conveyance            Treatment      Disposal     End-use
   here)
 On-site
 containment:            Improve the design
                                                Improve range
 emptiable               and construction of
                                                of responsive     Identify, pilot and
                         septic tanks (STs)
  Limited use of                               & affordable      develop
                         and pits, with
   emptying services                            emptying          innovative                           Modify
                         standards followed
   – high rate of FS                            options and       transport solutions   Introduce a    existing
                         to maximize
   discharge to                                 services          (mechanized or        range of       sites and
                         retention of FS.
   drains                                                         human powered),       decentralize   manage
                                                                                                                    Explore
                         Modify existing        Extend            offering affordable   d treatment    new FS
 On-site                                                                                                            financially
                         STs/pits, to convert   emptying          and responsive        facilities     disposal
 containment:                                                                                                       viable
                         to being emptiable     services to       services              and/or FS      sites – to
 non-emptiable                                                                                                      options for
                         and also providing     additional                              handling       minimize
  poor containment                                                                                                 FS end-
                         effective              sanitation        Introduce transfer    station at     risk to
   infrastructure                                                                                                   use
                         containment            facilities        stations for small-   wastewater     public and
                                                Identify          vehicle operators     treatment      environ-
                         Invest in new          innovative        – linked to larger    plants         mental
 No containment          household-level        servicing of      collection services                  health
                                                                  to take FS to
  direct discharge to   containment            household
                         options, where         containment       treatment sites
   environment
                         acceptable to users    options that
                                                have no outlet


Once technical options have been proposed, it is essential to consider the ‘institutional’ elements
within the broader enabling environment that show up as priority areas for action in the CSDA
scorecard and in light of the Prognosis for Change. These elements must be addressed if technical
interventions are to provide effective and sustainable services. This process is structured around a
Service Delivery Action Framework, discussed in the previous section.

  Important links
      Poor-Inclusive Urban Sanitation: An Overview, WSP, 2013



                                                                                                                                     22
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final



2.9        Other tools, including those developed by partners

2.9.1      FSM costing tool

USAID have supported the development of a FSM costing and financing tool, which has been
adapted for and is being field tested in Indonesia. This comprehensive tool has been developed by
MWH, a global consulting firm, and has potential for adaptation for use in other countries. The
tool estimates the number of staff, number of trucks, capital cost and on-going operation and
maintenance costs for a complete FSM system including scheduled (regular) collection, treatment,
management and community engagement. The tool calculates an appropriate monthly tariff to
cover all these costs, based on local capital and recurrent unit cost data, and presents relevant
financial data in a variety of formats and reports. Other functionalities of the tool include:
        Evaluation of distances and times required for collection of septage;
        Comparisons between different FSM service delivery models (private sector and
         government) and septage treatment options;
        Modeling of capital and recurrent financing from government and non-government loans,
         grants and revenue in addition to funding obtained from customers of the service.
It is not widely available yet, and still requires further testing and development. It would in any
case need to be adapted for application in any specific country or city, or for ‘on request’ FSM
services.

2.9.2      TrackFin

The TrackFin (Tracking Financing) Initiative of UN-Water GLAAS provides a methodology to track
financial flows into and throughout the WASH sector. A guidance document has been developed to
help users prepare WASH Accounts for their country. Tracking finance in this way enables a
comprehensive understanding of what funding is available for different purposes and where it is
coming from. TrackFin is designed for the national and sub-national level. This focus means that it
is less directly relevant for the project level, which is the main concern of this study, although these
analysis can provide useful background for these analysis. However, it has been applied to
sanitation finance tracking in several countries (including in Brazil, Morocco and Ghana), and has
the potential to be used for tracking funds to urban sanitation nationally and sub-nationally, which
could be of use to those using the other tools in this study. The guidance document is available on
the WHO website.

Figure 11 below shows TrackFin results for WASH financing in Ghana over 2010-12, which shows
spending for urban sanitation (Trémolet, n.d.). The study’s authors were mainly intending to
develop a proof of concept for the methodology, so did not sub-divide spending by type of services
or along the sanitation chain. However, this is technically possible using the TrackFin methodology
and could be carried out by studies using it in the future.




                                                                                                               23
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                  Version: draft final


Figure 11         TrackFin results for Ghana by subsector in millions of Ghana Cedis




2.9.3      Public Health Risk Assessment Tools

The principal rationale for improving sanitation is to Figure 12 Relationship between open
improve public health. Statistical analysis (see                 defecation and stunting
Figure 12) shows that stunting, which aggregates
many of the effects of poor sanitation, is closely
correlated with levels of open defecation, and this
correlation increases in densely populated urban
areas. Many other studies show that improving
sanitation reduces diarrheal disease, although a
precise causative relationship is hard to determine.

Public health risk has two major components:
hazard (the levels of fecal contamination along
various pathways from feces to mouth) and
exposure (the frequency and extent of contact with
each contamination pathway). Hazard may be
estimated from measurements of fecal pollution in
the environment, or by taking the SFD a stage further by consideration of microbiological decay
along the various pathways. Exposure is much more difficult to estimate, but may involve
individual and group surveys, observation, key informant interviews, GPS mapping, etc. Various
initiatives are in progress to address these complexities and may eventually be developed to a
stage where they can help to pinpoint priority public health risks in specific areas of the city, which
can then be targeted with specific interventions. The most advanced tool in development is
SaniPATH, developed by Emory University in the USA. SaniPATH guides the user through a
comprehensive environmental microbiological sampling and analysis process, and links this with
behavioral observations and discussions.9 The tool is not yet ready for routine use and is being
further developed to make it both easier to apply and more reliable. The University of North
Carolina in the USA is developing an analysis of the return of fecal pollution to the environment,
which focuses more on hazard than risk (= hazard x exposure) since exposure is hard to measure.
This initiative is at an early stage, so it is not yet clear in which direction it might develop. 10
University College London (UCL) in the UK was involved in the SPLASH program, of which one

9
   See http://sanipath.org/
10
    See http://waterinstitute.unc.edu/publication/unsafe-return-human-excreta-environment-literature-review/ for a
literature review on the subject


                                                                                                                              24
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                Version: draft final


sub-project further developed community-based risk assessment tools which are more subjective,
but incorporated exposure issues through working directly with the target populations.11 The World
Bank Global Water Practice is in contact with all of the above-mentioned groups. It may be
realistic to hope for easily usable tools or viable heuristics within the next 2-3 years. At present,
the priority is to support such developments and get the various ideas field-tested.

2.9.4      Fecal Sludge Technical Tools

In low and middle-income countries, regulations relating to fecal sludge often do not exist, or if they
do, are not enforced. This makes defining performance goals for fecal sludge management
challenging. Most sanitation infrastructure projects are designed to overly-stringent performance
goals, but end up not performing as intended and therefore ‘failing’. While over-designing wastes
money and resources, under-designing does not provide adequate protection of human and
environmental health. Technologies designed to enable and optimize resource recovery
opportunities can be used as a way to define more appropriate performance goals, including
increased financial flows to offset costs in the sanitation service chain. 12 The technologies can
also provide an incentive for efficient and effective collection and transport arrangements, as well
as the operation of optimized treatment plants, functioning on the basis of meeting a market
demand.

SANDEC at EAWAG is currently developing a series of tools to support an integrated approach to
designing fecal sludge treatment.13 The tools will be based on field experience in fecal sludge
management and address five core areas and objectives:

    Market Driven Approach: to aid selection of treated end-products with the greatest potential for
     market volume and growth;
    Evaluate collection and transport service delivery and the siting of treatment plants;
    Optimized treatment technologies for resource recovery: to optimize existing treatment
     technologies for increased volumetric capacity or reduced footprint of the treatment plant;
    Fecal sludge quantification and characterization: to reasonably estimate the characteristics and
     quantities of fecal sludge on a city-wide scale, or an appropriate scale to suit the intended
     treatment plant; and
    Laboratory methods: to prepare reliable and replicable standard methods for laboratory
     analysis of fecal sludge.

Publications supporting development of the tools can be found on the SANDEC website at
www.sandec.ch/fsm_tools, following the link to Excreta and Wastewater Management. In support
of this SANDEC has published Fecal Sludge Management: Systems Approach for Implementation
and Operation, which is the first book dedicated to fecal sludge management. It compiles the
current state of knowledge of this rapidly evolving field and presents an integrated approach that
includes technology, management and planning. It addresses the planning and organization of the
entire fecal sludge management service chain, from the collection and transport of sludge and
treatment options, to the final end use or disposal of treated sludge.

In addition to providing fundamentals and an overview of technologies, the book goes into details
of operational, institutional and financial aspects, and provides guidance on how to plan a city-level
fecal sludge management project with the involvement of all the stakeholders.
11
   See http://splash-era.net/outputs.php and the outputs listed under the CLASS-A drop-down option
12
   Noting that the most appropriate technology is dependent upon the characteristics of the waste, costs associated with
the technology and the potential scale of the re-use market
13
   Department of Sanitation in Developing Countries (Sandec) of the Swiss Federal Aquatic Research Institute (EAWAG)


                                                                                                                            25
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas              Version: draft final


The FSM book (Strande et al (eds.), 2014) can be downloaded free of charge from Fecal Sludge
Management: Systems Approach for Implementation and Operation

2.9.5      Urban Sanitation Status Index

The Urban Sanitation Status Index (USSI), developed by <>>>, is a tool based on the sanitation
service chain that visualizes the sanitation status at the neighborhood level, which is usually the
lowest administrative unit within a city. It is based on 15 qualitative indicators assessed via
household surveys and key informant interviews. The USSI uses similar data (but in larger
quantity, allowing spatial disaggregation) to those required to develop an SFD, but also includes
very basic data on solid waste and drainage, which are important complementary aspects of
sanitation in its narrower sense of excreta management.

The 15 qualitative base indicators are aggregated into 9 numerical indicators and then into 4
components (see Table 5 below), grouped according to stages the sanitation service chain:
(i) containment; (ii) emptying and conveyance; (iii) treatment and disposal; and (iv) complementary
services (solid waste and drainage). The indicators can be mapped by neighborhood to give a
sense of where the service chain is failing most severely (see Figure 13). They can also be
aggregated into the overall USSI using the analytic hierarchy process, whereby sanitation experts
familiar with the area under study provide relative rankings of pairs of the numerical variables,
which are aggregated and used to generate a weighted geometric mean of all the variables.

Table 5           Components and indicators in the USSI
  Component                             Indicator                                Information capture
                                        Access to toilet                         Household
  Containment                           Structural safety                        Household
                                        Hygienic condition                       Household
                                        Access to emptying services              Household
  Emptying and Conveyance
                                        Transport safety                         Neighborhood/KII/FGD
                                        Level of treatment                       Household
  Treatment and Disposal
                                        Final disposal                           Household
                                        Solid waste management                   Household + Neighborhood/KII/FGD
  Complementary Services
                                        Storm & greywater management             Household + Neighborhood/KII/FGD

Figure 13         Examples of USSI output maps from Maputo, Mozambique




          Emptying and Conveyance                                  Overall Urban Sanitation Status Index

                                                                                                                          26
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas           Version: draft final


                      2.9.6      SFD promotion initiative

Based on the Fecal Waste Flow Diagram (SFD) developed by the World Bank/WSP, a number of
institutions active in excreta management convened in June 2014 to further develop it. In addition,
the CSDA tool was adapted to enable a short-form of reporting on key elements of the enabling
environment. This joint initiative is managed under the umbrella of the Sustainable Sanitation
Alliance (SuSanA) and has been funded by BMGF since September 2014.14

BMGF’s first grant kick-started a process of developing tools and mechanisms for the easy
production of standardized SFDs, backed by a description of information sources and the enabling
environment in the city concerned. The approach is being tested in cities across Africa, Asia and
Latin America and the results disseminated via the SuSanA website (see Figure 14). The aim is to
promote better understanding of excreta management by demonstrating the power of the SFD to
summarize and present what happens to excreta in cities. The SFD is recognized as an advocacy
and decision-support tool, which has the potential to shift the focus of attention, money and
activities towards more effective and inclusive urban sanitation and more efficient investments. In
a second phase, the initiative is being extended further to support the creation and use of SFDs as
widely as possible.

Existing SFDs, e-tools and guidance about how to develop new ones are available online from the
website.

Figure 14         SFD SuSanA Website (see http://sfd.susana.org/)




14
   The consortium consists of the Global Sector Program on Sustainable Sanitation of the Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ GmbH) commissioned by the German Federal Ministry for Economic Development
and Cooperation (BMZ); the water@leeds research group of the University of Leeds (UoL); the Water, Engineering and
Development Centre (WEDC) of Loughborough University, the Department of Water and Sanitation in Developing
Countries (SANDEC) at the Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology (EAWAG); the Centre for
Science and Environment in Delhi (CSE) and the World Bank Water and Sanitation Program (WSP).


                                                                                                                       27
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final



2.10       When to apply the tools
At the inception of this study, the tools were at different stages of development. This study has
developed the tools and guidelines through case studies, to make them more useful in practice. In
most cities, the case study was linked to a World Bank investment project.

The tools can be used as a package, and were designed to be complementary. However,
depending on the city context and especially if substantial prior work has been undertaken relating
to FSM services, they can be applied individually to address particular issues. In the absence of
relevant prior evidence-based FSM work, the strongest analysis will be gained from applying all of
them together, as shown in Figure 4.

For stakeholders who already know the city FSM context well, use of the tools is unlikely to provide
a large amount of new information. Rather, the benefit of using them will be in bringing information
together under a clear analytical framework, and providing a basis for bringing all stakeholders
(particularly those who may not be so well-informed) to a common understanding. This facilitates
the case for intervention (if required) through a collaborative and participatory process. Section 4.2
below explains how each tool is relevant at different stages of the project cycle. For example, if the
city is already at the project planning stage, then it may be too late for new diagnosis of what is
needed.

It may therefore not always be necessary to collect new data. In the Balikpapan case study, as
detailed in the next Section, the team worked largely from existing data being collected under
another initiative. Likewise, some diagnosis was not felt to be necessary in that city, even for the
purposes of stakeholder cohesion, because a strong shared diagnostic and understanding already
existed.




                                                                                                               28
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                 Version: draft final



3          Case Study Overview and Methodology

3.1        Rationale and objectives of case studies
The aim of the case studies was to test existing and new tools in real-world settings using primary
data, so as to inform their development and refine both them and their application. The immediate
objectives of the five city case studies were to provide:
        Quantitative and qualitative data on the sanitation situation in the city from a socio-
         economic perspective, specifically as it relates to FSM, but in a city wide sanitation context.
        Data that is representative of the city as a whole but also provides a separate picture of the
         situation in low-income areas (linked to a World Bank investment project wherever
         possible).
        Initial recommendations to guide discussions around future interventions in the sanitation
         sector in the city, by contributing credible data and analysis.

The study was therefore primarily socio-economic rather than technical, and most primary data
collection (e.g. surveys, focus groups) was carried out by non-technical enumerators. It did not
carry out technical inspections of infrastructure (beyond observations of the latrine superstructure,
slab, etc.) or produce detailed maps with neighborhood-level analysis and recommendations.15 For
those who have worked in the city on sanitation for some time, there were not many surprises.
However, the primary data allowed them to tell a story about FSM with stronger evidence than just
experience and intuition.

This chapter will first explain the case study methodology, including data collection instruments and
sampling. Next, key headline data for each city are shown, followed two-page summaries of each
case study, which introduce the key service delivery challenges and summarize main findings and
intervention options for each city.


3.2        Case study methodology
An important aspect of the study’s research framework (research questions and data collection
instruments) was to consider FSM in the context of the sanitation service chain, so as to maximize
its relevance and effectiveness. The research design was adapted in slightly different ways to
each city, but the broad overview is shown in the table below. For further information on the
methodology for each city, refer to the specific city case studies.

The rationale for selecting particular data collection instruments and the associated sample sizes is
set out in the Tools and Guidelines. Sampling was designed so as to allow conclusions to be
drawn about the city-wide situation as well as the specific context of low-income areas or slums.




15
  This is, however, an output of the USSI tool, developed in other work carried out at the same time under a different
program, and a recommended component of the suite of tools considered by this study.


                                                                                                                             29
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                  Version: draft final


Table 6                   Summary table of data collection instruments

                 Instrument                Data source                                                 n per city

                                           Survey of households (i) across the city, (ii) in slums /
                 1. Household survey                                                                           720
                                           informal settlements
                 2. Observation of
                                           Observation of containment, collection,
                    service provider                                                                             5
                                           transport/disposal and treatment/disposal
  Quantitative




                    practices
                 3. Testing fecal sludge   Samples from (i) pits/tanks during emptying, (ii)
                                                                                                                 5
                    characteristics        truck/vessel outflow, (iii) final drying bed or outflow
                                           Observation of environmental and public health risks                 40
                                           through transect walk
                 4. Transect walk          Drinking water supply samples, tested for fecal                      60
                                           contamination and chlorine residual
                                           Drain water samples, tested for fecal contamination                  60
                                           (a) Government (e.g. council / utility, ministries)
  Qualitative




                 5. Key informant
                                           (b) Service providers along the sanitation chain               As required
                    interviews             (c) Other key FSM agencies
                 6. Focus group            FGDs with slum, low-income and informal
                                                                                                                10
                    discussions            communities


3.3                Overview of city-specific data
Case study cities were selected so as to be spread across the principal regions of the developing
global South, and to provide a variety of contexts in terms of city size and stage of sanitation
development. Further criteria for case study city selection were to work with ongoing investment
projects financed by the World Bank, and a mix of regional and capital cities.

Table 7 below shows that the five cities span four continents and range from a population of
350,000 to 10 million. In terms of sanitation, the percentage of the population with a sewer
connection ranges from 0% to 92%. This gave a breadth of contexts in which to develop and test
the tools, to make them as broadly applicable as possible. Detailed findings can be found in the
full case studies. In the table, cities are ordered by the proportion of people using a sewer
connection, from highest to lowest.

Population data is approximate from the latest available data, and in most cases refers to the
geographical area under the jurisdiction of the municipality (e.g. Dhaka “mega-city” has a
population closer to ~14,000,000 compared to population of ~7,000,000 living within the municipal
jurisdiction). Data on the sanitation chains present in the cities comes primarily from household
surveys carried out under this study, or from secondary data if surveys were not conducted. Full
details and references are given in the city reports.




                                                                                                                              30
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                 Version: draft final


Table 7           Headline data for each city
                                                                                                                Whole
                                                                 Containment and conveyance
 City                        Population                                                                       sanitation
                                                                 (the three columns total 100%)
                                                                                                                chain
                                                                                         % using a toilet
                                                                                                                     % of
                                                                           % using      which discharges
                                      Approximate          % using                                                excreta
                   Approximate                                                non-       directly into the
                                           annual           sewer                                               identified
                    population                                           networked       environment, or
                                       growth rate      connection                                               as safely
                                                                         sanitation      practicing open
                                                                                                                managed
                                                                                              defecation
 Lima, Peru          10,000,000                  2%            92%               7%                   1%               46%

 Santa Cruz,
                       1,900,000                 4%            47%              47%                   6%               31%
 Bolivia

 Dhaka,                        16
                     7,000,000                   3%            25%              54%                  21%              0.3%
 Bangladesh

 Balikpapan,
                         650,000                 4%              2%             89%                   9%               33%
 Indonesia

 Hawassa,
                         350,000                 4%              0%            100%                   0%               74%
 Ethiopia

Source: Case Studies


3.4        Lima, Peru
Overview and key FSM service delivery challenges

Lima is the capital city of Peru. It is the third largest city in Latin America, with a population of
almost 10 million distributed across 49 districts, the majority of which are entirely urban. Rural-
urban migration has been one of the main drivers of population growth, with around 60% of Lima’s
citizens coming from other regions of the country. Lack of long-term planning has resulted in many
settlements in peri-urban areas having limited or inadequate access to basic public services, e.g.
electricity, water and sewerage. According to the 2013 National Household Survey (ENAHO),
around 92% of Lima’s population has a sewer connection, but this is the case for only 43% of the
population in the lowest quintile. The sewerage system is far from perfect, but is broadly
functional. However, FSM services do not really exist in the low-income areas.

Lima’s main service delivery challenge is addressing the current and future FSM needs of the 1.2
million people in peri-urban areas of Lima who do not have a sewer connection. Amongst
households in the lowest quintile, 12% practice open defecation, while 17% rely on septic tanks
and 19% use lined/unlined pit latrines. Analysis of demand and supply for FSM services finds that
there is basically no demand or supply of services to empty these pits and tanks. The most
common practice among poor peri-urban households is to dig a new pit once the one in use fills
up, although there is an increasing usage of urine-diverting technologies that are being provided by
NGOs (e.g. X-Runner and PEBAL).

Study findings

The fecal waste flow diagrams for Lima were already presented in section 2.4.


16
  This is the population within the jurisdiction of the two municipalities; Dhaka North City Corporation
(DNCC) and Dhaka South City Corporation (DSCC)



                                                                                                                             31
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


Analysis of demand and supply for FSM services finds that there is basically no demand and no
supply for the urban poor in Lima. That is not surprising in the context of the SFD above, and
particularly the household survey finding that only 4% of households in non-sewered areas who
had a toilet with a pit or septic tank had it emptied when full. Households in non-sewered areas
generally cover and abandon their pit once it fills up, digging a new one nearby. However, there
have been several reports (both in the media and also in the focus group discussions) about
people running out of space in their plots to dig new pits, which may be encouraging the demand
for FSM services. Nonetheless, current prices remain too high and unaffordable for the majority of
households in poor non-sewered areas. On the supply side, there are currently no large-scale
FSM services for poor households, with private service providers mainly serving only public
facilities (e.g. hospitals, schools) or households in wealthy areas of Lima. Given the lack of
knowledge about the potential market for FSM services as well as the low willingness of
households in poor peri-urban areas to pay, private service providers have had little incentive so
far to offer services in these areas.

Findings from the transect walks show that there are very few instances where blackwater was
visible in irrigation channels. Although open defecation (OD) is not a major problem in Lima, OD
was reported in 10% of the non-sewered areas sampled, mainly practiced by a few children or
elderly people. FS was also reported to be dumped alongside solid waste – focus group
discussions revealed that this was primarily carried out by households whose pit had filled up and
were unable to dig a new pit, or by people who use a chamber pot (as opposed to a toilet) at night.
The main issue in the majority of locations was the accumulation of solid waste on a daily basis.
Overall, the combination of instances likely to introduce risks to public health occurred in a total of
17 locations in non-sewered areas and 3 locations within lowest-income areas.

The City Service Delivery Assessment for FSM shows that public policy is deficient, while there is a
severe shortage of capital investment and operational oversight of FSM services throughout Lima.
Although for the city as a whole, the lack of FSM services may not seem to be a priority (given the
high level of sewerage coverage), there are 1.2 million people in poor areas without a real and
sustainable solution to their daily sanitation needs. Sustainable solutions will only come about
when an FSM framework translates into clearly defined, capacitated and financed action. This
requires recognition of the scale of the problem, and dialogue and engagement with public, private
and civil society bodies to ensure appropriate infrastructure and services can be systematically
developed and adapted to respond to the various contextual challenges of the city. Segmentation
and lack of coordination is already a key constraint in the provision of basic services, so bringing all
key stakeholders together and aiming at reaching a consensus on a course of action, and a clear
definition of stakeholders’ roles is an imperative.

Next steps for the city

Recommended intervention options from the study are grouped according to the key stages of the
sanitation service chain (focusing on the lowest-income non-sewered areas of Lima). Extending
the sewer network will be part of the picture, but a large proportion of the more than 1 million
people currently unconnected will remain so into the medium-term. Much of the focus is on the
containment stage, given the precarious structure of the pits and toilets. To improve the likelihood
of safe emptying, interventions include promoting the use of a wider range of affordable pit-lining
and construction arrangements for pits and septic tanks, including twin compartment -pit or other
permanent options. These options should be incorporated into a broader sanitation marketing
strategy. To the extent this results in demand for emptying services increasing over time, it will be
important to promote the use of a wider range of emptying and transport options (manual and
mechanized), strengthen the capacity of the private sector to provide affordable services and build



                                                                                                               32
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


decentralized treatment sites, such as drying beds, at locations to incentivize effective disposal,
treatment and viable market-based options for end-use of fecal sludge.

Finally, the Prognosis for Change shows that current incentives discourage actions by both public
and private stakeholders. On one hand, responsibilities and mandates for FSM (e.g. of
municipalities vis-à-vis utilities) at both national and local levels have not been clearly designated,
and thus neither effective planning nor adequate financing for FSM are likely, as no stakeholder
can be held accountable for investments and results. Most interventions also concentrate on
sewerage infrastructure or toilets, rather than behavior change or aspects of FSM service delivery.
Evidence from key informant interviews (KIIs) also suggests that, although there seems to be no
political opposition to the development of FSM services, neither is there significant political will or
political incentives to carry this forward. On the other hand, without a clear demand (current and
future) for FSM services, private service providers are unwilling to develop a market that may be
unprofitable. Moreover, households may be reluctant to invest in upgrading their containment
facilities, partly because many regard sewerage as the only long-term option, but also because the
lack of land tenure and ownership generally discourages investment. Change is achievable, but
interventions will not be successful unless these interventions address the incentives which deliver
the current status quo.


3.5        Dhaka, Bangladesh
Overview and key FSM service delivery challenges

Dhaka, the capital city of Bangladesh, is one the fastest growing cities in the world. Depending on
the definition of its boundaries, between 7 to 14 million people live in Dhaka. As well as population
expansion, an associated trend is the vertical expansion of the city, which is seeing low-rise
houses making way for multi-story apartment blocks, which in turn have made way for high-rise
buildings.

Dhaka’s key service delivery challenge is that expansion of the sewerage network has not kept up
with population growth, and instead the drainage network runs as a sewer. Furthermore, the
sewer network that exists is ineffective due to leakage and non-functional pumping stations. Those
without sewer connections (around 75% of the population) use on-site sanitation, but a large
proportion of these people either connect their pits/tanks to the drainage system, or do not have
any intermediate containment at all. This results in the near absence of a mechanical emptying
market in Dhaka. Manual sweepers play a key role in some areas, but overall effective demand for
FSM services is still relatively small. This is due to the city’s reliance on the drainage system
running as a sewer.

Study findings

The fecal waste flow diagram for Dhaka is shown below. This is the city-wide version, while a
second diagram in the full Case Study shows the situation for slums in particular.




                                                                                                               33
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


Figure 15         Fecal Waste Flow Diagram for Dhaka – city-wide sample




The data in the table above paints a picture of almost all FS ending up in the drains or in the
environment one way or another. It is therefore not surprising given the high levels of poverty in
the city, that a functioning market for FSM services barely exists.

Analysis of demand and supply for FSM services finds that demand is very low and supply is weak.
That is not surprising in the context of the SFD above, and particularly the household survey
finding that only 13% of households city-wide who had a toilet with a pit or septic tank had ever
experienced it filling up. On the supply side, there are very few mechanical emptiers in operation.
The bulk of service provision, when demanded, is carried out by manual emptiers. Of those
households who had emptied a pit tank city-wide, 97% had used a manual emptier last time. This
is also reflected in reported intentions next time the pit or tank filled up.

Findings from the transect walks emphasize that all of Dhaka is affected by poor FSM – it is not
only a problem for slum-dwellers. Latrines empty into drains throughout the city, and drains run
through all areas – slums and non-slums. Having large amounts of FS in the drains and
environment is an externality which affects everyone in Dhaka. Therefore, poor FSM is not only a
private household matter – it is a public health and environmental hazard.

The City Service Delivery Assessment for FSM shows that there is a severe shortage of public
policy, capital investment and operational oversight of FSM services throughout Dhaka. This
allows the current unsafe practice of latrines emptying into drains to continue. This in turn
eliminates the need for much of the effort and financial cost required to achieve effective
construction, management and maintenance of appropriate infrastructure. A viable solution will
only come about when an FSM framework translates into clearly defined, capacitated and financed
actions to establish a fully-functioning service chain for all of Dhaka’s fecal waste flows . This

                                                                                                               34
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


requires recognition of the scale of the problem, and engagement with public, private and civil
society bodies to facilitate the systematic development and adaptation of appropriate infrastructure
and services to respond to the various challenges of the city (crowding, tenancy, flooding, poverty,
etc.).

All of this suggests that improving fecal sludge management practices in Dhaka will demand
significant reform of the regulatory systems that currently govern all stages of the service chain.
Clearly segregating the roles for regulation, licensing and service management may improve the
incentives for overall compliance and investment.

Next steps for the city

Recommended intervention options from the study are identified, grouped according to the key
stages of the sanitation service chain. With the vast majority of Dhaka’s population rely ing on on-
site sanitation systems that eventually or directly discharge into the extensive drainage network, a
priority must be to introduce correctly built containment that stops excreta getting into the local
environment and enables systematic and safe emptying services to function. Systematic and
progressive steps to introduce improved containment infrastructure will need to be accompanied by
measures to disconnect latrine outlets from drains, as alternative ‘outlets’ are introduced, such as
local, decentralized sewerage arrangements or FSM services. All newly-constructed buildings
should be prohibited from discharging fecal matter to drains.

The elimination of the practice of manual sweepers entering pits and tanks is a high priority, and
might be achieved by gradually improving their operations through the provision of a range of
affordable mechanical, or improved manual, emptying devices and services that can respond
quickly to demand, especially for shared sanitation facilities and for the urban poor. Licensing,
service agreements and contracts can help service providers to invest in improved equipment and
business operations, supported by better regulation to achieve service standards. Formalized and
operational conveyance, treatment and end-use stages of the fecal sludge service chain need to
be identified and eventually put in place. This should focus on enabling fecal sludge to be safely
received, treated and managed at designated fecal sludge treatment facilities, linked to the
increased demand from upstream arrangements. This process will take time to roll out, requiring
good planning and oversight as identified areas of the city transfer from to non-networked to
networked sanitation services. Effective business and financial models supporting viability of both
public and private service providers will be needed for each stage.

The prognosis for change surmises that the externalities of poor FSM are both public and
dispersed, whereas addressing the lack of proper containment would involve private costs (from
households and property developers). A credible threat of enforcement, which would raise the cost
of inaction on the part of these stakeholders, is therefore critical. Proper containment will require
that existing emptiable facilities (pits/tanks) are disconnected from drains, that existing non-
emptiable systems are upgraded, and that newly-constructed buildings have an appropriate
containment system. Change is achievable on this front, but interventions will not be successful
unless they address the incentives and lack of enforcement of regulations which deliver the current
outcome, which is the drains running as sewers.


3.6        Hawassa, Ethiopia
Overview and key FSM service delivery challenges

Hawassa, the capital of the Southern Nations Nationalities and Peoples Region (SNNPR), is one of
Ethiopia’s newly emerging cities, with a population in 2015 of appr oximately 350,000 and an


                                                                                                               35
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


annual growth rate of just over 4%. It is located on the shores of Lake Hawassa in the Great Rift
Valley, which is a source of pride and responsibility which underlies the city administration’s goal of
achieving clean and green development.

The city consists of three main settlement types, with different population densities. Well-defined
residential housing and new industrial areas are of low density with well-planned road access,
while old government and compound housing plots (kebele houses) within the city center are of
medium to high density. Many kebele houses are planned to be replaced with multi-story dwellings
(condominium housing). The newly expanding informal peri-urban areas inhabited by the poor
have high density semi-permanent housing where they are within the city boundary, while those
further out are currently more rural in nature.

The main challenge facing current and future sanitation service provision in Hawassa is the rapid
urbanization of the city. All households currently use on-site sanitation options, with little visible
evidence within the city that this is a problem. Wastewater and fecal sludge is managed by
privately and publicly operated vacuum trucks, with the liquid fraction leaching from septic tanks
and pits into the volcanic, fractured and highly permeable soil below. Many operate this way for
many years without the need to be emptied. The densification of the city center and growing peri-
urban fringe, accompanied by shifting settlement patterns and increased generation of wastewater
and fecal sludge, will result in increasing saturation of soils and higher levels of groundwater
contamination. This may increase public health risks, and, perhaps more significantly, may lead to
environmental contamination of Lake Hawassa and other water bodies in and around the city.

Study findings

The SFD that follows shows that, while there is effective access to some form of on-site sanitation
facilities throughout the city (resulting in no open defecation being reported through the household
survey, backed by limited evidence through other data collection tools), not all fecal waste is being
effectively managed through the later stages of the FSM service chain. The mixed green and
brown shading for facilities reported as not being emptied indicates an anticipated change in the
overall risk from these fecal waste flows over time. The situation will reach ‘crisis point’ when there
is insufficient subsoil absorption capacity for the total liquid effluent load being generated. As
buildings are built in more central and planned areas of the city at above say 3 stories high, there
will be a need for sewerage systems to service those buildings. Other more informal and outlying
areas of the city are likely to maintain the existing pattern of low-quality sanitation systems, while
septic tanks will become more common in the intermediate areas.

The transect walks indicated little visible evidence of environmental contamination resulting from
poor fecal sludge management services, with the most notable source of contamination being
dumped solid waste. As indicated in the fecal waste flow diagram, this does not mean that
environmental pollution is not occurring – but rather that it is not above ground. What the transect
walks also identified is the extent to which the low-income areas are becoming increasingly
densely populated, with the resulting shortage of land creating the need for alternatives to the
current practice of abandoning and rebuilding latrines when pits become full.




                                                                                                               36
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas       Version: draft final


Figure 16         Fecal Waste Flow Diagram for Hawassa – city-wide sample

                                                                                            End-use/
    Containment                  Emptying              Conveyance               Treatment   Disposal




The City Service Delivery Assessment shows that, in general, Hawassa’s FSM service context is
considered to be making progress in relation to the three major components of the assessment:
enabling, developing and sustaining services. However, greater attention has been given to
providing and promoting toilet facilities, and to some extent the provision of emptying services.
Weaknesses were identified in relation to the existing treatment facility and the effective disposal of
dried fecal sludge, or actions to develop options for fecal sludge end-use applications. The current
extent of ‘treatment and disposal’ of fecal sludge in -situ (the 70% shown on the SFD, where
containment relies on local soils to continually absorb leachate from pits and tanks) may be
satisfactory for now, but as areas of the city become more densely populated and soil infiltration
capacity is surpassed, increased risks of localized surface ponding of effluent and pit collapse are
anticipated. Residents of low-income areas also voiced concerns that the decreasing space to
build new pits when current ones become full make this practice increasingly difficult to sustain.

All of this suggests that, without greater attention given to investing in the future needs of the city,
risks to public health will increase, particularly in the expanding low-income areas, where
concerted efforts will be needed to address issues of inequity and inferior service outcomes. To
improve FSM services in Hawassa as a whole, greater attention needs to be given to investment in
a range of services that will be appropriate, affordable, available and adapted to the needs of all
users.

Next steps for the city

Recommended intervention options to improve the delivery of FSM services are driven by the need
to address urban growth and the resulting densification of settlements throughout the city. It is
recommended that Hawassa Municipality address both improvement and enforcement of

                                                                                                                   37
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


construction standards for the range of containment facilities, especially for government-owned
and compound (kebele) housing and low-income areas. They should also investigate and identify
the extent to which sewerage must be eventually implemented in high-density areas and where on-
site facilities constitute a clear risk to polluting Lake Hawassa. Where non-networked systems are
to remain, a greater variety of smaller-scale fecal sludge emptying options need to be investigated
(e.g. Gulper pumps, VacuTugs) for low-income areas. Steps need to be taken now to identify and
plan for the future land requirements of more conveniently sited treatment plants that can
incorporate market-based end-use options of treated sludge, considering co-located wastewater
treatment, fecal sludge treatment and solid waste management disposal. In parallel, the
appropriate division of roles for public and private service providers, notably in relation to the
operation of vacuum tankers and fecal sludge treatment facilities, needs to be more clearly
defined, within an environment of more strongly regulated and enforced service tariffs and
performance standards.


3.7        Santa Cruz, Bolivia
Overview and key FSM service delivery challenge

Santa Cruz Metropolitan Area is the second largest urban area in Bolivia, encompassing six
municipalities and around 1.9 million inhabitants. Santa Cruz has faced high rural-urban migration
since the 1980s, with annual growth averaging around 5% in the late 1990s and 4% from 2001 to
2012 (Caceres Magnus, 2015; Rivera, 2010). As with other Latin American countries, urbanisation
has not been coupled with equitable access to basic services and sanitation coverage remains a
challenge, with only 61% of the urban population having access to an improved sanitation facility.
The 2012 Census data for Santa Cruz indicated 47% of the population connected to sewerage,
with 21% and 26% of facilities emptying into a septic tank or a lined pit respectively. 6% of
households had no reported sanitation facility, i.e. practising open defecation.

Although the Santa Cruz FSM services context is relatively developed, several challenges remain.
In particular, although the policy and regulatory framework is comprehensive for emptying,
conveyance and treatment stages, standards and guidelines for containment and reuse are limited.
Resources to ensure the enforcement of regulations are also lacking and FSM services remain
unaffordable for the very poor.

Study findings

The SFD below shows that the majority of excreta (69%) are not effectively managed. While 47%
of households have a sewer connection, about 23% of wastewater does not reach the treatment
plant due to leakage and a further 1% is not effectively treated. In addition, only 9% of fecal sludge
(FS) contained in emptiable systems reaches a treatment facility and is adequately managed.
Facilities emptying FS straight to drains together with open defecation practices account for around
6% of total FS produced by households, while all single-use pits (covered and abandoned when
full) and around 33% of septic tanks and lined pits allow FS to leach into the surrounding
environment.




                                                                                                               38
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


Figure 17         Fecal Waste Flow Diagram for Santa Cruz – city-wide sample




An analysis of the demand and supply for FSM services suggests that around 79% of households
using non-networked facilities discharging into a septic tank or a soakaway use emptying services.
Access for emptying is not a major issue, with 83% of emptiable facilities having a purpose-built
hatch. Fill-up rates and therefore demand, are highly variable; while some septic tanks (~20%)
need desludging every 6 months and 36% of soakaways between 7-12 months, on average
facilities take around 2.5 years to fill-up. Willingness to pay for emptying services among
households in non-sewered areas is generally below the average cost for an FS emptying and
transport service (US$68). Other concerns relate to service reliability and quality, especially
regarding how hygienic the service is. Around 27 of the emptying and transport service providers
(ERTLs) are legally registered (i.e. operate in the formal market) to the Water Supply and Basic
Sanitation Supervision and Societal Oversight Authority (AAPS). ERTLs are generally
subcontracted by one of the ten WSS utilities/cooperatives (EPSAs) in Santa Cruz, allowing them
to use the EPSAs’ treatment facilities for discharge. However, only SAGUAPAC, the main WSS
cooperative, has adequate wastewater treatment facilities, which currently has contracts with 14 of
the 27 ERTLs. Estimates indicate that around 24,000 m 3 of FS are illegally dumped every year.

The City Service Delivery Assessment shows that Santa Cruz is currently addressing the enabling,
developing and sustaining environments for FSM services. Policy and regulatory frameworks have
been significantly developed since 2009, but roles and responsibilities of municipal and national
institutions remain unclear, hindering the adoption and enforcement of regulations. There are no
known processes for coordinating FSM investments, with all resources currently directed towards
the expansion of the sewerage network and the construction of new wastewater treatment plants.

Oligopolistic competition between ERTLs limits access to FSM services for the poorest
households, making the market inequitable. Nonetheless, FS emptying, transport and treatment
services are generally good, though there are still improvements to be made with regards to the
availability of treatment facilities for collected FS and guaranteeing that ERTLs comply with all
administrative and technical standards. Considering the sustainability of FSM services, so far no
policies and procedures have been developed to stimulate demand for emptying services, although


                                                                                                               39
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


performance of current service outcomes is good, with some improvements to be made on
minimising health risks for personnel during emptying and maximising equity.

Next steps for the city

A Prognosis for Change analysis reveals that the roles and responsibilities across stakeholders at
national, departmental and municipal governments are not clear, resulting in limited engagement
on the design and implementation of FSM policies. Responsibilities for FSM services have been
delegated to AAPS (given its role as the main regulatory agency), the EPSAs and the ERTLs.
Although at the micro level, the FSM market seems to be performing relatively well, lack of
government involvement at the macro level has affected the availability and allocation of financial
and human resources to develop FSM services. Some investments are being made to increase
capacity for wastewater treatment, but there is no explicit focus in FS treatment and its subsequent
reuse. Besides up-take from national and departmental authorities, consumers (i.e. households,
commercial establishments and industry) also need to play a more active role by taking interest in
environmental concerns (such as quality of containment infrastructure, or ensuring FS is taken to a
treatment facility) and in ensuring that only formal ERTLs services are used.

Within this context, future city interventions are likely to focus on ensuring that recent policy and
regulatory frameworks are adequately implemented and enforced. The current processes for the
formalisation of ERTLs, although much needed, seem to be quite cumbersome for certain smaller
firms. Enforcement of administrative and technical standards is also required to guarantee FSM
services are of the highest quality, customers are satisfied, and demand is sustained in the
medium to long-term. Competition among ERTLs needs to be encouraged to increase access to
the poor, but this needs to be coupled with dissemination and enforcement of standards for the
construction and maintenance of on-site facilities. Focus in the FSM sector should also be directed
towards developing a FS reuse market, coupled with improvements in FS treatment capacity, and
on securing financial and human resources from both public and private stakeholders.


3.8      Balikpapan, Indonesia
Overview and key FSM service delivery challenge

Balikpapan city, located in the province of East Kalimantan, Indonesia has a reported population of
approximately 640,000 people and annual population growth of about 4.5% (approximately 1.5%
due to natural growth and 3% due to immigration). According to the latest health census, 99.5% of
households in Balikpapan own their own home, while only 0.5% rent their property.

A key challenge facing the development of Balikpapan’s sanitation and FSM services is the lack of
clarity around institutional roles and responsibilities, particularly in relation to the provision and
regulation of emptying and transportation services. The DKPP (Agency of Cleanliness, Housing
and Parks – the institution currently undertaking the role of managing any FSM activity in
Balikpapan) manages the septage treatment plant. However it plays no direct role in the emptying
and transportation elements of FSM services, though these services do exist and are supplied by
various private sector entities. DKPP focuses on solid waste management, constructing roads and
drainage. It is unclear who, if anyone supervises and issues permits for the construction of on-site
containment (tanks and pits), exacerbated by a lack of standards, guidelines and norms.

Study findings

The fecal waste flow diagram for Balikpapan below shows that, while almost 90% of households
have access to non-networked sanitation facilities (predominantly pour-flush latrines emptying to


                                                                                                               40
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                       Version: draft final


tanks), service arrangements for managing fecal sludge beyond these tanks are limited. Almost
60% of on-site facilities are reported to have never been emptied, limiting demand for the emptying
services, provided by private providers. Some of the ‘non-emptied’ systems are no threat to the
environment or public health but a proportion are in areas of high ground water where the
groundwater is used for domestic purposes. Where households do have fecal waste removed, it is
often indiscriminately dumped, resulting in very little of the fecal sludge generated actually being
taken to the septage treatment plant.

Figure 18         Fecal Waste Flow Diagram for Balikpapan – city-wide
                                                                                                  Reuse/
           Containment           Emptying          Conveyance            Treatment                                 33.5%
                                                                                                 disposal

               WC to                                                          Effectively
                                                                           treated at IPAL
                                                                                                                   0.5%
               sewer                                   Leakage
               WC to                                                       Effectively treated
            decentralized                                                                                          0.3%
                                                                           at IPAL communal
               sewer
                                                                             Transported                            5.2%
                                     Safely                                    to IPLT
                                    emptied                Illegally
                                                           dumped

              On-site
              facility                                                                                              27.5%
              contained
                                      Not
                                    emptied



               On-site
                 (not
              contained)

                 Direct
              discharge &
                 Open
               defecation
                                    10.3%              9.2%      26.3%     14.7% 0.7%                       5.2%
                                                                              Drainage               Receiving
        66.5%               Groundwater                Local Area              system                 waters
Analysis of demand and supply for FSM services highlights that, while private providers of
emptying services are available, the demand for these services is limited. Results of a willingness
to pay survey identified that the majority of households are prepared to pay for a monthly
desludging service, at a price commensurate with the fees currently charged for emptying – if this
is assumed to occur approximately every 5 years. The current low demand for emptying is
however exacerbated by a combination of the poor quality of onsite infrastructure and the lack of
regulation to enforce regular emptying. Households predominantly rely on non-compliant standards
of containment facilities, where pour-flush latrines discharge to a single or double compartment
“cubluk” (rather than a septic tank). Only partially lined, the cubluk effectively operates as a soak-
pit. Other containment facilities have overflows that allow fecal sludge to discharge into drains or
open water bodies. Both conditions significantly impact on the required demand of scope and
frequency of emptying.

The City Service Delivery Assessment of Balikpapan highlights priority areas for action to establish
and implement city-wide plans to improve FSM services, together with associated budgets. It is
important that private sector providers of emptying services are incentivized to both stimulate and
meet demand for affordable FSM services, as well as to correctly use the disposal site in a way
that is economical. This must be accompanied by attention given to improving technical standards

                                                                                                                                   41
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


and arrangements for on-site facilities, with consideration for a range of emptying services that can
reach into poor areas and provide affordable services. Without this, demand for emptying services
will continue to be constrained.

Next steps for the city

Presentation of the Fecal Waste Flow diagram to city officials in Balikpapan resulted in an
immediate acceptance of the problems facing FSM services. This lead to a constructive discussion
on “How do we solve this?” and “Who should be responsible for doing what?”. A Sanitation
Working Group has been established and a City Sanitation Strategy (CSS) developed that lays out
targets and identifies required sanitation development activities. This in turn has enabled the new
Head of Bappeda (the City Planning Agency) and the city Mayor to identify and propose new
institutional arrangements to enhance FSM services and effective treatment of septage from on-
site sanitation systems at the treatment facilities. Policy, regulatory and legislative arrangements to
support these changes will need to be developed. Budget allocations, poorly coordinated in the
past, will need to be oriented in line with the new institutional arrangements as they are translated
into law and responsibilities for asset ownership transferred.

The local House of Representatives has been formulating a sanitation law, with regulation focusing
on issues of tariffs and off-site sewerage services. It has been identified that the development of a
new city sanitation master plan should include regulation around non-networked services and
private sector emptying, to ensure these issues are included in future legislation. While new
institutional arrangements and plans for FSM services, as part of the sanitation master plan, are
starting to be addressed, consideration will need to be given to the costings (investment and
recovery) for a range of service levels and intervention options, to support implementation.
Bappeda have indicated plans to invest in more private sector-operated desludging trucks and
construction of a new septage treatment plant. Use of emptying services by households is currently
constrained by cost, location and access (to the property and into the tank itself), especially for the
urban poor. Those who use desludging services report being satisfied with them, but the sanitation
master plan must also identify how these services will expand to meet future demand, to ensure
safe transfer of fecal sludge to effectively managed treatment facilities.




                                                                                                               42
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final



4          Experiences and lessons from case studies in applying
           the tools

4.1        Introduction
This section synthesizes the most significant experiences and lessons gained from deploying the
Tools in the five cities. It aligns these experiences and lessons with the typical project cycle of a
financing institution, such as a development bank. The accompanying Tools and Guidelines,
explains in detail how the tools work, as well as providing guidance on how to use them, whilst the
ToRs and Data Collection Instruments provide material to operationalize the tools.


4.2        Using tools within the project cycle
Figure 19 below summarizes a typical project cycle, whether of a development finance institution or
a locally responsible agency such as a utility or municipality, and which tools would be appropriate
at which stages. Specific factors in any given case, such as individual corporate procedures, prior
work, limited time or budgets, and political economy factors, may mean that the process looks
somewhat different in practice, but the underlying principles are still valid. The FSM tools are
flexible with respect to when they are applied, and the level of detail used in data collection and
analysis. The following discussion is based around five stages used to describe the project cycle.

1. Project Concept and Identification
This upstream work may be spread over one, two or more years, with the objective of bringing
urban sanitation and fecal sludge management to the attention of decision-makers, and gaining
traction for the development and implementation of a project to address them. Once a decision
has been taken in principle, the project concept can be developed more fully by identifying the links
in the sanitation service chain and geographical areas to be targeted.

This stage begins with diagnostic work, based on published data, results of key informant
interviews, focus group discussions and field surveys. These methods are used to develop the
SFD. The SFD demonstrates where the sanitation service chain is not functioning in the target
city, and has been found to be an effective means of convincing decision-makers of the need for
action. The USSI tool, based on the same data with a few additions, can show which geographical
areas are contributing most to the overall sanitation problem. The CSDA tool is also applied at this
stage, to provide an initial idea of institutional, legal and financial constraints and opportunities.
The TrackFin tool, as used by WHO in the GLAAS water and sanitation sector assessments is
designed for use at national level, but may also be useful at this stage to supplement financial
aspects of the CSDA, providing a broader picture.

Typically, this stage ends with a project description or concept used to obtain funding from an
international development partner or a national or local funding window.

2. Project Planning and Preparation
Data obtained in the previous stage can be used in the development of specific investment and
institutional development components of the proposed project, and in feasibility assessment. In
addition, the Prognosis for Change / Political Economy Analysis (PFC/PEA) tool will help to identify
and address key non-technical bottlenecks (institutional, legal/regulatory, financial, etc.), as well as
the interests and values that prevent decision-makers from acknowledging and responding to
issues related with non-networked sanitation. For larger projects or more complex situations, it
may be necessary to produce a city-wide sanitation strategy, Master Plan, or Integrated Urban

                                                                                                               43
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                      Version: draft final


Water Management Plan, if not already prepared during the Project Concept and Identification
stage, of which the FSM project or intervention would address specific parts.

Other useful tools developed by other partners are the FSM costing tool, which can help estimate
the economic benefits of planned interventions, and a public health risk analysis which would focus
and further prioritize health-related project components.

Figure 19           Typical project cycle

           1.   Project Identification                                  2. Planning &
               Diagnostics                                             Preparation
               Advocacy                                                 Quantification
               Prioritization                                           Institutional assessment
                                                                         Appraisal/feasibility

     Terms of reference                                                                 Terms of reference
     Case studies                             1.                2.
                                                                                         Case studies
                                           Concept/           Planning
                                         Identification


                                        5.                         3. Design
                                    Evaluation

        5. Evaluation                                                                   3. Intervention
                                                       4.                                 Design
           and Learning
         Sanitation
                                                   Implemen-                             Technical
          outcomes                                   tation                              Institutional
         Sustainability                                                                 Prioritized
         Project                                                                          investments
          implementation

                                          4. Project Monitoring                          Terms of reference
                                           Institutional                                Case studies
                                             performance
                                           Technical development
                                           FSM services & end-use
                                             market development

1. Project                   2. Planning & Preparation 3. Intervention 4. Project    5. Evaluation
   Identification                                         Design          Monitoring    & Learning
 Fecal Waste Flow            SFD/USSI data                   Intervention                               Fecal Waste
  Diagram (SFD)               City Service Delivery            Options                                     Flow Diagram
 Urban Sanitation             Assessment (CSDA)                Assessment                                  (SFD)
  Status Index (USSI)         Prognosis for                   Service                                    Urban
 Initial City Service         Change/Political Economy         Delivery Action                             Sanitation
  Delivery Assessment          Analysis (PFC/PEA)               Framework                                   Status Index
  (CSDA)                                                       SANDEC Book                                 (USSI)
                              FSM costing tool
                                                                on FSM                                     City Service
                              Public health risk analysis                                                  Delivery
                                                               SANDEC online
                                                                resources                                   Assessment
                                                                                                            (CSDA)
Tool developed under this work                                Tool developed by others




                                                                                                                                  44
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas          Version: draft final


3. Design of Interventions
This stage moves from the project components outlined and costed in the project description to
their detailed design. This comprises technical/infrastructure elements and institutional
development programs, including both responsible authorities and service providers if these are
different. At this stage, it is also useful to identify early interventions that can achieve short term
impact, as a means to generate political dividends for local decision-makers (and development
partners, if involved) and gain further traction for the project.

The Intervention Options Assessment tool or process helps to match technology choices to the
specific challenges diagnosed at the inception stage, drawing on technical expertise and up to date
reference material. Choices must be validated with the relevant stakeholders (responsible
authorities, service providers, users, etc.) and more detailed technical and social fieldwork will
probably be needed to enable the choice of suitable final designs. One of the more difficult tasks
at this stage is to identify the quantification and characterization of fecal sludge and an assessment
of the end-use market, to enable optimal choice and design of treatment facilities. While tools to
identify these results remain in development, achieving meaningful parameters on which to design
optimal treatment and end-use stages of the service chain remains a significant challenge.

The Service Delivery Action Framework builds on the results of the CSDA and PFC/PEA. It is
designed to indicate the next steps in building up sustainable service delivery arrangements,
starting from the current situation. These steps are then translated into technical assistance and
other supplementary inputs to be provided under the project.

A key external resource for this stage is the material produced by EAWAG/SANDEC, which lays
out clearly in one place much of the technical knowledge around sanitation and fecal sludge
management technologies.17

4. Project Implementation
The tools developed and used in this work are focused on diagnostics and project design, so are
not intended to add substantially to the project implementation stage.

5. Project Closure, Evaluation and Learning
The fact that a need has been expressed for the tools laid out in this work clearly indicates the
need for systematic learning, both to refine the tools and develop implementation methods. From
a more general perspective, it may be useful to re-run the basic diagnostic tools (SFD, USSI and
CSDA) to assess progress made under the project, and how sustainable it is.




17
 See for example: http://www.eawag.ch/en/department/sandec/publications/publications-excreta-and-wastewater-
management/


                                                                                                                      45
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas          Version: draft final




4.3        General lessons learned in using the tools
Many of the lessons learned in the process of developing and applying the tools are applicable to
them all. This section summarizes those lessons, then later sections go into more detail on
specific tools.

Table 8           Broad lessons applicable across the tools

 Lesson                      Explanation and example


 Using the tools

                             Involving stakeholders in the process of design and data collection is important
                             to promote their ownership and understanding of the results and acceptance of
 1. Stakeholder
                             the findings. In all cities the SFD was found to foster a common understanding
    engagement in
                             and a more realistic overview of the current situation that key stakeholders
    the process is
                             “recognize” as representing their city.
    key to building
    a common                 In Hawassa conversations around the range of possible intervention options to
    understanding            address the current complexities affecting low demand for emptying and
                             ineffective treatment of fecal sludge were made much easier by everybody
                             having common reference points.

                             The tools and associated data collection methods may require adapting, or
 2. Focus on what            supplementing, to accommodate issues which are key to informing action in the
    is important at          city concerned. In Balikpapan a technical survey of containment systems and a
    the city level           willingness to pay study were undertaken, as city stakeholders had identified
                             those as specific areas of interest.

                             It is necessary to explain what can and cannot be achieved by using different
 3. Explain the              tools from the outset. For example, Planners may expect recommendations for
    objectives and           interventions in specific geographical areas. This was not possible from
    limitations of           applying the SFD in the case study cities based on the sample survey design
    the tools                and resulting level of representativeness. It can be achieved however by
                             applying the USSI tool, if more geographically localized decisions are needed.

 4. Use the tools as         The stakeholder engagement and participation process should be iterative,
    part of an               which requires a series of consultations and opportunity to comment as reports
    iterative                are prepared. The more engagement there is, the more likely it is that findings
    process                  will be used (either implicitly or explicitly).




                                                                                                                      46
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas            Version: draft final




 Data collection for quantitative instruments e.g. household survey, transect walks

                             An SFD based on primary data requires a well-organized field operation to
                             administer the household interviews. Enumerators need to be well trained and
 5. Good quality             have access to a sanitation specialist, to ensure good understanding of the
    survey                   survey questions and how to interpret answers or unforeseen situations. Field
    management               managers need to fully understand the sampling methodology to ensure the
    and                      results are robust and representative at the level of interest. Quality control
    enumerators are          should be continuous, and can usefully be done in real time if mobile-based
    needed                   technology is used (such as PDAs). In Dhaka, where an experienced firm had
                             undertaken many similar surveys, the basics of fieldwork management were not
                             an issue, allowing training time to focus on the technical details.

                             Higher-quality data is likely if enumerators have pre-existing knowledge of the
 6. City experience          city – to check inconsistent responses (such as a household latrine “discharging
    of enumerators           to sewer” when sewers do not exist nearby) . For example, in Hawassa, some
    is valuable              enumerators who were from the city or had studied there, knew their way
                             around and could ensure the training benefitted from local examples.

                             If key issues (e.g. in sampling, questionnaire design, fieldwork model) are
 7. Do not                   addressed early on, higher-quality data is likely. This allows the survey firm to
    underestimate            prepare well and the enumerator training to focus on the required details. As
    the time for             specified above, during implementation of the survey it is essential to have a
    preparation and          sanitation specialist available in situ to resolve technical questions and to follow
    supervision              up on inconsistent or apparently erroneous data as soon as possible, while the
                             survey team is still mobilized.

 Data collection for qualitative instruments e.g. key informant interviews, focus groups

                              A consultant or other suitable expert with tacit knowledge of the city’s
                              administrative roles and functions, as well as the broader policy environment, is
 8. Engage                    extremely valuable to achieving credible CSDA scorecard results and a rich
    consultants               political economy analysis. Working together with a consultant knowledgeable
    with a breadth            in technical aspects of sanitation and fecal sludge management services, this
    of knowledge              can provide a strong team to identify many of the more sensitive realities
    and expertise             underlying the service delivery challenges. As the breadth of knowledge and
                              expertise required is rarely found in a single individual, a team is
                              recommended.

 9. Tacit versus             The CSDA and PFC/PEA often engage with issues that experienced (local or
    explicit                 otherwise) professionals are familiar with, and they may not see the value in
    knowledge and            conducing more analysis. However, not all stakeholders with an interest or
    analysis - for           responsibility in the city’s sanitation services will necessarily have the same
    open                     level of knowledge or perspective. The CSDA and PFC/PEA provide an
    discussion               invaluable way to capture tacit knowledge, analyze and present it in a coherent
                             form that can be discussed openly.




                                                                                                                        47
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                  Version: draft final



4.4        Specific lessons learned in using the tools

4.4.1      Fecal waste flow diagram

As summarized in Section 2.3, the objective of the fecal waste flow diagram, or SFD, is to
represent where fecal waste goes, what proportion is effectively managed and where the
unmanaged portion ends up. It provides a credible and compelling visual summary of how fecal
waste (including fecal sludge and wastewater) flows along the sanitation service chain for a given
population – specifically highlighting at which stages the fecal waste becomes ineffectively
managed.

In Figure 4 (Section 2.3) the SFD is the trigging tool from which the other analyses flow, so in many
ways it is the most critical of the diagnostic tools. Accordingly, SFDs were developed for all five
city case studies and, where possible, separate SFDs were developed for:
        The city-wide situation, and
        The situation in low-income areas / slums.18

This approach was in line with the overall principle of analysis being both city-wide and poor-
inclusive, as outlined in Section 2.1. The work therefore acknowledges that solutions serving the
entire city are required, while also emphasizing that specific solutions for poor urban areas must be
included in implementation plans. Primary data collection methods followed this principle, with two
sub-samples used for the household survey. A detailed description of the methodology is provided
in the Tools and Guidelines. If the USSI tool is used, the data collected will be granular enough to
enable both city-wide and low-income area SFDs to be prepared.

Key experiences and lessons from using the SFD in city-level discussions were:

        Visual summary of current status: City authorities and stakeholders find that the SFD
         (and the USSI, where it has been used) gives a clear and strong visual summary of current
         sanitation status, including where along the service chain and to what extent problems are
         occurring (i.e. where fecal waste is not being effectively managed). For example, in Dhaka,
         the SFDs generated a discussion focused on non-networked sanitation rather than the
         more commonly discussed sewerage network. In Balikpapan, the high data credibility (from
         primary data collection, corroborated by a department of health census) resulted in an
         immediate acceptance of the SFD, so that within a very short time a constructive discussion
         on “How do we solve this?” and “Who should be responsible for doing what?” emerged.

        Focus on low-income areas: Producing a separate SFD for low-income areas reveals the
         extent to which poor services, in certain areas, can be ‘masked’ in aggregated city-wide
         results (as for wealth-quintile disaggregated results for service coverage more generally).
         For example, in Lima 90% of people city-wide are shown to be connected to a sewer, but
         when looking at low-income areas only, the SFD highlights that FSM services are almost
         totally non-existent. However, this approach may not work well in cities where rich and
         poor households live in a more intermingled way – for example in Indonesia or Ethiopia.

        Put results in context: The SFDs must be reviewed in conjunction with the supporting
         CSDA results and narrative, as well as the underlying data on the quality of sanitation
         facilities. This is important to understand both the current status of services and what

18
  The terms “slum”, “informal settlement” or “low -income area” are variously used in different cities depending on the
national context.


                                                                                                                              48
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


         interventions can realistically be made. In Dhaka for example, septic tanks do not function
         well due to impermeable soils and a high water table, resulting in dysfunctional leach pits
         and households often connecting septic tank outlets to covered or open stormwater drains.
         Construction of future septic tanks must therefore identify alternative arrangements for
         handling the effluent, such as connecting septic tank outlets to localized (simplified or
         shallow) sewers.

Key experiences and lessons from data collection to produce SFDs were:

        Early discussion of sampling frame: The sampling frame for sub-samples is the key
         determinant of what conclusions can be drawn. For example, in Lima it was agreed to
         exclude areas with more than 90% sewerage coverage (based on the last census), the
         major social and public health issues arise from the non-sewered areas. This had
         implications for what conclusions could be drawn, which were understood from the start.
         The data was useful for the specific purpose of this study, but would be of less use from a
         broader city-wide perspective.

4.4.2      City Service Delivery Assessment for FSM

The City Service Delivery Assessment (CSDA) for FSM is a tool designed to help diagnose the
main impediments within the current enabling environment to support the development, expansion
and sustainability of FSM services. The process uses a set of objective criteria and a standard
scoring system to assess the quality of service delivery through all stages of the service chain.
The resulting color-coded scorecard provides a clear visual overview of the quality of the current
enabling environment.

As shown in the Tools diagram Figure 4 in Section 2.3, results of the CSDA are considered
alongside the Prognosis for Change (discussed in Section 4.4.3) to inform aspects of program
design affecting the institutions, systems and broader enabling environment for service
improvement.
Key experiences and lessons from using the CSDA in city-level discussions were:

        Represents the complexities of the enabling environment: The CSDA scorecard for a
         city provides a clear, visual representation of the complexities of the enabling environment
         affecting the delivery of sanitation and FSM services. It helps to identify where contextual
         elements are stronger, and where attention most needs to be focused to tackle the
         identified weaknesses.

        Initial draft CSDA presented for validation: Presenting a draft CSDA for consideration
         during stakeholder validation meetings allows adjustments to be made to the scores, based
         on further data or evidence that is made available, and increases stakeholder ownership. A
         revised CSDA, mutually agreed on by city municipality and other stakeholders, provides a
         stronger basis for action.

        A common basis for action: Stakeholders may be familiar with some, or many of the
         issues the CSDA covers (e.g. legislation, financial constraints, role of the private sector).
         However it is unlikely that all stakeholders will have had a common basis on which to
         agree, discuss and identify potential strategies and actions. Such actions should address
         the full range of political, institutional, financial and equity challenges facing FSM service
         improvements, and the prospects for sustainability.

Key experiences and lessons from data collection to produce CSDAs were:


                                                                                                               49
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


        Value of the CSDA scorecard structure: The CSDA scorecard itself, consisting of a suite
         of questions and scoring options, provides a structured means for consultants to gather
         evidence and use this to analyze the strengths and weaknesses of the enabling
         environment on a common basis. This helps to ensure all aspects are considered to the
         extent possible in any city, as a way to achieve consistency within and between resulting
         scorecards.

        Background evidence captured : The documented evidence behind the scores, in the
         form of the table with the narrative justification and a consultant report, is essential to
         enable others to see and understand why particular scores have been given.

Key experiences and lessons from using the results of the CSDA within the study team were:

        Realistic, workable solutions: The CSDA results have been used in conjunction with the
         PFC/PEA tool as a way to develop realistic and informed recommendations for the City
         Municipality and other responsible actors.

        Critique and validate results internally before presenting : A process of critique and
         validation of the CSDA scores within the project team has helped ensure they can be fully
         justified against results generated by the survey firm and other data available about the city.
         On occasion this has resulted in significant adjustments to the draft CSDA scorecard prior
         to a stakeholder validation meeting.

        Setting lines of inquiry under the Prognosis for Change: The CSDA is an important
         input to the analysis under the Prognosis for Change (PFC). It serves to identify key
         service delivery blockages which can be the focus of political economy analysis. This
         further analysis in turn seeks to identify and analyze ways in which vested interests or other
         factors impact on how decision-makers or communities view different sanitation
         approaches and interventions.

4.4.3      Prognosis for Change assessment (Political Economy Analysis)

Key experiences and lessons from data collection to undertake a Prognosis for Change (PFC)
assessment were:

        Politically savvy national WASH expert: The most appropriate national WASH expert to
         use the tools of political economy analysis (PEA) may not have the same profile as a
         national WASH expert needed for work on technical sanitation solutions. Some unique
         individuals may cover both bases, but a high-quality PEA requires individuals who are
         politically savvy and have the required connections to get access to key individuals. It may
         be necessary that this comes at the expense of technical experience other areas.

        Give consultants a very clear brief. The tools of PEA (such as stakeholder analysis,
         process mapping etc.) are not in the armory of the typical WASH consultant. Guidance can
         be given (the Tools and Guidelines contains an annex on how to use PEA tools). It is also
         important to show consultants the kind of output that is required, and examples the kind of
         insights that would be needed to produce it. This will take time and energy. If using
         consultants for the CSDA, ideally the same consultant should be used for the PEA,
         because of the obvious synergies (see next point).

        Link to a clear analytical process: The links between the CSDA and the PFC
         assessment are strong, and stakeholder mapping is key for both. The PFC should build on
         the CSDA and, in particular, focus on priority areas in the CSDA which were highlighted as

                                                                                                               50
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


         weaknesses in service delivery. The Intervention Options Assessment should then take
         place under a robust understanding of the political economy of urban sanitation in the city,
         so as to avoid recommending hardware interventions which will fail.

Key experiences and lessons from using the results of the PFC/PEA were:

        Illustrating complex problems: Outputs of the PFC helped channel people’s experience
         of problems into a coherent framework. In Dhaka, for example, the use of an intuitive
         “process map” to explain what happens (on paper and in reality) when a new building is
         constructed helped the team understand a key problem.

        Sensitivities around ‘obvious’ interventions : There may well be an urban sanitation
         intervention which many stakeholders see as the obvious choice, but which the PFC and
         other analyses suggest may not work. The opposite case is also possible (attractive
         intervention which many people say will never work).           It is important that the
         communications around these topics are undertaken delicately, so as to avoid alienating
         key stakeholders. All recommendations that go against prevailing thinking must be strongly
         evidence-based.

The following decision-support tools were used by the study team, drawing on the findings from
applying the above tools. This evidence is combined with the expertise and knowledge within the
study team and drew on available knowledge and publications about the functional (technical) and
institutional challenges and solutions to achieve effective sanitation and fecal sludge service
delivery, such as resources published by SANDEC, WEDC and the World Bank WSP (refer to
References / Bibliography). A more detailed explanation of each decision-support tool and how
they are used can be found in the Tools and Guidelines.

4.4.4      Service Delivery Action Framework

The Service Delivery Action Framework responds to the complexity of the enabling environment for
FSM and sanitation services, allowing actions to be prioritized in response to the current status.

Key experiences and lessons from using the service delivery action framework to identify
appropriate interventions affecting the enabling environment of FSM services were:

        Addresses the “what next?” resulting from CSDA and PFC findings: This tool provides
         a mechanism both to avoid over-simplification of the CSDA scorecard, and to identify and
         propose a set of actions. By linking the CSDA with PFC results, the action framework can
         be proposed based on the experience of the study team and good practice, in collaboration
         with city stakeholders.

        Building on what currently works: Any actions proposed for the city must relate to the
         extent to which cities are already showing and achieving progress in the enabling
         environment. The action framework builds on this foundation to help drive results.

        Helps city authorities identify where to prioritize and focus actions: The tool helps first
         to prioritize the protection of public health, then to strengthen the foundations for this, and
         finally to achieve fully sustainable services (and downstream interventions) that ensure
         environmental protection. In this way, city authorities can see where they are achieving
         good results, but also where they need to give greater attention to the remaining priority
         issues.



                                                                                                               51
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


4.4.5      Intervention Options Assessment

The Intervention Options Assessment is a structured way of representing potential interventions
affecting the service chain, for each current or proposed service delivery option in the city. The
report does not go into detail on FSM business models (e.g. the relative merits of regular
desludging versus on-call services).

Key experiences and lessons from using the Intervention Options Assessment to identify
technical interventions were:

        Informed by the SFD (and USSI): This tool starts with the results of the fecal waste flow
         diagram (or SFD) and identifies a series of technical interventions in response to the key
         challenges that the SFD represents. This provides a strong evidence base from which to
         draw out prioritized actions, allowing a phased approach to be considered in response to
         the changing physical and institutional realities within the city.

        Addresses connectivity between service chain functions : The technical interventions
         recommended by the study team must be informed by good practice and experience. The
         recommendations must also ensure continuity of service through the stages of service
         chain, with changes made to any one of the stages reflected in appropriate interventions to
         other stages affected by these changes. For example, enforcing standards for effective
         containment of fecal sludge in septic tanks requires action to increase the availability of
         emptying services to households who improve their septic tanks, as well as expanded
         arrangements to dispose or treat fecal sludge safely. Addressing parts of the chain in
         isolation is not a viable option.

        Highlights areas of greatest complexity: Presenting technical interventions in the format
         of a matrix through the stages of the service chain provides a valuable way to identify
         where the range of interventions at each stage of service chain results in greater or less
         complexity. A variety of household containment options may be needed (to suit issues of
         poverty, access to households, sharing of facilities, groundwater and soil conditions, etc.),
         while perhaps only one or two different emptying and conveyance models may be relevant
         to the delivery of fecal sludge to a single new treatment facility – either directly or via local
         transfer stations.


4.5        Estimates of cost, time and resources needed for using the tools

4.5.1      Cost

Table 9 shows the costs of the studies carried out under this work, and three more (Maputo, Beira,
Lusaka) where the same concepts were used in a “live” situation in support of sanitation
interventions. The studies undertaken while developing the tools include a mix of several
individual local and international consultants plus a firm, and were more complex than those that
would be carried out routinely in an urban sanitation project environment (where the emphasis is
typically on sewerage). The figures for Maputo and Beira reflect work undertaken in such a
context, but are lower than they would otherwise be, as not all the tools were used (notably the
CSDA, since its content was already well known to the local project teams). Overall management
and the data analysis were carried out by World Bank staff, rather than contracted out, and were
therefore not captured as costs. These three studies do however include the USSI, which was not
produced for the five cities in this study.



                                                                                                               52
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas    Version: draft final


Table 9           Cost of studies in a range of cities

                      Approx.
 City                                Remarks
                     cost (US$)
 Studies designed specifically for the development of the tools
 Dhaka,                        Household survey, transect walks, FGDs, FS tests and observations (not
                   45,000
 Bangladesh                    key informant interviews, which were under a separate contract)
 Hawassa,
                   80,000      As per Dhaka, but no FS tests or observations carried out
 Ethiopia
 Lima,
                  155,000      As per Dhaka, but with fewer FS tests and observations carried out
 Peru
                               Added to another study with different terms of reference. Cost includes
 Santa Cruz,
                   75,000      household survey, key informant interviews and FGDs (but not transect
 Bolivia
                               walks, FS tests or the observations):
 Freetown,
                  135,000      As per Dhaka. Contract awarded but dropped due to Ebola outbreak
 Sierra Leone
 Other studies with similar specifications, undertaken in a project context
 Balikpapan,                   Data used from a technical assistance study with different terms of
                   35,000
 Indonesia                     reference
 Maputo,
                   55,000
 Mozambique                    Studies with similar scope, but with leadership and analysis in-house, so
 Beira,                        not directly comparable
                   45,000
 Mozambique

These highly variable costs reflect local prices and whether the local market can provide the
resources, or if a mix of local and international firms and consultants are required. The best
estimates are that the SFD, USSI and CSDA can be conducted in a sizable city for USD 30,000 -
60,000 depending on the macroeconomic environment of the country and competitiveness of the
data collection market. Africa and Latin America are generally more expensive and Asia is
generally less costly. The above costs only include delivery of clean datasets. They do not include
data analysis and report-writing, which for this study was undertaken by the OPM / WEDC team,
as well as individual national consultants.

4.5.2      Time

The data collection and survey work should take around two to four months once the team have
been procured. This includes time for adaptation and pre-testing of survey tools, and close
consultation with the clients. The time taken for analysis will depend partly on the format and
quality of the data collected, but another two to three months including consultation with the clients
should be adequate. In most case six months should be adequate for the data collection, analysis
and consultation process, and in smaller cities or where this relevant prior work 3 to 4 months may
be enough.

4.5.3      Consultant resources

The roles in the data collection fieldwork and analysis will depend on the nature and scale of the
data and analysis needed. However, some of the principal team requirements (particularly for
household surveys) are set out below, and others are noted in the generic terms of reference.




                                                                                                                53
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


Field survey manager
There are many things which can go wrong in data collection, particular when collecting data with
multiple teams. One small mistake anywhere in the chain from design, to data collection, to data
entry and cleaning can drastically reduce the quality or usefulness of all the data.

Therefore, the Field Manager requires extensive experience in field-based data collection and
management (e.g. pre-testing instruments, recruiting and training enumerators, implementing
sampling protocols, coordinating multiple teams in the field, quality control etc.). They must have a
keen attention to detail, as well as be able to motivate the team and make the training as fun as
possible.

Experience and knowledge of sanitation is highly desirable, but comes as a secondary priority to
data collection and management skills. If sanitation experience is not available, the extensive
involvement of a local sanitation specialist in all aspects of preparation and training is required.

Effective management of the whole team by the field manager is essential. She or he must inspire
or motivate them, as well as be checking up on them at every stage. In addition, close supervision
of the Field Manager by their client is essential, to ensure that they are interpreting instructions or
protocols as intended.

Sanitation specialist
Sanitation arrangements vary greatly between and also within countries. Local knowledge of
typical arrangements is crucial, especially in design and training. If this experience is not there,
then data collection instruments (e.g. response categories to questions) may be inappropriate for
the local context and deliver misleading data. Even an excellent questionnaire may be
misinterpreted if enumerators are poorly trained and a sanitation expert is not present.

A specific sanitation specialist is therefore required to support design and training. Their role could
be small if the field manager is a sanitation specialist, but the field manager has a huge number of
things on their plate so it is still important to have a separate sanitation specialist to input as
required. It is the extent of their input which would change.

Data manager / programmer
This role is essential regardless of whether paper questionnaires or digital data entry (e.g. using
smartphones) is used. Paper questionnaires must be double-entered into computers (to avoid
mistakes). A large survey requires a team of data entry clerks who need to be closely managed.
Once entered, the data must be cleaned and checked for inconsistencies and errors.

With smartphones, the data manager also has to turn the questionnaire into a smartphone program
which is a specific skill. If done badly, this can be catastrophic. Whereas mistakes in paper
questionnaire design or data entry can often be found and rectified, a mistake in smartphone
program design (e.g. question skipping pattern) can introduce problems which are impossible to
correct once the data has been collected. Furthermore, while using a smartphone avoids some
data entry mistakes, these can still occur at the enumerator level, and data cleaning processes
need to be set up to identify these.

This role is therefore crucial and the field manager will not have the time or head space to do this
role themselves. The individual must have experience in doing this kind of role in several surveys
of different types.




                                                                                                               54
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


Enumerators
Enumerators are the front line of data collection, and the only people who will interact with
respondents other than the quality control team. It is therefore crucial that they are sufficiently
qualified and motivated to do the job. Many data collection efforts deliver poor quality data
because the enumerators do not fully understand the questions and response categories and so
do not know how to interpret the household’s answer. It is also not uncommon for unmotivated
enumerators to sit under a tree and make up the answers.

The best enumerators are usually (but do not have to be) young and enthusiastic. Recent
graduates or even current students are an ideal choice, and are also affordable. They should
ideally have a bachelor’s degree, and using recent sociology graduates is common. Ideally they
would not be sanitation specialists, because they may not concentrate in the training and bring pre-
conceived biases.




                                                                                                               55
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas           Version: draft final



5          Integrating FSM into the Urban Sanitation Agenda
The FSM tools developed in this study, and others being developed by partners, are specifically
designed to support FSM development as one component of a city-wide urban sanitation program.
This is because FSM is a significantly under-researched and undocumented aspect of urban
sanitation. However, in a live situation, the objective will always be to improve all elements of
urban sanitation including, but not restricted to, FSM. The diagram below shows the relative scope
of this study and of urban sanitation in general.

Figure 20         Scope of FSM within City-Wide Sanitation

       MDGs                                Sustainable Development Goals
                                                                                                End-use/
    Containment                Emptying               Conveyance               Treatment
                                                                                                Disposal



    Centralized and decentralized Sewerage                                  City-wide sanitation
                                     Sewerage network                            Sewage         End-use/
           WC                                                                   treatment
                                     Pumping stations                                           Disposal
                                                                                  works


    On-site Systems with Fecal Sludge Management                                            This study
                                         Vacuum truck
                                                                               Treatment
        Latrine
                                 Primary                                         plant          End-use/
          or                                             Transfer
                                emptying                                                        disposal
      septic tank
                                Safely covered and replaced in new location




5.1        The FSM tools in the urban sanitation context
Looking in more detail at the tools, some are relevant to urban sanitation as a whole, and some to
FSM only. The whole suite is set out in the Figure, and the table below shows which of the tools,
as developed and applied in this study, focus on FSM, and which are relevant to urban sanitation
overall.

.




                                                                                                                       56
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                     Version: draft final


Table 10            Relevance of the tools used in this study to FSM only or City-wide Sanitation

 Tool                                                                           FSM Only            City-wide Sanitation
 1 Fecal Waste Flow Diagram (SFD)                                                                                  
   Urban Sanitation Status Index (USSI)                                                                            
 2 City Service Delivery Assessment (CSDA)                                              
 3 Prognosis for Change/Political Economy Analysis                                                                 
   Public Health Risk Assessment                                                                                   
   FSM costing tool                                                                     
 4 Service Delivery Action Framework                                                    
 5 Intervention Options Assessment                                                                                 
   SANDEC technical material19                                                          

Many aspects of urban sanitation – such as the design of conventional sewer systems and sewage
treatment – are well understood, documented and guidance is widely available. However, these
are not necessarily linked to other components of real city-wide needs. There is therefore a need
to supplement such widely available knowledge with emerging learning to address service
provision in previously neglected areas. Tools developed under this study which will require further
development to cover aspects of networked sanitation are:
             City Service Delivery Assessment: Development of a new set of questions that
              additionally address networked sanitation services;
             Service Delivery Action Framework: Development of a complimentary series of options
              corresponding to the development of sewerage in its various forms.

The tools highlighted in blue are those developed by other partners, and require no further
development to cover networked sanitation, since the only FSM-specific ones already have widely
used equivalents for networked sanitation. As noted above, there is little need for more technical
material on conventional sewerage, although other lower-cost forms (condominial, small-bore,
settled sewage, simplified sewerage, etc.) are still insufficiently documented.


5.2           Knowledge gaps on city-wide urban sanitation
Based on this study and previous related work, a number of key knowledge gaps and areas of
weakness in city-wide sanitation have been identified and include:

a) Inclusive delivery of effective sanitation facilities to users
            Sanitation for low-cost rental accommodation – how to ensure landlords or others provide
             adequate sanitary facilities for tenants, and how to mitigate the effect this may have on
             increasing rents;
            Upgrading on-site facilities at scale to improve emptiability and user hygiene;
            Optimum modalities and timing for effective urban sanitation and hygiene promotional
             campaigns (including for example behavioral change on the appropriate use of sanitation
             facilities, by avoiding the disposal of solid waste into pits);
            Affordable sanitation technologies for challenging environments such as high water table
             and flood-prone areas, rocky ground, steep hillsides, settlements built over water, cold
             climates, etc.;

19                                                                        nd
  SANDEC’s “Compendium of Sanitation Systems and Technologies” 2               edition addresses city wide sanitation
technologies


                                                                                                                                 57
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


        Ensuring that the institutions responsible for health centers, schools, etc. provide adequate
         sanitation for users.

b) Institutional issues
        Development of the community engagement capability of utilities (or other responsible
         authorities) to enable effective planning and community mobilization for both sewerage and
         non-networked sanitation;
        Understanding complementary roles and collaboration modalities for utilities, local
         government and the private sector in diverse governance environments;
        Financing of capital and operating costs, including subsidies where appropriate;
        Design of institutional incentives;
        Development of better political economy analysis tools.

c) Institutional aspects of fecal sludge management
        Developing viable business models for FSM, including considerations of scale, linkages
         with solid waste management services, on-demand vs. scheduled emptying, etc.;
        The elimination of manual emptying and introduction of improved methods and/or
         alternative sources of income for manual emptiers;
        Use of charging systems that promote fecal sludge discharge at approved sites;
        PPPs for production and marketing of end-use products derived from sludge.

d) Technical aspects of fecal sludge management
        The use of transfer stations or alternatives;
        Improved technologies for dealing with thick pit latrine sludge;
        Fecal sludge treatment plant design;
        Greywater management – specific arrangements where there is no sewerage.

e) Making sewerage available to poor households
        Increasing connections to existing and planned sewers and making sewerage systems
         work better for poor communities;
        Technical and institutional models for simplified, shallow, settled and condominial sewers;
        Pro-poor sewerage tariff design;
        Optimizing scale and centralization vs. decentralization;
        Management of potentially toxic industrial discharges (also relevant for non-networked
         systems).

f) Complementary services
        Systematic application of an integrated urban water management approach in sanitation
         intervention design, linking with drainage and solid waste management;
        How to keep solid waste out of latrine pits;
        Expanding the use of infiltration in urban drainage systems.

g) Regulation
        Regulation and licensing of FSM service providers;
        Design and enforcement of sanitation byelaws and building regulations, especially in
         informal settlements;
        Regulation of end-use products and sludge disposal.

The World Bank and other donors are well placed to advance global knowledge on a number of
these issues, based on learning an analysis from its ‘at scale’ implementation experience in urban

                                                                                                               58
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


sanitation. However some points would be more suitable for research institutions, universities,
development agencies, foundations or non-government organizations to address to lead – often in
collaboration or partnership with donor knowledge work.




                                                                                                               59
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas            Version: draft final



6          Findings and Recommendations
These policy recommendations have been developed based on an analysis of the lessons
emerging from the five FSM case study cities, with additional evidence from studies undertaken by
team members in World Bank funded sanitation projects (Lusaka, Zambia and Accra, Ghana) and
FSM technical assistance (Maputo and Beira, Mozambique and Tabanan, Indonesia)


6.1        The importance of FSM in national policy and legislation
FSM services are an essential component of urban sanitation: On-site sanitation systems are
the norm for both rich and poor in cities and towns of developing countries. In Sub-Saharan Africa
for example, only about 10% of the urban population are connected to sewers and 8% have no
toilet at all (Morella et al, 2009 cited in Peal et al, 2014). In Vietnam, Indonesia and Philippines,
sewerage access is even lower, and in Indonesia 14% of the urban population practice open
defecation (WSP, 2015). While the vast majority of urban dwellers use on-site sanitation, more
wealthy households are likely to have access to improved, private facilities (Hawkins et al, 2013).
Almost all informal settlements and poor households are served by on-site sanitation (if they have
any sanitation service at all). Such facilities are often shared between many families, and may be
unsafe and unhygienic. A desk study of 12 cities carried out in 2012 showed that, on aggregate,
only 22% of fecal waste from on-site sanitation was safely managed (WSP, 2013). The five cities
in this study have ranges for safely managed fecal waste ranging from 0.3% (for Dhaka) to 74%
(for Hawassa), as shown earlier in Table 7. It is clear that fecal sludge management remains a
neglected but essential part of sanitation services for the majority of households in many cities,
while any assessment of sanitation services needs to include a focus on how the poorest
communities can best be served.

FSM services need to be included in national sanitation policies: Policies must consider the
entire sanitation chain. FSM services must be addressed in both national sanitation policies and
city-level sanitation plans, even where water and sanitation service functions are fully delegated to
local government. Definitions in policy documents need to be clear and unambiguous, but are
often confusing as they may be based on an assumption that sanitation is the same thing as
sewerage. In some cases, bucket latrines are recognized in law and policy, but not FSM. In other
cases pit latrines are outlawed despite being the form of sanitation used by most people. Many
national sanitation policies focus on access to toilets (containment) and sewerage, without regard
to what happens when on-site sanitation facilities require desludging. This was evident in Dhaka
and Hawassa where the City Service Delivery Assessment (CSDA) showed policy is strongest, or
only really effective, for the containment stage of the service chain.20

Even where the policy framework is stronger for FSM, it is often not yet effectively implemented.
For example, in Balikpapan and Tabanan, Indonesia, the Local Government is expected to link any
new local regulation with an over-arching national policy when formulating local FSM regulations.
While National Government is promoting and funding FSM and support exists in principle, the
national policy is not yet clear, formalized or reference-able. In Ethiopia, FSM is recognized within
the OneWASH National Program and is to be incorporated into the upcoming Integrated Urban
Sanitation and Hygiene Strategy. This will address components of sanitation provision through the
service chain and institutional arrangements, but it has yet to be implemented (see Hawassa city
report for more details).


20
  A draft Institutional and Regulatory Framework for Fecal Sludge Management in Dhaka City was in preparation and
being discussed amongst key stakeholders at the time of the study


                                                                                                                        60
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


In some cases, currently widespread practices associated with use of on-site sanitation systems
are illegal – for example, in Accra, bucket latrines and the dumping of fecal sludge into the sea are
both illegal, but cannot be stopped because the available alternatives (open defecation and open
dumping on land) are worse. In Dar es Salaam, where pit latrines are the norm, they are
prohibited within the municipal boundary under outdated byelaws. This type of legislation tends to
hinder rather than help the phasing out of the undesired practices.


6.2        Drivers of improved urban fecal sludge management services
Incentivize the role of the private sector in FSM: Where formal FSM services are absent or
inadequate, the private sector often steps in to provide them in response to customer demand.
This is evident from the CSDA analyses of Dhaka and Balikpapan. From the SFDs it is seen that
the services, while removing the waste from the household, often result in indiscriminate dumping
by both manual and mechanical services in nearby open spaces, rivers and drains. It is therefore
important that private sector actors are incentivized to both stimulate and meet demand for
affordable FSM services, as well as being granted access to safe disposal sites at economical
distances from areas of collection, while observing minimum safe practices for the emptying and
disposal of wastes.

Even where the public sector is providing fecal sludge collection services, these are almost always
“privatized” by the operatives, who undertake extra work and accept payment directly . The
situation is further aggravated by the tendency of public institutions to be very slow in procuring
spare parts to keep equipment operational. Private FSM operators tend therefore to be more able
to maintain a continuous service.

Bury and forget is common practice but is not sustainable over time: In rural areas and urban
areas where housing density is low, people ‘self-provide’ with pit latrines, which are abandoned,
covered and rebuilt elsewhere when they fill up. This practice is often widespread and can be the
main method of dealing with full pits in a given city. But as found in Lima, Hawassa and Maputo
this approach becomes less viable as housing density increases. Such traditional practices cannot
continue to be used as houses are extended, rental units constructed, and back yards get smaller.
Even where land-use is not changing much, improved water supply with on-plot connections may
rapidly move users towards more aspirational flushing toilets. They require more expensive and
strongly built infrastructure such as septic tanks, which users may prefer to empty rather than
abandon when full. Also, the practice of rebuilding the superstructure every few years discourages
investment in a permanent quality superstructure. This can perpetuate the perception that pit
latrines are inevitably an unsatisfactory option.

Protection of groundwater – consider all options: Pollution of shallow groundwater is often
given as a reason for not using on-site sanitation systems where the population uses shallow wells
for domestic water supply. However, reviews of sewerage systems indicate that considerable
leakage, overflowing pumping stations and dysfunctional treatment are the norm – all of which
have the potential to pollute groundwater too (Williams and Overbo, 2015). All situations of high
groundwater (typically within 5-6m of the surface) should be assessed, but before on-site systems
are rejected, options such as providing piped water from alternative sources should be costed.
Discouraging the use of shallow domestic wells by providing clean piped water is invariably a
cheaper, more effective solution, and more popular than installing sewerage to ‘protect’ the ground
water – which it usually does not achieve. Shallow groundwater is also contaminated by industrial
and commercial wastes, leaking drainage channels and leachate from solid waste, making
investments in sewerage alone of little use unless incorporated into a comprehensive waste
management (or integrated urban water management) approach.


                                                                                                               61
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                    Version: draft final


In some cities (for example, Lusaka) the water for piped supply is abstracted from boreholes
beneath the city, creating a need to protect the aquifer. However, exactly which technology may
do this more effectively is not easy to define. In other cities, such as Dhaka or Hawassa, the water
supply comes from sources external to the city, with actions to protect the groundwater aquifer
unlikely to be driven by the risks to drinking water but by wider environmental pollution risks – for
instance to open water bodies such as Lake Hawassa.


6.3          Institutional, regulatory, legal and financial matters
Clear institutional roles for FSM at local level: All aspects of sanitation services are intrinsically
issues which cut across several jurisdictions, including line ministries, municipal departments and
service providers. Usually, unless there are clearly assigned institutional responsibilities for all
aspects of the service chain, including FSM, nobody will take responsibility, and the result will be
unregulated and unhygienic services.

There is no ‘one model fits all’ situation, but where piped water access is substantial, the water and
sewerage utility may often be best placed to manage FSM services – usually together with the
private sector. This is the situation in Santa Cruz and Hawassa, and has developed over the study
period in Balikpapan and Lima.21 A drawback of this arrangement is that the utility usually lacks
enforcement powers, which are typically vested in local government, and it may be difficult to
control the private service providers. The utility may also have an in-built bias toward sewerage –
perhaps unsurprisingly, given the lack of exposure to alternatives most engineers are given during
their education.

Utilities are usually mandated to provide piped water and sometimes piped sewerage services, and
have few obvious incentives to address the challenges of non-networked sanitation. In most cases
this has been the result of a legacy – often colonial – or of separating responsibilities for public
health from water supply, which has meant that municipalities retained responsibility for public
health (including sold waste management), with the role of utilities in sanitation assumed to mean
sewerage systems.

Where local government retains responsibility for FSM, as in Mozambique (Maputo, Beira) or
Tabanan in Indonesia, the municipality will often be a service provider itself, typically resulting in
uneconomically priced services, inadequate maintenance, and a two-level service – cheaper but
often much delayed from the municipality, and more expensive but immediate from the private
sector. The resulting misplaced subsidies and temporarily overflowing pits are obviously
undesirable. However, there is an argument for retaining some minimal in-house municipal
capacity to deal with public emergencies and send price signals into the market through a limited
services for some paying customers.

Effective and enforceable regulations for FSM: Clear local regulations (bylaws or ordinances),
which are both enforceable and enforced, are the logical and necessary extension of institutional
responsibilities. Resulting institutional frameworks and byelaws for FSM should ideally be
incorporated into broader Integrated Urban Water Management approaches, to achieve credibility
and maximum results, but should be developed in any case. Regulations need not be overly
complex to start with, especially when transitioning from informal services.

At the most basic level the regulations should ensure clean and safe operation (such as by
ensuring correct designs and well-constructed containment infrastructure with regular and effective
desludging by registered operators), that all fecal waste is safely disposed at designated treatment
21
     In the case of Dhaka city, the draft FSM framework vests responsibility for FSM services with the two city corporations.


                                                                                                                                62
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


works, that sanctions are applied for disposal elsewhere, and that workers use protective clothing
and undergo health checks. The responsible agency should be required to keep complete records
and account for its operations and income, and manage the private sector operators in a fair and
transparent manner. In Balikpapan, when regular desludging is operating at scale, beyond the
limited pilot studies, regulations will necessarily be more complex.

An unexpected benefit of regulating pit emptying properly is that the emptiers themselves move
from the informal towards the formal sector, and feel less marginalized and stigmatized by the work
they do. This has been observed in Dakar, Lusaka and Maputo.

Incentives to improve disposal practices: This is a relatively new area, with limited experience
gained or documented. However, promising approaches include:
        Providing credits to tankers discharging at the authorized sites instead of charging them a
         tipping fee;
        Provision of cheap loans, possibly by way of a guarantee fund, to operators to allow them
         access to modern, efficient and reliable equipment;
        Reducing haulage costs (the biggest ingredient of FSM costs) by building more treatment
         and/or transfer facilities, thus reducing distances;
        Branding and promotion of improved services to wean customers away from unhygienic
         FSM practices;
        Reducing prices through promoting competition, as with a customer call center established
         in Dakar which allows for competitive bidding between operators;
        Teaming up with micro-finance institutions to enable facilitated payment for emptying, which
         is typically a major cost for a poor household, possibly as much as an entire month’s
         income.

Adequate containment and building regulations: In all the cases studied, poorly constructed
pits and septic tanks contribute to inadequate FSM, as well as to inadequate hygienic conditions
for users. Typically, only septic tanks have regulated designs or design parameters, and in
informal settlements, where the bulk of FSM services are typically though not only required, such
regulations are, more or less by definition, not enforced. The question therefore arises as to how
to persuade residents of informal settlements to adopt adequate sanitation infrastructure.
Sanitation promotion is certainly part of the answer and has been found in Indonesia, where
regulation tends to be weak, to lead to significant uptake of improved services (WSP, 2009).
Another possible approach could be to bundle toilet upgrading or construction with emptying
services. A pilot initiative is being tested under the GPOBA project in Sri Lanka (see Box 2) but the
approach has yet to be tried at scale.

Planning and budgeting processes for FSM: Even where FSM is identified in policies, the
associated planning and budgeting required for implementation are identified as key weaknesses
in the FSM City Service Delivery Assessments (in the 12-city study as well as the current project).
FSM service targets in city development plans, viable service funding arrangements and a clear
FSM component in any comprehensive, city-wide sanitation investment plan are crucial – but
usually missing. Well-designed national plans, funding windows and reporting mechanisms can
also be critical to achieving success at scale.

Monitor FSM service outcomes: The key outcome when considering only the containment stage
of the service chain is use of an adequate sanitation facility. Considering FSM as a complete end-
to-end system, the key outcome is that people do not interact with fecal sludge in the environment,
but this is difficult to monitor. An important proxy outcome indicator to monitor is the proportion of

                                                                                                               63
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas       Version: draft final


fecal sludge discharged to a proper treatment and/or safe disposal facility, as the intended end-
point of fecal waste flows.

Equity in subsidizing the sanitation chain: Although it is normal worldwide practice that
households pay for their water closet and household plumbing, sewerage is extensively subsidized
on the basis of providing public health and environmental benefits. Many of the beneficiaries are
businesses and richer residential customers, whilst many customers who continue to depend on
non-networked sanitation cannot afford the full market costs of mechanical emptying, which is
mostly not subsidized. The public good element is a clear argument for subsidizing urban
sanitation and there is a real need for smart, targeted subsidies for poor FSM customers,
especially when those better able to pay already enjoy significant subsidies through access to
sewers. Sustainable subsidization of an on-going service provided by the private sector is much
harder than subsidizing major public investment in sewerage systems. Innovative subsidy
mechanisms will therefore need to be developed, that target specific cost elements through the
entire service chain (not necessarily limited to conveyance, as in the case of sewerage), without
compromising the sustainability and inclusiveness of the services.

Smart subsidies for household on-site sanitation maybe justified by the externalities resulting from
a poorly covered pit or one that requires manual emptying.           Output-based aid mechanisms,
together with improved fecal sludge management, are being tried in a number of countries. (e.g.
Sri Lanka, Indonesia) to improve the quality of on-site sanitation and in the process ensure that the
facilities are suitable for regular emptying. Box 2 outlines the bundling of toilet upgrading and FSM
services in Sri Lanka. A mechanism used in a number of countries is a cross-subsidy from water
supply, which can be managed in-house by a utility, or take the form of a transfer to local
government if they are responsible for FSM. Whatever mechanism is selected, national
government and/or the sector regulator will need to be involved, either to agree on an increased
water tariff, or to provide another funding window.

Box 2 Bundling of toilet upgrading and FSM services in Sri Lanka

The National Water Supply and Drainage Board of Sri Lanka is piloting an innovative Public-Private
Partnership (PPP) with World Bank output-based aid. The purpose is to help mitigate widespread pollution
resulting from dysfunctional on-site sanitation in some of the peri-urban areas of the national capital,
Colombo. The challenges are twofold: the sewerage network is minimal, and extending it is a massive and
slowly progressing process; and on-site sanitation systems, where they exist, are often not functional and
overflow into the nearest canal, causing environmental and public health hazards. The World Bank helped
to design a PPP model offering a service to low-income households, which combines the improvement of
their on-site sanitation facility with annual desludging and disposal of the septage at an authorized discharge
point. The innovation resides in linking the upgrading and subsequent operation of on-site sanitation
systems in a single service package, activities until then performed separately by different private
companies. Workshops with the private sector confirmed their interest to organize themselves in joint
ventures to bid for such services. The PPP offers them visibility with their service provision in the project
area, and provides the beneficiaries with a full service, while limiting environmental pollution. The bidding
process was successfully completed in December 2015 and four 10-year PPP contracts are expected to
serve over 20,000 people. A GPOBA (Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid) grant will bridge the gap
between an affordable price and the cost of infrastructure and desludging services for the first two years.
Results and lessons will be closely monitored and published. If successful, the approach may be replicated.




                                                                                                                   64
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final



6.4        Planning for incremental changes over time
While sewerage will be the preferred long term sanitation solution in many cities, it may not be
appropriate in all areas (e.g. low-density residential areas). As it will certainly not be possible to
make the change all at once for financial and logistical reasons, there must therefore be an
incremental approach to improving sanitation. A number of sanitation options will be in use at any
one time, and these will change differently over time in different areas. It is the difficult job of the
responsible authorities to identify and prioritize the type and location of interventions for the best
public health and environmental outcomes at any given time. Even if the long term vision is for
widespread sewerage, it will in general be more appropriate to invest partly in improving on-site
sanitation rather than diverting all available resources towards sewerage and leaving the
population using on-site systems to fend entirely for themselves.

The hypothetical diagram below (Figure 21) shows how such changes might play out in practice.
The horizontal axis represents time, while the types of sanitation in use are spread along the
vertical axis, thus representing the spatial variation in sanitation across the city at any given time.
The current situation (at the left of the diagram) is loosely based on Hawassa, with the addition of
manual emptying (not observed in Hawassa) for illustrative purposes.                  Major sewerage
investments are anticipated, as industries move in and the city continues to expand rapidly. Some
of the key elements of the trajectory of change mapped out in the diagram are:

        An initial focus on eliminating open defecation and manual emptying;
        A gradual improvement of on-site facilities to make them more hygienic for users and easier
         to empty – either by promotion only, or possibly supported by subsidies if appropriate;
        Increased availability of FSM services to serve the growing number of improved facilities;
        Improvement of fecal sludge treatment and disposal;
        Gradual introduction of regularly scheduled emptying;
        Gradual implementation of sewerage in the most densely occupied areas




                                                                                                               65
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas                    Version: draft final


Figure 21         Evolution over time of the sanitation mix in a city

 100%
                                                                           centralized and decentralized
                                                                           sewerage + effective treatment
   80%


                                    on-site +                                   on-site +
   60%                              on-request emptying +                       regular emptying +
                                    controlled dumping                              adequate treatment


   40%
                                                        improved on-site facilities
                 cover and
                 build new
   20%

              manual emptying
              open defecation
     0%
             Time                                                                                             


The aspiration for a water-flushed sanitation facility is a global reality – but this does not or should
not necessarily equate to a conventional sewerage system. People may make considerable
investments to achieve this aspiration once piped water is available in the house or yard. This
impacts the sanitation mix and the demand for FSM services. This is well illustrated by recent
experience in Maputo, where piped water supply to the dense unplanned inner city area of
Nhlamankulo was substantially upgraded. As the charts below show, on-plot water supply
connections rose from about one third of households to almost 80% between 2011 and 2013, while
the proportion of households using a septic tank tripled and those using dry latrines fell
substantially.

Figure 22         Effect of improved water supply on sanitation in Nhlamankulo, Maputo

              Sanitation Facilities                                              Water Supply
 50%                                                            80%
                                                                               2011        2013
                       2011      2013                           70%
 40%
                                                                60%
 30%                                                            50%
                                                                40%
 20%                                                            30%
                                                                20%
 10%
                                                                10%
   0%                                                            0%
         Traditional Improved Pour Flush       Septic                    Standpipe      Neighbor's Tap    Individual
           Latrine    Latrine                  Tank                                                      Connection


                                        Source: Hawkins and Muxímpua (2015)

                                                                                                                                66
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final



7          Conclusion
This report synthesizes analysis from five city case studies. In each case study, a set of
diagnostics and decision-support tools was applied based on primary and secondary data
collection. Overall, the case studies confirm the importance of non-networked sanitation in many
developing country cities, and deficiencies in the management of services to manage the resulting
fecal sludge. They also show how diagnostic and decision-support tools can be useful in informing
interventions to address these problems.
The tools presented in this summary report are available for use by anybody, and their use is
encouraged. Key audiences for the outputs of these tools are government decision-makers,
development banks, utilities and municipal authorities. They are primarily intended for carrying out
a sanitation situation diagnosis and the preliminary selection of intervention options, bringing a
focus to each part of the sanitation service chain. They will be particularly useful at the project
identification and preparation stage. However, much of the data collected will also be useful later in
the design of interventions.
The Tools and Guidelines, contains detailed guidance on how to use the tools and provides more
examples of their outputs. It should be used with the generic Terms of Reference and Data
Collection Instruments to support the necessary data collection. In addition, the full Case Studies
from the five cities are also available for readers wishing to see in more detail how the tools have
been used.
Various toolkits already exist or are being developed (e.g. Sanitation 21, Strategic Sanitation
Approach, the Asian Institute of Technology’s FS M toolkit for Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation etc.)
to help decision-makers identify actions to take at city level. However, they do not focus specifically
on FSM or address political economy aspects. They also tend to focus on municipal and
community action, with limited acknowledgement that tackling the problems will require substantial
external support, from other levels of government as well as under project-type arrangements. The
tools set out in this report take these factors into account, and aim to help stakeholders consider
how to develop urban sanitation services that manage all fecal waste rather than only that which is
discharged to sewers.




                                                                                                               67
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final



References / Bibliography
AMCOW (African Ministers Council on Water). 2011. AMCOW Country Status Overviews –
Regional Synthesis Report. Pathways to Progress: Transitioning to Country-Led Service Delivery
Pathways to Meet Africa’s Water Supply and Sanitation Targets . Washington, DC: The World
Bank/Water and Sanitation Program

Chowdry, S and Kone, D., 2012, Business Analysis of Fecal Sludge Management: Emptying and
Transportation Services in Africa and Asia, Draft Final Report, The Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation, USA

DFID, 1998, Guidance Manual on Water Supply and Sanitation Programmes, London, UK:
Department for International Development

Dodane P, Mbéguéré M, Sow O, and Strande L, 2012, Capital and Operating Costs of Full-Scale
Fecal Sludge Management and Wastewater Treatment Systems in Dakar, Senegal, Environ. Sci.
Technol. 2012, 46, 3705−3711

Edwards, B., Nagpal, T., Rose, R., et al, 2015, Municipal finance for sanitation in three African
cities, WSUP Discussion Paper, DP#007, July 2015, Water and Sanitation for the Urban Poor,
London, UK

Evans, B.E., Saywell, D. and the Sanitation 21 Task Force, 2006, Sanitation 21: Simple
Approaches to Complex Sanitation – A Draft Framework for Analysis, London: International Water
Association

Hawkins, P, Blackett, I. and Heymans, C., 2013, Poor-Inclusive Urban Sanitation: An Overview,
Water and Sanitation Program Study, Washington , DC: World Bank Water and Sanitation
Program

Hawkins P. and Muxímpua, O., 2015, Developing business models for fecal sludge management
in Maputo, Water and Sanitation Program Study, Washington , DC: World Bank Water and
Sanitation Program

IWA (International Water Association), 2006, Sanitation 21 – Simple Approaches to Complex
Sanitation: A Draft Framework for Analysis. IWA Publishing, London, UK

Lüthi, C., Morel, A., Tilley, E. and Ulrich, L., 2011, Community-Led Urban Environmental
Sanitation Planning (CLUES). Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology
(Eawag), Dübendorf, Switzerland

Medland, L., Cotton, A.P. and Scott, R.E., 2015, SPLASH Urban Sanitation Research Programme
Briefing Note 1: An enabling environment for urban sanitation, Loughborough University, UK:
Water, Engineering and Development Centre (WEDC), Loughborough University

Medland, L., Cotton, A.P. and Scott, R.E., 2015, SPLASH Urban Sanitation Research Programme
Briefing Note 2: City wide planning to support effective sanitation service chain operation ,
Loughborough University, UK: Water, Engineering and Development Centre (WEDC),
Loughborough University

Morella, E., Foster V. and Banerjee, S.G., 2009. Climbing the Ladder: The State of Sanitation in
Sub-Saharan Africa. Vol 13. Africa Infrastructure Country Diagnostic (AICD) Background Paper
13 (Phase 1), The World Bank, Washington, DC.

                                                                                                               68
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final


Peal A., Evans B., Blackett I., Hawkins P. and Heymans C., 2014. Fecal sludge management
(FSM): analytical tools for assessing FSM in cities. Review paper. Journal of Water, Sanitation
and Hygiene for Development: 04.3, pp. 371-383. IWA Publishing

Scott, P., Cotton, A. and Sohail, M., 2015, Using tenure to build a “sanitation cityscape”: narrowing
decisions for targeted sanitation interventions, Environment & Urbanization, Vol 27(2): 1-18,
International Institute for Environment and Development, UK

Spears, D., 2013, How Much International Variation in Child Height Can Sanitation Explain? World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6351. Washington, DC: The World Bank

Strande, L., Ronteltap, M. and Brdjanovic, D. (eds.), 2014, Fecal Sludge Management: Systems
Approach for Implementation and Operation, London, UK: IWA Publishing

Tayler, K., Parkinson, J. and Colin, J., 2003, Urban Sanitation: A Guide to Strategic Planning,
Rugby, UK: Practical Action Publishing

Tilley, E., Lüthi, C., Morel, A., Zurbrügg, C. and Schertenleib, R., 2014, Compendium of Sanitation
Systems and Technologies, 2nd Revised Edition. Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and
Technology (Eawag). Dübendorf, Switzerland

WHO / UNICEF, 2015, Progress on sanitation and drinking water – 2015 update and MDG
assessment, UNICEF and World Health Organization Joint Monitoring Programme

WHO / UNICEF, 2015a, Post-2015 WASH targets and indicators. WASH targets and indicators
post-2015: outcomes of an expert consultation

Williams, A.R and Overbo, A., 2015, Unsafe return of human excreta to the environment: A
literature review. 2015. The Water Institute at UNC, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Wright, A.M., 1997, Towards a Strategic Sanitation Approach: Improving the Sustainability of
Urban Sanitation in Developing Countries , Washington , DC: UNDP-World Bank Water and
Sanitation Program,

WSP, 2009. Total Sanitation and Sanitation Marketing Research Report March 2009. Prepared
by Nielsen Indonesia. World Bank Water and Sanitation Program, Washington, DC.

WSP, 2013. A Review Of Fecal Sludge Management in 12 Cities , DRAFT for Internal Review.
Prepared by Andy Peal and Barbara Evans. Washington , DC: World Bank Water and Sanitation
Program (WSP) Urban Global Practice Team




                                                                                                               69
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas              Version: draft final



Annex A               Links to other key documents

This annex contains further details about other key documents which are part of this study, namely
the Tools and Guidelines, Data Collection Instruments, Terms of Reference and city Case Studies.

A.1      Tools and guidelines for improving fecal sludge management
         (FSM) services
The Tools and Guidelines is the ‘how to’ report, including full details about the tools and how to use
them. It goes through each tool, as well as the methods and data sources underlying it. The Tools
and Guidelines includes examples from the city case studies, focusing on the SFD, CSDA,
Prognosis for Change, Service Delivery Action Framework and Intervention Options Assessment
Framework.

It is important to distinguish between the diagnostic tools and the data collection instruments. The
tools are quantitative and qualitative means of displaying data to support problem diagnosis and
decision-making. The data collection instruments consist of both the data collection formats (such
as the household survey questionnaire) and their associated protocols (which are essentially an
instruction manual and methodology), which provide inputs to the tools. A third element is the
Terms of Reference for commissioning work to use the instruments – these will be helpful to
people using the tools, whether they want to contract out the work or do it themselves, but the
assumption is that the person doing the work is a consultant. The distinction is shown in the table
below.

Table 11          The difference between Tools, Instruments and Terms of reference

           Element          Contains                                              Where to find

           Experiences of using the tools
                       Summary of tools, lessons learnt about                     Summary Report
           Summary
                       their use, and policy recommendations.                     (this report)
           How to use the tools
                       Tool objectives, detailed methods and                      Tools and Guidelines
           Overview
                       examples                                                   (main body)
                       Instructions and formats for applying the                  Tools and Guidelines
           How to
                       tool                                                       (Annexes)
           Data collection Instruments
                       Manual on how to use the instrument                        Data Collection
           Protocol
                       format                                                     Instruments (main body)
                       Data collection instruments for                            Data Collection
           Format
                       adaptation to a city context                               Instruments (Annexes)
           Terms of Reference
                       Instructions for staff or consultants (firm
           TORs        or individual) who will implement one or                   Terms of Reference
                       more data collection instruments


A.2      Data collection instruments and terms of reference
The Data Collection Instruments (with associated protocols) and Terms of Reference are in
companion documents. The various data collection instruments and the research methods
associated with them are summarized in the table below.


                                                                                                                          70
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas              Version: draft final


The TORs should be adapted to a given city context, depending on which tools are planned to be
used and the focus of the work. The consultants would need to be provided with the protocols and
data collection instruments (once adapted). These are summarized in the table below.

Table 12                  Research methods and associated instruments

                                      Data collection            City where             Diagnostic tool or
               Research method
                                      instrument                 applied                analysis this informs

                                                                                        SFD tool, CSDA tool,
                                                                 Dhaka,
               1. Household           Household                                         Supply and demand
                                                                 Hawassa, Lima,
                  survey              questionnaire                                     analysis, Economic
                                                                 Santa Cruz
                                                                                        analysis
               2. Observation of      Structured observation     Dhaka                  Supply and demand
Quantitative




                  service providers   form                                              analysis
                                                                 Dhaka,
               3. Transect walk       Transect walk form                                Public health risk analysis
                                                                 Hawassa, Lima
               4. Environmental       Water supply and drain
                                                                 Dhaka                  Public health risk analysis
                  sampling            water testing protocol
                                      Test of FS physical
                                                                 Dhaka                  Reuse analysis
                                      characteristics
               5. Testing FS
                                      Test of FS
                  characteristics                                Dhaka
                                      chemical/biological                               Reuse analysis
                                      characteristics
                                                                 Dhaka,                 Prognosis for change tool,
               6. Focus group         Focus group
                                                                 Hawassa, Lima,         Supply and demand
Qualitative




                  discussions         discussion guide
                                                                 Santa Cruz             analysis
                                                                                        SFD tool, CSDA tool,
                                                                 Dhaka,
               7. Key informant                                                         Prognosis for change tool,
                                      Interview guide            Hawassa, Lima,
                  interviews                                                            Supply and demand
                                                                 Santa Cruz
                                                                                        analysis




                                                                                                                          71
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas   Version: draft final



A.3      City case studies
The city case studies are available via the links below. These are the in-depth studies of individual
cities and are therefore targeted at professionals working on sanitation in the given city or the
country, but may be of interest to others who want to use the tools or see how they were applied.

        Cities where most or all tools were applied:

              o   Dhaka, Bangladesh

              o   Hawassa, Ethiopia

              o   Lima, Peru

        Cities where some tools were applied:

              o   Balikpapan, Indonesia

              o   Santa Cruz, Bolivia




                                                                                                               72
