This brief presents a real-life example of how a group of government decision-
makers, programme managers, researchers and development partners worked
together to improve the allocation of HIV resources in Sudan and thereby better
address the HIV objectives that the country strives to achieve.1

   The initial modelling analysis showed that by reallocating funds towards antiretroviral treatment (ART)
    and prevention programmes in Sudan, 37% of new HIV infections could be averted with the same
    amount of funding.
   The Sudanese government then applied the findings in its national HIV strategic planning process and
    Global Fund concept note, and increased allocations to ART from 12% to 18% and HIV prevention for
    key populations from 7% to 29% of all HIV funding (as per the financial gap analysis including
    budgeted national, Global Fund and other resources) while de-prioritising HIV prevention targeted at
    the general population including HIV counselling and testing, condom distribution, and behaviour
    change communications.
   These allocations combined with additional technical efficiency gains would allow for increasing ART
    coverage from 6% in 2013 to 34% in 2017, and more than double programme coverage for key
    populations.
   The reallocations in the 2015–17 HIV budget for the national response are projected to avert an
    additional 3,200 new infections and 1,100 deaths in these three years compared to initially
    planned allocations.
   The reallocations were achieved through a rigorous HIV allocative efficiency analysis and evidence-
    informed policy process, conducted by a multi-disciplinary team of national and international partners
    working for the common goal to make Sudan’s HIV response more manageable and sustainable.
   The case study discusses process and outcomes of this effort. It also offers some reflections on the
    application of mathematical modelling to strengthening decision-making of finite HIV resources, and
    some lessons learned about how to go ‘beyond modelling’ to application of modelled allocative
    efficiency improvements to improving actual budget allocations for better health outcomes.


GLOBAL BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT – Why must today’s HIV
investment decisions be evidence-informed?
Although the total global resources available for HIV in 2014 were an estimated US$ 20.2 billion2, HIV
resources are relatively tight in many low- and middle income countries (LMICs). Several factors require
countries to re-think how HIV funding should best be allocated:
       In many countries, the ART programme locks up increasingly large sums and proportions of the
        available HIV resources. HIV has become a treatable, long-term condition, which will require
        decades of investment to continue provision of antiretrovirals to a growing cohort of people living
        with HIV.
       International funding contributions to national HIV programmes have been stagnant or decreased,
        leaving some countries with underfunded components of their national strategic plans for
        HIV/AIDS. As the modalities and criteria of Global Fund (GF) support undergo change, HIV
        responses need to adapt their resource mobilisation process. The availability of domestic HIV
        funding might not necessarily improve as governments weigh up the relative health impacts of
        investment in different disease programmes and initiatives.
       The situation of HIV resources can also be compounded by population growth which, in
        selected countries, significantly affects the per capita level of HIV resources over time, especially
        when looking at HIV programmes for young people.
       In the drive to “take the services to the people” through decentralisation in order to increase
        service access and coverage across settings and plan services in response to local needs,
        national programmes can incur increased above-facility management and supply chain costs as
        well as larger facility level costs. ART costs per HIV patient have for instance been reported higher
        in small and less established treatment sites – which may in turn be classified as “less efficient”
        despite their role of providing a more convenient experience for the health care client albeit at a
        higher cost.
       Another dimension in the policy dialogue on HIV resource allocation is the international time-
        bound HIV commitments which may be very challenging to meet with available HIV resources,
        such as halving HIV incidence, eliminating mother-to-child infection, reaching universal coverage
        of voluntary medical male circumcision in 14 priority countries, and ending AIDS. As these goals
        draw on the same resources, a body of evidence is required to aid good decision-making.
In summary, there is enormous pressure on health and finance ministries and AIDS coordination
authorities to use HIV resources wisely and in an impactful manner, with the long-term sustainability of the
HIV programme in mind. Being able to demonstrate impact, cost-effectiveness and/or return of
investment has therefore become a central theme in HIV and health economic decision making.


CORE QUESTION – How can allocative efficiency modeling support
decision making?
There have been a number of models used to guide allocations to different HIV programmes and
beneficiary populations.3,4,5 Although mathematical models are not able to capture the complexity of the
real world, they nevertheless contribute to the understanding of epidemic dynamics, costs, and impact of
HIV programmes and interventions.6,7 However, it has been repeatedly observed that resource allocation
modelling has only had a limited impact on actual allocation of health resources8,9,10. Discussions around
evidence-informed policy making often highlight the need for better knowledge translation between
academia and policy-makers. They specifically identify the “disconnect” between the application of
mathematical models to generate evidence for policy-decisions, and how strategy and policy development
occurs and decisions are taken.
The GF now actively encourages countries to present in their funding requests analytical and modelling
evidence of epidemic impact of investments.11 Also, concept notes and budgets are now developed in
close collaboration between GF and requesting governments, helped by partners providing analytical
support. The U.S. President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) in turn states that their joint
planning with governments and GF is a key strategy to optimise costs.12 Their judicious application of
resource allocation models is in fact supported by numerous HIV advisory, technical and funding bodies,
including the Economic Reference Group13, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV and AIDS
(UNAIDS), World Bank, GF and PEPFAR. The shifts in how investments are planned and allocated
provide opportunities for model-derived evidence to actually come to bear in HIV allocative decision-
making.

The Optima model used herein was developed to help HIV decision-makers and planners determine
optimal distribution of HIV investments to best serve national needs and priorities. Optima is a
mathematical model of HIV transmission and disease progression, which is integrated with an economic
and financial analysis framework and a formal mathematical optimisation routine.14, 15 It is a population-
based and highly flexible tool providing an optimisation method to quantitatively and objectively determine

                                                      2
best allocations of HIV resources across numerous HIV prevention and treatment programmes. A variety
of specific policy questions have been evaluated with Optima, ranging from the costs and impacts of ART
scale-up among men who have sex with men in Bangkok,16 to the impact of increased resource allocation
to ARV-based strategies and sex work prevention programmes in Niger,17 and the cost-effectiveness of
needle-syringe programmes in Australia.18 To date, the model has been used in over 20 countries to
advise Government decision-making on HIV policy.


APPROACH IN SUDAN – Defining and changing HIV investment
priorities in partnership
In 2014, the Sudan National AIDS Programme reviewed its national strategic plan on HIV and AIDS, while
at the same time preparing a concept note for submission to the GF, the single largest funding partner of
Sudan’s HIV response. In this context the government of Sudan approached the World Bank and the
Global Fund with a request to conduct an allocative efficiency analysis to inform the prioritisation of the
national HIV response, and the GF asked the World Bank to assist in generating modelling evidence on
high-impact GF HIV investments in Sudan.
The central theme of this case study is to report on the results of both the modelling analysis and the
policy and budgeting process. The analysis involved from the outset a variety of actors from different
institutions, who worked together under the common goal of achieving better value for money in Sudan’s
HIV programme. This included the allocative choices in the upcoming GF grant request as well as the
national budget for HIV/AIDS. The aim of the analysis process was actual change in allocations, and
therefore went well beyond the provision of a study report to the client government.
Key actors from government, programme management and implementation, surveillance, donor and
development agencies, and academia, each brought their unique contribution into the partnership (fig. 1).
They jointly defined the objectives of the analysis, agreed on model parameters and input data, vetted the
preliminary model outputs, reviewed the recommendations made, and applied the findings to the allocative
choices. The process culminated in assessing the likely HIV impacts of the improved, evidence-informed
budget allocations.
Figure 1 Key actors in the partnership for Sudan’s allocative efficiency analysis
1. Federal Ministry of Health       Costing and expenditure data
                                    Context of health financing
2. Sudan National AIDS              Facilitation of efficient in-country consultation
   Control Programme                Leading data review process
                                    Technical inputs during consultations
                                    Expertise in HIV programme and surveillance data
                                    Contextual information on different programme areas
3. UNAIDS Country office            Strategic insight into HIV epidemic and response
                                    Review of draft study results
4. WHO Country office               Expertise in surveillance and programme data on HIV diagnosis, treatment
                                     and care
5. UNFPA Country office             Data and contextual insights on HIV prevention and key populations
6. UNDP Country office              HIV programme funding and management information
7. World Bank Country office        Background information on HIV and health sector response
8. Global Fund                      Critical strategic advice on study objectives and design
                                    Facilitation of information sharing
                                    Support to epidemiological data review
9. University of New South          Leading the modelling analysis
   Wales                            Model calibration
                                    Provision of model outputs and iterations
10. World Bank HIV team             Coordination and liaison
                                    Centralisation of model input data
                                    Epidemiological, programmatic and cost analysis
                                    Leading report writing




                                                       3
METHODOLOGY – Leveraging tools for state-of-the art resource allocation
analysis
The main tools employed were data synthesis and triangulation, and the application of the Optima
model. Data on the wider development and health systems context was reviewed, as well as the
available epidemic, demographic, costing and expenditures, and HIV response data to populate Optima.
Trends in HIV and health financing were established. The following objectives were defined for the
modelling analysis19: (1) Determine the optimal allocation of funds to minimise HIV incidence and/or
disability-adjusted life years (DALYs); (2) Estimate the resource requirements to achieve moderate and
ambitious NSP impact targets; and (3) Assess the optimal allocations to minimise future spending
commitments.
The model input data, model parameters and constants were reviewed in a participatory consultation with
key stakeholders. During this engagement, ten populations were defined for inclusion in the model:
Female sex workers (FSW), their clients, MSM, children and ―disaggregated by sex―youth, adults and
older people. Due to lack of data, no drug-injecting population was included in the model. Then, seven
core HIV programmes were identified for optimisation: HIV prevention for FSW, MSM, and clients of sex
workers, general population prevention, HIV testing and counselling for the general population, ART, and
Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission (PMTCT). For impact modelling, three time horisons were
chosen: 2017, 2020 and 2030. Expenditure from the National AIDS Spending Assessment (NASA) for
2013 was used as a baseline scenario (total spending USD 12.2 million, programmatic spending USD 6.4
million USD). The Optima model was then calibrated to HIV prevalence data points available from the
different populations. Cost-outcome curves were developed for the seven programmes included in the
analyses. These curves define the relationship between programme expenditure and outcomes (such
as HIV testing rate, condom use per population, or number of people on ART) and form the basis for the
optimisation analysis. The curves are associated with the technical efficiency and resulting unit costs of a
programme.
Model outputs were contextualised and reviewed with the key stakeholders, and a set of validated results
and conclusions of the allocative efficiency analysis disseminated. The GF request was then re-oriented
based on the analysis, and the Sudanese Government also re-prioritised the national HIV strategy and
budget.
As a final step, the model was re-run to determine the impact of the HIV resource shift on cumulative HIV
incidence, AIDS deaths and DALYs in the medium term (2015-2017) and in the long term (2015-2030) as
well as the changes in cost-effectiveness of the medium-term response.


INITIAL RESULTS – Understanding context, identifying changes for
better allocative efficiency and impact
The data review showed that Sudan’s HIV response has seen declining international and domestic
funding levels (fig. 2). Thanks to policies on free HIV services, the Sudanese people have overall been
protected from significant household spending for HIV (but not health in general, fig. 3).
Figure 2 Main sources of HIV financing in Sudan (2011–13)
         25,000,000

                  20,000,000
     Spend, USD




                  15,000,000

                  10,000,000

                   5,000,000

                          0
                                  2011               2012                2013
       Public USD              6,558,053          4,698,522           3,717,832
       Private USD             2,313,206          1,414,522           1,070,800
       International USD       14,477,993        12,345,112           9,052,243
Sources: Based on AIDSinfo (http://www.unaids.org/en/dataanalysis/datatools/aidsinfo/) and DSAs 2012 & 2013
Note: private sources include for profit institutions and corporations and other private sources.


                                                               4
Figure 3 Household, state and aid contributions to Sudan’s total health and HIV expenditures in USD million
(2011–13)
  100%                                                                                  1.1
    80%

    60%               39,695.0                        3,100.0                           9.1

    40%
                                                       150.0
    20%               1,000.0
                      9,430.0                         1,000.0                           3.7
     0%
             Total expenditure (2012)       Health expenditure (2012)      HIV/AIDS expenditure
                              Public domestic        External       Households    (2013)

Sources: OECD database for external aid, WHO-NHA database for health, 2013 NASA for HIV. World Development Indicators
databank for household consumption data.
Note: The total expenditure from households is based on Household final consumption expenditure and is an approximation
(http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NE.CON.PRVT.CD), in the absence of a special survey on household expenditure.

Using NASA data, the pattern of past spending was determined (fig 4, left side). Optimisation analyses
suggested that - with the same USD 6.4 million of programmatic spending as in 2013―significantly
better HIV impact could be achieved. This by allocating more HIV funding to four priority, high-impact
programmes: ART, HIV prevention among FSW, HIV prevention among men at higher risk including
clients of FSWs, and MSM20 (fig. 4, right side). It was established that such a prioritised response could
avert an additional 19,000 cumulative new HIV infection from 2014 to 2020 (37% decrease) at the 2013
resource level, and achieve important reductions in HIV-related DALYs and HIV-related fiscal commitment.
Another key finding was that targeting programmatic resources almost exclusively to key populations and
ART delivery―while de-prioritising general population programmes―appeared to have important
downstream effects on all population groups, leading to HIV incidence reductions across populations over
the medium term, at lowest cost.
Figure 4 Spending pattern in 2013 and optimised allocations to minimise new HIV infections between 2014
and 2020, at 2013 resource level of USD 12.3 million




Source: 2013 National AIDS Spending Assessment for Sudan; populated Optima model for Sudan.
Note: Prevention packages do not include ART here and ART is shown separately for all populations combined. Expenditure areas
not included in optimisation (effect on HIV incidence, morbidity/mortality not quantifiable): PLHIV involvement and support,
Management, and Strategic information.

The analysis also explored scenarios of increased availability of programmatic funding beyond the USD
6.4 million of 2013, which could be obtained through mobilising additional HIV funds or by reducing
management/ coordination costs. Optima outputs suggested that additional HIV incidence reductions
could be obtained, and such evidence of additional impact may be a way to motivate efficiency gains in
management and coordination (fig. 5). While exploring model outputs, it was also noted that:



                                                                5
Figure 5 Optimised allocations to minimise HIV incidence by 2020 at different budget levels, Sudan
(empirical, higher PMTCT unit cost)




Sources: Populated Optima model for Sudan. Prevention packages do not include ART (which is shown separately).22
Note: 50% to 90% and 110% to 190% represent optimised allocations at different levels of funding.

At likely national HIV funding levels, prevention programmes for the general population were not part
of the optimal mix of HIV investments, as their allocative efficiency is low in this highly concentrated
epidemic. Optima-derived HIV incidence was below 0.05% in the general population.
At the 2013 level of total HIV funding (USD 6.4 million), PMTCT was neither part of the optimal mix of HIV
investments (fig. 5), a finding that was attributed to the high cost per identifying one HIV positive pregnant
woman, as HIV prevalence is low in this population.23 According to additional analyses of PMTCT
programme data, 76% of the 254 PMTCT sites did not identify an HIV positive woman in 2013. This
suggested that increasing cost-effectiveness of the programme will require geographical prioritisation.
Testing of pregnant women remained a priority amongst key populations at higher risk of HIV, and should
be embedded within antenatal service provision as part of the country’s universal health coverage efforts.
 Box: Further insights – Achieving strategic impact targets rapidly
 is costly
 Since governments are often required to plan for success within a few
 years, the partners also explored the best course of action for rapid
 impact. It was also estimated that the minimum programmatic
 spending to achieve moderate impact targets of 25% reduction in
 cumulative HIV incidence and AIDS deaths in the short-term was USD
 8.1 million per year until 2016. Interestingly, the modelling results
 suggest that the cost for reaching HIV incidence targets is lower than
 cost for reaching HIV mortality targets, which require extensive
 coverage of HIV testing for find cases for ART initiation. Achievement
 of ambitious targets (50% reduction in HIV incidence and AIDS deaths
 in the medium term by 2020) would require an estimated USD 34
 million annually for programmes (over 5 times spend of USD 6.4
 million in 2013).

In order to minimise HIV-related DALYs in the population by 2020, very similar budget reallocations would
need to be made as when aiming for minimal HIV incidence. Optimal allocations would avert
approximately 29,300 additional HIV-related DALYs (23%) compared to the non-optimal 2013 allocation


                                                         6
pattern. Likewise, optimal allocations to minimise fiscal commitments up to 2050 called for very
similar allocation patterns.
This suggested that the model-proposed intervention mix was robust for achieving different important
objectives of preventing HIV transmission and minimising HIV morbidity, HIV mortality and HIV long-term
costs.
The results of the allocative efficiency analysis were published in a comprehensive report. This had been
preceded by two webinars on the preliminary results in order to get critical comments from the country-
based partners and understand reactions to the findings. These exchanges created ownership of the
process and the new evidence. The report is available on: worldbank.org


APPLICATION – Using new evidence of allocatively efficient
investment for re-orienting HIV budgets
The results of the Optima analysis were used to inform the finalisation of the national HIV strategic plan
and the concept note submitted to the GF for the period 2015–17. Figure 6 shows the actual allocations,
which were made for the 2015–17 period according to the financial gap analysis carried out as part of the
GF concept note preparation.
Figure 6 Reallocation of HIV resources in the 2015–17 budget for the HIV response




Source: 2013 National AIDS Spending Assessment for Sudan; Sudan concept note to the Global Fund 2015–17 including
national financial gap analysis tables.

As was already anticipated before the analysis, there was an overall reduction in the level of funding for
the HIV response in the 2015–17 period.24 Despite a reduction from USD 12.3 million in 2013 to USD 10.0
million USD per year on average for the 2015–2017 period, the amount available for direct high-impact
programmes increased - in line with recommendations in the allocative efficiency analysis―from
USD 6.4 million to USD 7.2 million. This was achieved by reducing the budget lines for management and
other cost. The largest increases were recorded for budgets for prevention among key populations, which
increased from 1.3 million USD to 2.9 million USD and ART, which increased from 1.5 million USD to 1.8
million.
Increasing impact despite a reduction in the total funding available, was also achieved by critically
examining management and other programme costs outside the core prevention, treatment and care
programmes. In the actual budgets presented in the CN for the 2015–17 period, cost for other
programmes were substantially reduced from US$1.25 million in 2013 to US$0.26 million on average per
year in the 2015–17 period. A large contributor to the overall reduction were reduced allocations to
income-generating projects, for which there was no clear evidence of an effect on AIDS deaths or HIV
incidence, and which are beyond the comparative advantage of HIV service organisations.
Overall management costs were also reduced from US$4.20 million to US$2.02 million. This required
reductions throughout different budget categories including project administration costs for WHO as sub-
recipient to Global Fund grants, training, HIV specific infrastructure. Through moving the focus away from
HIV specific management and infrastructure, while at the same time strengthening targeted outreach

                                                        7
capacity, this shift in costs also represents a step towards integration of HIV programming and preparing
for programme sustainability.
The optimal HIV allocation pattern suggested from the Optima model were therefore used, but other
considerations taken into account. This illustrates how resource allocation practices are under the
influence of social, rights and equity considerations that may not be considered in purely rational
models. For instance, specific HIV prevention interventions for the general population, which were not part
of mathematically optimised allocations, remain part of Sudan’s HIV budget, but with reviewed and
improved costs of delivery. This is in line with the recommendations made in the allocative efficiency
analysis report. For the PMTCT programme, this meant reduced unit cost and geographic targeting to
increase cost-effectiveness of the intervention in this highly concentrated epidemic.
Despite the reduced overall level of funding, the prioritised resource allocation is anticipated to allow for
substantial increases in coverage of Sudan’s core HIV programmes. Figure 7 summarises
programme coverage targets, which are based on the actual costing of the GF concept note. Targets are
presented both for the confirmed GF allocation and the full national programme allocations. In line with
these targets, ART coverage would increase five-fold by 2017, thereby covering over a third of all people
living with HIV, which would be a major achievement considering the low 2013 levels of ART and HTC
access. Coverage of programmes for MSM and FSW is projected to increase more than two-fold by 2017
with a focus on key locations such as urban areas and States with higher HIV prevalence such as Red
Sea and Kassala.
Figure 7 Coverage targets associated with 2015–17 budgets




Source: Sudan concept note to the Global Fund 2015-17, modular template.


IMPLICATIONS – Expected efficiency gains from revised HIV resource
allocations
Additional Optima analyses were carried out to estimate the effect of the changed allocations on new HIV
infections and deaths, as it was considered critical to understand what the impact of the actual allocations
in the 2015–17 budgets would be. For this purpose, we compared the epidemiological effects of no HIV
spending, HIV spending distributed between programmes as in 2013 (‘business as usual’) and actual
2015–17 allocations as outlined in the national financial gap analysis submitted with the GF concept note
(fig. 8).
This analysis suggests that the 2015-17 actual allocations would avert 4,500 new HIV infections over the
three years compared to no spending, which means 3,200 additional new infections averted as
compared to business as usual. Actual allocations are also projected to avert 1,900 deaths as compared
to zero spending, or an additional 1,100 deaths averted as compared to business as usual. 12,300 DALYs
would be averted compared to zero spending, an additional 7,400 DALYs averted compared to business
as usual. The improved allocations are thereby projected to avert an additional 20% of new infections,
16% of deaths and 13% of DALYs compared to business as usual.
Additional analysis was conducted on the long-term effects of the change in resource allocation (fig. 9).
For this analysis, we assumed that improved allocations would be sustained up to 2030 and compared the
epidemiological effect of such an allocation to the effect of business as usual over the same time period.



                                                        8
This analysis suggests that in the long-term, the effects of the improved resource allocation
increases further.
Figure 8 Epidemiological impacts of 2015–2017 budget allocations compared to zero spending and business
as usual over the 2015–17 time period




Source: Populated Optima model for Sudan

The 2015–17 allocations applied up to 2030 would avert 72,200 new HIV infections over the 16 years
compared to no spending, which means 49,500 additional new infections averted as compared to
business as usual.
The new allocations applied up to 2030 are also projected to avert 23,500 deaths as compared to zero
spending, or an additional 14,100 deaths averted as compared to business as usual. 212,000 DALYs
would be averted compared to zero spending, an additional 130,000 DALYs averted compared to
business as usual.
The improved allocations are thereby projected to avert by 2030 an additional 33% of new infections, 22%
of deaths and 20% of DALYs compared to business as usual.
Figure 9 Long-term epidemiological impacts of 2015–17 budget allocations compared to zero spending and
business as usual (incidence and mortality impacts from 2015 to 2030)




Source: Populated Optima model for Sudan


                                                   9
CONCLUSION – HIV resource allocation dialogues need rational basis and stakeholder
participation to make well supported decisions
This case study describes how the Government of Sudan has re-oriented the national HIV budget and the
GF support toward higher-impact investments based on allocative efficiency analysis. Conducting a joint
HIV allocative efficiency analysis was a key building block in informing the national HIV strategy and GF
concept note, and improve actual HIV resource allocations. The following section summarises aspects of
the process we found important in order to succeed.

 Box: Key factors that facilitated the translation of results into policy
 Team approach: All key players, who were needed to translate findings into policy, were involved from
 the beginning and the Sudan National AIDS Control Programme convened stakeholder meetings at
 managerial level demonstrating to all partners the government’s commitment to getting better value for
 HIV money.
 Placing model in context: The mathematical model was used as a tool supporting a broader allocative
 efficiency analysis, also, the modelling team had a good level of understanding of the environment in
 which decision-makers operate.
 Consistent follow up: Various national and international agencies were involved in a process of
 consistent follow up on sharing of findings, finalising the national strategy and developing a GF concept
 note, while exploring possibilities for cost reductions and technical efficiency gains.
 Timing tied to specific decision-making process: This analysis was done, while national strategic
 planning was ongoing and a GF concept note being developed. This made key players feel that the
 analysis is relevant and timely, which gave everybody a sense of urgency in contributing to the analysis,
 which in turn generated ownership.
 Implementability of recommendations: One key advantage of the allocative efficiency analysis
 approach was that it provided recommendations, which were immediately implementable with given
 levels of funding and could be translated into concrete action plans within the national plan and GF
 concept note.

Analytical approaches and tools can help transform national HIV strategy, and reduce subjectivity in
how resources are allocated. In the case of Sudan, better allocative decisions will help make the
national HIV responses more sustainable and manageable through increased programme coverage of
populations at high risk of acquiring or transmitting HIV, expansion of the ART programme, and selective
programme scale-up in areas of higher HIV transmission. The case study confirms the critical role of
integrated epidemic and programme analysis in maximising impact of programmes on key health
outcomes and improving the sustainability of national HIV responses.
The joint partnership process was a learning curve for all: It familiarised the stakeholders with allocative
efficiency and intervention effectiveness considerations including the importance of time horizon of impact,
demonstrated the use of Optima and its data requirements, showed the necessity to strengthen decision-
making about scarce resources, and how different strategic goals need to be weighed up. It also
highlighted that cost-effectiveness and impact are not the only criteria for allocating resources in public
health systems, and that the right to basic services and ethics are important considerations too. Some of
the principles and broader lessons can be summarised as follows:

   Engaging decision-makers at the beginning of a highly technical process―which involves cost
    estimations, assumption-making and mathematical modelling―is essential for the results and
    their significance to be understood by non-modellers, and for the findings to be regarded as the
    product of collective input and work
   Consistent message by international agencies – GF, UNAIDS and World Bank jointly fostered the
    same participatory and country-based process and communicated as “one”
   Contextualising model outputs in the wider financing and health delivery context is necessary
    for good decision-making, as is the willingness to make decisions based on evidence, even if they are
    at times going against the status quo




                                                    10
   Embarking on an allocative efficiency analysis with clear, consensual and immediately
    relevant policy questions is a key success factor for the results actually bearing HIV allocative
    consequences in plans and budgets
   Reaching out to forge a broad-based partnership between national policy-makers from the line
    ministries, programme managers, data analysts and the funding partners enables the key
    stakeholders to appropriate the outcome of the analysis and bring in their specific and changing needs
    for evidence throughout
   When all elements of the “decision-making process” are connected and evidence generated and
    shared in a timely manner, the policy impact of an analytical study can be magnified


Acknowledgements
The allocative efficiency analysis and resulting budgeting process would not have been possible without
the many contributions from stakeholders in Sudan.
The authors of this case study acknowledge in particular also: Arwa Amardi, Osama Elhassan, Mujtaba
Hassan, Ismail Hamid and Mutaz Idris (Sudan National AIDS Programme) who provided technical inputs
during consultation meetings. Nuha Hamid, Nahid Salih (WHO), Majid Elamim, Rania Hassan, Elsheik
Abdallah (UNFPA), Joseph Sherry, Sally Ahmed, Aala Mahmoud, Amira Elfadil, Suhir Eltahir (UNDP), and
Hind Hassan (UNAIDS) provided data and contextual insights in their fields of work. Nezar Al-Hadaii and
Nibretie Workneh (Global Fund) provided very useful feedback and inputs during field work. Fernando
Lavadenz and Eliana Zeballos (World Bank) provided peer review support during the analysis. Norman
Hearst and Tommy Wilkinson (members of the Allocative Efficiency and Program Effectiveness Technical
Working Group of the UNAIDS/World Bank HIV Economics Reference Group) provided peer review of the
final report.


Contact information
Clemens Benedikt:        cbenedikt@worldbank.org
Nicole Fraser-Hurt:      nfraserhurt@worldbank.org




                                                    11
Citations and notes
1
     We greatly acknowledge the contributions of various colleagues working on this case study paper including: Nicole Fraser,
     Clemens Benedikt, Emi Masaki; Mohamed Osman Hamid Mohamed (The World Bank), Robyn Stuart, Cliff Kerr, Andrew
     Shattock, Richard Gray, David P Wilson (University of New South Wales, Kirby Institute, Australia), Maxim Berdnikov,
     Jinkou Zhao, Shufang Zhang (The Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria), Hamidreza Setayesh, Hind Hassan
     (UNAIDS, Sudan Country Office), Mohamed Mustafa, Abdallrahim Tarig Abdalla, Fatima Elhassan (Federal Ministry of
     Health), Mohammed Abdelrahim Sidahmed (seconded from World Health Organization, Khartoum)
2
     UNAIDS (2015). How AIDS changed everything.
3
     LF Johnson & PJ White (2011). A review of mathematical models of HIV/AIDS interventions and their implications for
     policy. Sexually transmitted infections 2011; 87:629-634, doi:10.1136/sti.2010.045500
4
     Eaton JW, Johnson LF, Salomon JA, et al. (2012) HIV Treatment as Prevention: Systematic Comparison of Mathematical
     Models of the Potential Impact of Antiretroviral Therapy on HIV Incidence in South Africa. PLoS Med 9(7): e1001245.
     doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001245
5
     Hankins CA (2013). HIV prevention policy and programme planning: What can mathematical modelling contribute?
     Current HIV/AIDS Reports, 2013 - dare.uva.nl.
6
     Delva W, Wilson DP, Abu-Raddad L, Gorgens M,et al. (2012) HIV Treatment as Prevention: Principles of Good HIV
     Epidemiology Modelling for Public Health Decision-Making in All Modes of Prevention and Evaluation. PLoS Med 9(7):
     e1001239. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001239
7
     Hallett TB, Menzies NA, Revill P, et al. (2014). Using modeling to inform international guidelines for antiretroviral
     treatment. AIDS 2014, 28 (Suppl 1):S1–S4.
8
     SS Alistar, ML Brandeau (2012). Decision making for HIV prevention and treatment scale up bridging the gap between
     theory and practice - Medical Decision Making, 2012 Jan-Feb;32(1):105-17. doi: 10.1177/0272989X10391808.
9
     Steven Forsythe S, Stover J, Bollinger L (2009).The past, present and future of HIV, AIDS and resource allocation. BMC
     Public Health, 9( Suppl 1):S4 doi:10.1186/1471-2458-9-S1-S4
10
     Lasry A, Richter A, Lutscher F (2009). Recommendations for increasing the use of HIV/AIDS resource allocation models.
     BMC Public Health, 9(suppl 1):S8.
11
     The Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (2015). Strategic investments for HIV programs. Information note.
     http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/fundingmodel/support/infonotes/ (verified on 29 July 2015)
12
     D. Birx, PEPFAR and Finance Ministers roundtable. April 2015
13
     The HIV Economics Reference Group (ERG), co-convened by the UNAIDS Secretariat and the World Bank, is an
     advisory body that provides countries and international partners with policy and guidance for HIV investments, advances
     the research agenda in AIDS economics and seeks to harmonise research methodologies and tools.
14
     Kerr, CC, Stuart RM, Gray RT, et al. (2015). Optima: A model for HIV epidemic analysis, program prioritization, and
     resource optimization. JAIDS, 69(3), 365–376
15
     A description of the model is available on www.optimamoodel.com
16
     Zhang L, Phanuphak N, Henderson K, et al. (2015). Scaling up of HIV treatment for men who have sex with men in
     Bangkok: a modelling and costing study. Lancet HIV 2015; 2: e200–07
17
     Fraser N, Kerr CC, Harouna Z, et al. (2015). Reorienting the HIV Response in Niger Toward Sex Work Interventions:
     From Better Evidence to Targeted and Expanded Practice. J. Acquir Immune Defic. Synd.r 2015;68:S213–S220
18
     Kwon JA, Anderson J, Kerr CC, et al. (2012). Estimating the cost-effectiveness of needle-syringe programs in Australia. 2).
     AIDS 26 (17):2201-10.
19
     Sudan's HIV response: Value for money in a low level HIV epidemic: findings from the HIV allocative efficiency study
     (2014). Fraser N, Benedikt C, Obst M, Masaki E, Görgens M, Stuart R, Shattock A, Gray R, Wilson D).
     https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/21104
20
     ART (22% of all HIV funding instead of 12% as in 2013), Prevention services for FSWs (15% instead of 4%), Prevention
     services for high-risk men/SW clients (10% instead of 4%), and Prevention service for MSM (6% instead of 2%). Note that
     non-program expenditure for management and strategic information, as well as PLHIV support activities, are not
     considered in this optimal allocation analysis although they were 47% of all 2013 HIV expenditure.
22
      At low levels of spending, prevention programs for key populations were most effective in minimizing HIV incidence, but
     at levels of 2013 spending ART is part of the optimized mix. The cost-outcome relations for ART were structured in a way
     that there is initial set up and fixed cost. Therefore with low levels of funding ART cost per person reached is higher, but
     with increasing funding and coverage, the role of initial set up cost diminishes, a threshold is passed and ART becomes
     more cost-effective and absorbs substantial portions of funding.
23
     This remained unchanged with a substantially lower unit cost for PMTCT used in the 2015-2017 NSP (USD 2,666 per HIV
     positive woman receiving PMTCT services instead of USD 9,016 based on past program data). However, using the lower
     unit cost, PMTCT did enter the optimal allocation mix from 170% of the 2013 programmatic spending amount (USD 10.7
     million) and above.
24
     Under the new funding model of the Global Fund the total envelope of resources available for HIV programmes in Sudan
     had declined, as revised HIV estimates for post-secession Sudan suggested that the epidemic is more concentrated than
     previously assumed.


                                                                 12
