Fecal Sludge Management: Diagnostics
for Service Delivery in Urban Areas

Terms of Reference




Final

April 2016
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas




Preface / Acknowledgements
This document is supporting material to World Bank Economic and Sector Work on Fecal
Sludge Management: Diagnostics for Service Delivery in Urban Areas (P146128). The task
team leaders were Isabel Blackett and Peter Hawkins the task team members were Zael
Sanz Uriarte, Ravikumar Joseph, Chris Heymans and Guy Hutton.

This document is based on work conducted between January 2014 and February 2016 by
Oxford Policy Management (OPM) in partnership with the Water, Engineering and
Development Centre (WEDC) at Loughborough University. It was authored by Ian Ross
(OPM), Rebecca Scott (WEDC), Ana Mujica (OPM) and Mike Smith (WEDC). The broader
research team who contributed to the original work included Zach White, Rashid Zaman and
Simon Brook from OPM, as well as Mike Smith, Andy Cotton and Sam Kayaga from WEDC.
Andy Peal and Pippa Scott (independent consultants) also contributed to certain aspects of
the methodology.

The inputs of many other World Bank staff, consultants and data collection firms are
acknowledged with thanks from the task team. They have contributed to the research,
findings, analysis and reviews but are too numerous to mention.




    2
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas




Terms of reference for data collection, analysis and
producing outputs of diagnostic tools

This document contains a generic terms of reference (TOR) for contracting a firm to carry out
data collection, data analysis and production of the outputs of the diagnostic tools. Before
being used in any city it will need adaptation and review by the task team leader or project
manager who understands the local context. It is designed so the entire package can be
delivered by a single firm (which could sub-contract elements, if necessary). In some
situations it will be appropriate to adjust it remove tools which are not needed or to add other
tasks.

However, the Team leader or project manager may wish to consider other contracting
scenarios such as: use of individual consultants for some tasks, separation of data collection
and data analysis into two firm contracts, or carrying out some tasks in-house. The TOR is
set out in a modular structure to facilitate this process.

Therefore, relevant sections are broken into:

           Part (i) – collection of data (quantitative and qualitative)

           Part (ii) – data analysis: production of data tables and other intermediate outputs

           Part (iii) – data analysis: production of tool outputs

Notes to the commissioning agent are in square brackets.


A. PROJECT BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES

Client name
[Explain background to the agency commissioning the work]

Project name
[Explain background to the project the work is part of]


Objective of the assignment
   1. The objective of this assignment is to collect quantitative and qualitative data on Fecal
        Sludge Management in [city], and conduct analysis to produce outputs of diagnostic and
        decision-support tools. The consultant firm will manage all aspects of
    (i)         collection of data (quantitative and qualitative),
    (ii)        data analysis: production of data tables and other intermediary outputs,
    (iii)       data analysis: production of tool output. [state roles of other contractors if relevant]




    3
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas




B. SCOPE OF WORK
Part (i) – data collection
The scope of work includes, but is not limited to:
A. Household survey
    2. Obtain the list of all the primary sampling units (PSU) in the city, ideally census enumeration
       areas, from the national statistics office or the census authority. The consultant company will
       finalize the sampling frame and draw the sampled PSUs from that, in consultation with the
       client.
         [The sampling frame is important as it affects what conclusions can be drawn from the data.
         In some contexts a city-wide sample will be appropriate but in situations where only a small
         proportion of households use non-networked sanitation, it may be more appropriate to focus
         sampling on those areas.]
    3. Obtain written letter of approval for the survey from the relevant authority (e.g. national
       statistics office, Ministry of Water).
    4. Review the generic questionnaire (see Data Collection Instruments), and adapt it to the local
       context, in close collaboration with the client. Key areas which may require adaptation
       include: types of sanitation facilities used, types of sewerage and drainage systems, housing
       types and tenure arrangements, land ownership, shared/private toilet arrangements, etc.
         [the questionnaire should primarily be focused on the key information required to populate
         the tools. Other areas may be of interest but should be a secondary concern]
    5. Translate the draft (if necessary), revise data collection instruments into the local language –
       numbers and length of instruments are indicated in section C below. Paper data collection
       may be used, but use of personal digital assistants (PDAs) or mobile phones is strongly
       recommended and will make the data collection and analysis more straightforward.
    6. Pretest the survey instruments in a slum or poor community and provide detailed comments
       on the use of the instruments and quality of data collected, with suggested changes, to be
       agreed in writing with the client.
    7. Arrange recruitment of enumerators of the required level of education (see section E below),
       and organize a schedule of training for them, to ensure they will fully understand the
       questions and be able to explain them clearly.
    8. Pilot the revised instruments with the trained enumerators in an urban slum community
       outside the sampled PSUs.
    9. Manage all the fieldwork, including transport, communications, meal allowances, quality
       assurance and other logistics for the field workers.
    10. Develop a data entry programme in commonly-used software (e.g. CSPro), carry out double
        data entry, and initial cleaning of the data (if using paper data collection).
B. Other quantitative instruments
    11. For the other quantitative instruments, carry out the same activities as for the household
        survey above, including: (i) adaptation to local context (ii) review, finalise and translate the
        data collection instruments and pre-test them, (iii) recruit and train enumerators, and pilot
        the instruments with them, (iv) manage fieldwork and data entry. This should be done using
        the observation protocol, transect walk protocol and fecal sludge sample testing protocol.




    4
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas




         Numbers of samples in each case are given below.
    12. The observation protocol requires a sanitation specialist to make [X] observations and
        document aspects of different FSM activities (including physical activities, practices and
        associated risks) the sanitation chain (from household containment through to end-use or
        disposal of fecal sludge).
    13. The transect walk protocol requires a sanitation specialist to conduct [Y] transect walks
        through sampled PSUs together with community members who can identify relevant
        features of the environment.
    14. The fecal sludge sample testing protocol requires the collection of [Z] samples of fecal sludge
        at three stages of the sanitation chain (collection, pre-treatment (at disposal/discharge
        point) and post-treatment), and to submit these for testing at an agreed laboratory.
C. Qualitative instruments
    15. For the focus group discussions, the consultant should carry out the same activities as for the
        household survey above, including: (i) review, finalise and translate the data collection
        instruments and pre-test them, (ii) recruit and train enumerators, and pilot the instruments
        with them, (iii) manage fieldwork and data entry. This should be done using the focus group
        discussion guide.
    16. The focus group discussion (FGD) guide requires a qualitative research specialist to gather a
        group of community members from the PSU and conduct a discussion.
    17. For the key informant interviews (KIIs), the consultant should undertake a stakeholder
        mapping in collaboration with the client and in accordance with guidance (see Annex A).
    18. Arrange and conduct KIIs with individuals selected in consultation with the client, and write
        up a transcript of discussions in English. Interviewees may include interviews with
        governments, service providers, urban planning agencies, with a total of 40-50 interviews of
        around 1 hour.
    19. During and after the KIIs, collect all relevant documents and other secondary data referred to
        by interviewees, e.g. policy documents, financing frameworks, business plans etc.
D. General
    20. As noted above, the consultant firm is responsible for the following activities with regard to
        all instruments: sampling, finalization and translation of instruments, pretesting, recruitment
        and training of staff, piloting, fieldwork management, data entry, data cleaning, transcribing
        and documenting findings.
    21. The consultant firm will provide the equipment and supplies necessary to conduct the safe
        and effective completion of all activities, including but not limited to: GPS units, PDAs,
        stationery, equipment for fecal sludge sample collection, procurement of laboratory facilities
        for testing samples and providing reliable and validated results, computers and software for
        data entry.
    22. The client will provide all draft data collection instruments in English [or other language
        specified by the client], along with protocols describing how they are to be used. The
        consultant firm will input into draft instruments and then collect the data using those
        instruments, according to the sampling approach specified in the agreed final protocol. The
        sample size for each instrument is specified in the paragraphs below.
    23. Sample sizes for each instrument are listed below. They may be subject to change for any




    5
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas




         instruments listed below. The consultant should make average unit costs clear in their
         financial proposal, for ease of comparison when scaling up or down.
         [the sampling frame, and sample sizes for each instrument, should be debated by the
         commissioning agency before launching a request for expressions of interest. For the
         household survey, a specific sample size calculation for the city will be required, depending on
         the objectives of the study and the level of representativeness required]
        Household survey questionnaire
             o Interviews with 720 households
             o Sample made up of 12 households from each of the 60 primary sampling units
                 (PSUs)
                       o Group 1 – 30 PSUs to be randomly sampled from across the whole city
                       o Group 2 – 30 PSUs to be sampled purposively from selected slums, low-
                           income or informal settlements
             o Estimated 45 minutes per questionnaire
        Observation protocol
             o Fully recorded observations at 5 different locations, at all stages of the sanitation
                 chain, giving at least 15 written observation recordings in total, i.e. at (i)
                 household/building containment, (ii) collection through to disposal point, (iii)
                 treatment. The chosen observations should be reflective of the existing fecal sludge
                 management practice and will reflect both manual and mechanical emptying
                 methods. Manual emptying observations may need to be done at night.
             o Estimated 30 minutes per recording, using a sanitary survey format.
        Sample testing
             o Collection of fecal sludge samples from 5 different locations at 3 stages of the
                 sanitation chain, giving 15 samples in total. The stages are (i) before removal from
                 pit/tank (at a time when emptying has been requested), (ii) at the truck/ vessel
                 outflow (tipping point or treatment plant), (iii) after treatment
             o Testing of all 15 samples for the following parameters in an agreed laboratory
                       COD (Chemical Oxygen demand)
                       BOD (Biological Oxygen Demand)
                       NH4 – Nitrogen (free and saline ammonia)
                       Total Nitrogen
                       Total Phosphorus
                       TS (Total solids)
                       TVS (Total volatile solids)
                       SS (Suspended solids)
                       Helminth eggs (viable)
                       E.coli
                       Calorific value
             o Testing protocols for each test must be accepted in writing by the client before
                 being undertaken.
        Transect walk protocol
             o 40 transect walks, 30 in sub-sample A, 10 in sub-sample B
             o Estimated 45 minutes per transect walk
        Focus Group Discussions (FGDs)
             o 10 FGDs with householders from 10 PSUs. The types of respondents to be selected
                 for these group discussions are indicated in the Annex.
             o The FGD topic guide and questions to be asked are to be agreed with the client in




    6
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas




                 advance, and discussions are to be recorded, transcribed and translated into English
             o Each FGD to last approximately 1 hour
        Key informant interviews (KIIs)
             o Interviewees may include interviews with governments, service providers, urban
                 planning agencies, with a total of 40-50 interviews of around 1 hour.
             o The KII guide and associated questions to be asked are to be agreed with the client
                 in advance.

Part (ii) – data analysis: production of data tables and other intermediary outputs
The scope of work includes, but is not limited to:
E. Household survey
    24. Transfer the data into a well-known statistical package (eg. Stata, SPSS) and carry out
        detailed data cleaning processes included additional checks as recommended by the client
    25. Analyse the data to produce all tabulations and cross-tabulations requested by the client,
        using sampling weights if necessary.
    26. Obtain written comments from the client and undertake additional analysis as requested.
F. Other quantitative instruments
    27. Compile the data from the rest of the quantitative instruments (e.g. observations, transect
        walk protocols, fecal sludge sample testing) and present in a consistent format in Microsoft
        Excel spreadsheets (to be agreed with the client in advance).
    28. Obtain written comments from the client and incorporate.
G. Qualitative instruments
    29. Produce transcripts of FGDs in the agreed language, to be shared with the client.
    30. Based on the transcripts, develop a short FGD report (around 20pp) summarising findings. It
        should arrange findings along key topic areas, based on a table of contents to be agreed with
        the client before data collection commences. Obtain written comments from the client and
        incorporate.
    31. Compile notes from KIIs in a consistent format such that they can be navigated if the client
        wishes to look into detail for a particular interview. Notify the client of any significant
        research questions which remain unanswered.

Part (iii) – data analysis: production of tool outputs
The scope of work includes, but is not limited to:
    32. Prepare draft Fecal Waste Flow Diagrams (city-wide and low-income areas) based on the
        analysed household data tables and secondary data (e.g. expert opinion on rates and
        frequency of pit/tank emptying, levels of transportation by tankers to disposal or treatment
        site, leakage from sewers, treatment plant efficiency). The methodology should be in line
        with the Tools and Guidelines referenced in Annex A below.
    33. Prepare a draft City Service Delivery Assessment (CSDA) for the city, based on information
        from key informant interviews as well as key secondary literature and documents. The
        methodology should be in line with the Tools and Guidelines referenced in Annex A below.
    34. Prepare a draft public health risk analysis, based on information from transect walks and key



    7
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas




           informant interviews. The methodology should be in line with the Tools and Guidelines
           referenced in Annex A below.
    35. Prepare a draft fecal sludge reuse analysis, based on results of the tests of fecal sludge (i)
        physical characteristics, and (ii) chemical/biological characteristics, as well as key informant
        interviews.
    36. Prepare a draft prognosis for change assessment (political economy analysis) for FSM
        services in the city, based on all the analysis above and findings from FGDs and KIIs.
    37. Draft a single coherent report for the city, including all of the above, based on a table of
        contents agreed in advance with the client.
    38. Obtain written comments on the report from the client and other selected stakeholders
        identified by the client, and incorporate.
    39. Present findings at a workshop with sector stakeholders in the city to validate them, and
        hold separate side-meetings to test and update the prognosis for change


C. DELIVERABLES EXPECTED FROM CONSULTANT

[The times quoted should be sufficient in nearly all circumstances, and in smaller cities under ideal
conditions (free-flowing traffic etc.) it may be possible to reduce the overall time to about 18 weeks.
Judgement should therefore be exercised in setting the time targets]

Part (i)
           Deliverables                                                                    Weeks from
                                                                                        start/delivery date
           Inception report, including updated work plan and                                     3
           methodology
           Adaptations for local context and translated instruments and                         6
           report on pretesting
           Weekly fieldwork progress reports                                                    9

           Field work manager’s report                                                          12

           Transcripts of focus group discussions in English                                    14

           Delivery of clean datasets                                                           16


Part (ii)
        Deliverables                                                                       Weeks from
                                                                                        start/delivery date
           Analysed data tables and associated analysis code (e.g. Stata                        21
           .do files)
           Data from the rest of the quantitative instruments (e.g.                             22
           observations, transect walk protocols, fecal sludge sample
           testing) in Microsoft Excel format
           FGD report and transcripts                                                           22




    8
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas




Part (iii)
         Deliverables                                                                      Weeks from
                                                                                        start/delivery date
           Draft synthesis report                                                               23

           Client Consultations workshops                                                       25

           Final synthesis report                                                               26

D. SPECIFIC INPUTS TO BE PRESENTED BY THE CLIENT

The client will:
     Provide overall leadership and be the primary point of contact for the consultant company
     Provide technical and managerial inputs on a regular basis.
     Share any relevant background material

E. SPECIAL TERMS & CONDITIONS / SPECIFIC CRITERIA

Timing/Assignment Duration
The contract will start in month, year and final outputs submitted by month, year, or as agreed.

Reporting
The Consultant will report to client name

Payment Schedule
Payments will be lump sum based on acceptance by the client of the following:

[The breakdown of costs between the three modules will be quite situation-specific, so is left to the
judgement of the contracting entity]

Part (i)

  Stage                                Output                                                        Payment

 Inception                             Inception report, including updated work plan 20%
                                       and methodology
 Inception                             Adapted and translated instruments and report 10%
                                       on Pretesting, client consultation,
 Fieldwork                             Brief weekly fieldwork progress reports       5%

 Fieldwork                             Fieldwork manager’s report                                    20%

 Data entry                            Transcripts of focus group discussions in English             20%

 Data entry                            Clean datasets                                                25%

 Total                                                                                               100%




    9
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas




Part (ii)

  Stage                                 Output                                                  Payment

 Data analysis                          Analysed data tables and associated analysis code 40%
                                        (e.g. Stata .do files)

 Data analysis                          Data from        the    rest    of   the    quantitative 30%
                                        instruments

 Data analysis                          FGD report and transcripts                              30%

 Total                                                                                          100%


Part (iii)

  Stage                                Output                                                 Payment

 Report writing                        Draft synthesis report                                 50%

 Client consultation                   Workshop summaries                                     20%

 Report writing                        Final synthesis report                                 30%

 Total                                                                                        100%


Required Qualifications and Experience of the consultant company
The consultant company and key staff must have
     At least 10 years of experience in conducting household surveys from design to clean dataset
       delivery stages.
     At least 5 years of data collection and survey experience in urban areas.
     Experience in researching urban sanitation, especially in onsite services and /or fecal sludge
       management
     Experience in conducting focus group discussions
     Experience in taking and testing of samples
     Experience in conducting key informant interviews
     Deep knowledge of the water and sanitation institutional setting in the country;
     Excellent data analysis, writing and communication skills.


Required Qualifications and Experience of field team members

 Position                         Minimum academic              Minimum years of        Minimum number of
                                  qualification                    experience             similar surveys
 Field Manager                    Post graduate                     10 years                     5




     10
Summary Report – Diagnostic Tools for Fecal Sludge Management Services in Urban Areas




 Qualitative specialist           Post graduate                       8 years           2
 Quality Control Officer          Graduate                            8 years           3
 Supervisor                       Graduate                            5 years           2
 Enumerator                       High school                         2 years           1
 Data Entry Programmer            Post graduate                       10 years          5
 Data Entry Supervisor            Graduate                            5 years           3
 Data Entry Operators             High school                         2 years           2
 Data Editors                     High school                         5 years           2


Annex A – Essential background documents
        Summary report
        Tools and Guidelines
        Data collection Instruments
[if the documents themselves are not provided or are amended, the annex should contain the
protocols for the instruments to be used and any associated guidance, to allow more accurate costing
of activities]




    11
