                           LATIN AMERICAN PROGRAM




                           LATIN AMERICAN PROGRAM




                            LATIN AMERICAN PROGRAM




Natural Resource
Governance in Latin
America and the Caribbean
Social and Environmental
Policies for Inclusive Growth
High-Level Dialogue, Wilson Center, 	                June 2016
Washington, DC, Meeting Report
                        LATIN AMERICAN PROGRAM




                        LATIN AMERICAN PROGRAM




                         LATIN AMERICAN PROGRAM




Natural Resource
Governance in Latin
America and the
Caribbean
Social and Environmental Policies
for Inclusive Growth
High-Level Dialogue, Wilson Center, 	             June 2016
Washington, DC, Meeting Report
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank and the Woodrow Wilson International
Center for Scholars with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Execu-
tive Directors, or the governments they represent, or those of the Woodrow Wilson International
Center for Scholars.

The World Bank and the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars do not guarantee
the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World
Bank or the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars concerning the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Cover photo credit: Andes mountain range, Bolivia, 2012
Video still: Stephan Bachenheimer/World Bank




Acknowledgments
This report is based on the event, “Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Carib-
bean: Social and Environmental Policies for Inclusive Growth,” co-hosted by the Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars and the World Bank on March 3, 2016.

Both the event and the report were prepared under the oversight and strategic guidance of Cynthia
Arnson and Karin Kemper. Augusto de la Torre played a critical role in the conceptual genesis of
the event and in setting the context for the day’s discussion, and provided generous support with-
out which the event and this report would not have been possible. We also thank Daniel Lederman
for his motivating role and important contributions during the initial discussions on the event’s
conceptualization.

The report was written by Patricia Vásquez and benefited from the comments and input of several
event participants, whose biographies can be found in Appendix A. Advice and input from Alejan-
dra Viveros, Mauro Azeredo, and Carlos Molina from the LAC World Bank Communications team
are gratefully acknowledged.

We are also grateful to Verónica Colón-Rosario, who coordinated the report’s editorial process and,
with Kevin McCall, oversaw organization of the event. Karina Peña, Natasha Waller, and Jacque-
line Larrabure Rivero provided valuable support to event planning, while John Dawson and Daniel
Balke contributed editorial assistance for the report.
Contents
Foreword	iv
1. Summary	1
2. The Commodity Super Cycle	2
3. A New Governance Paradigm	6
4. Transparency: A Key Element of Good Governance	8
5. Conclusion	13
Appendix A. Biographies of Participants	14
Appendix B. Conference Schedule	19
Appendix C. Additional Material from Participants	21


Figure List
Figure 1. Economies: Share of Commodities Experiencing a Boom	2
Figure 2. South America: Terms of Trade and Commodity Prices	3
Figure 3. South America: Domestic Demand and Terms of Trade	4
          ECLAC Proposal for Latin American Natural Resource
Figure 4. 
          Governance Structure	6
Figure 5. Human Rights-Based Model of Extractive Industry	10




                                                             iii
Foreword
Natural resource wealth has long played a central role in the fortunes and development of Latin
American and Caribbean economies. During much of the 2000s, high prices of the region’s key com-
modity exports drove unprecedented economic growth, poverty reduction, and declines in income
inequality. In 2011, for the first time in the region’s history, more people lived in the Latin American
and Caribbean middle class than in poverty. However, a slowdown in emerging markets, principally
China, that are major consumers of Latin American commodities triggered a sharp deceleration in
regional growth in 2012, one that has now persisted into its fifth year. Indeed, the regional economy
contracted in 2015 and is expected to do so again in 2016, as demand for and prices of regional
commodity exports remain subdued.

Against this backdrop, effective natural resource governance has taken on new importance. Maxi-
mizing both the economic and social benefits of Latin America’s extractive industries proved chal-
lenging for regional policy makers even when commodity prices were high. Now, falling revenue has
forced governments to undertake fiscal adjustments and curtail public spending, adding to the dif-
ficulty of sharing resource gains in a socially equitable manner. Moreover, the rising tide of climate
change—which is already having damaging effects across much of the region—has made clear the
need to embed environmental sustainability in all areas of public and private activity, including the
extractive industry. In today’s “new normal” of sluggish growth, Latin America will need to rethink
the paradigm for resource-led growth and governance and improve its approach to benefit sharing.

It was in light of the region’s changing economic dynamics that the Wilson Center and the World
Bank convened a day-long discussion on “Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the
Caribbean: Social and Environmental Policies for Inclusive Growth,” the proceedings of which are
summarized in this report. Leaders from government, academia, think tanks, multilateral institu-
tions, civil society, and the private sector focused on how, within the current environment of fis-
cal constraint, governments in the region can better channel their resource wealth into gains for
the poor and vulnerable, while bringing benefits to local communities and protecting the natural
environment. Panelists were unified in their view that a new paradigm for regional resource gover-
nance needs to include wider participation from and enhanced dialogue among local communities,
companies, and public officials at the local and national levels. Such a new approach should also
enhance the capacity of governments at the federal and local levels to reduce the fiscal effects of
commodity price volatility, share the gains of resource wealth in a more equitable manner, improve
transparency, and channel public revenue into productive, non-extractive investment that reduces
the region’s dependence on commodity exports over time.

In the sweep of Latin America’s economic history, natural resources have had both positive and
deleterious impacts. Going forward, the region needs to engage in new thinking over how to limit
the impact of commodity price downturns, better capitalize on the upswings, and minimize the
social and environmental conflicts that natural resource extraction all too frequently signifies. Shap-
ing such a paradigm will take time and the commitment of multiple stakeholders to constructive
engagement. However, we hope that the observations contained in this report serve to guide future
discussions on how to use natural resource abundance as a source of inclusive, sustainable economic
growth and poverty reduction across the region.

Cynthia Arnson 	                         Karin Kemper
Director 	                               Senior Regional Adviser
Latin American Program	                  Latin America and the Caribbean Region
Woodrow Wilson International 	           The World Bank
Center for Scholars

iv
1. Introduction
Economic growth has slowed dramatically in Latin America since mid-2011. This stands in marked
contrast to the previous decade, when countries in the region saw the largest sustained growth rates
in their history. The main drivers of this boom and bust cycle are commodity price volatility and
fluctuations in international demand for Latin America’s natural resource products. The growth
fluctuations of recent years reflect Latin America’s strong dependence on the price of commodities,
mainly extractive industry products, such as metals and crude oil. Once again, Latin America’s
economic prospects hinge largely on its extractive industry abundance and variations in external
factors, particularly the price of commodities, demand from China, and shrinking investment flows.

Within the current macroeconomic context of low commodity prices, Latin American countries face
the challenge—and opportunity—to adopt a new natural resource governance model that maxi-
mizes development benefits while respecting transparency and social and environmental sustain-
ability. A new governance paradigm for Latin America’s extractive sector should be based on ample
stakeholder participation—including local and federal governments, companies, local communities,
and society as a whole—and deep institutional reform, both at the central and subnational govern-
ment levels.

With this challenge in mind, the Wilson Center and the World Bank brought together several
stakeholders from the region to discuss tools available for central and subnational governments to
capitalize on their natural resource endowments while ensuring social equity and environmental
protection. The debate took the form of a high-level dialogue on “Natural Resource Governance in
Latin America and the Caribbean: Social and Environmental Policies for Inclusive Growth,” which
took place on March 3, 2016, at the Wilson Center, in Washington, DC. The following is a summary
of the main issues discussed during the high-level dialogue. A complete list of participants and the
schedule of the event are included in Appendices A and B, and a video of the conference along with
the complete PowerPoint presentations of the participants can be found at http://bit.ly/1RYW2nq.




                                                                                                   1
          2. The Commodity Super Cycle
          The golden decade of commodity prices that ended in 2011 brought unprecedented economic growth
          to Latin America. During those years, more than 70 million people in the region emerged from pov-
          erty, and the middle class expanded to nearly 40 percent of the population. Latin America had never
          enjoyed such a prolonged period of high commodity prices. In the past, the region always expe-
          rienced a mixed commodity performance dur-
          ing upward cycles, with some prices increasing
          while others did not. What is most remarkable


                                                                                                                                                                        W
          about the recent commodities super cycle is that                hat is most remarkable about
          the price of every single commodity that is rel-
                        …and the most “comprehensive” in recorded recent
          evant for Latin America went up, said Augusto
          de la Torre, Chief Economist for Latin America
                                                                          the recent commodities super
                                                                  cycle is that the price of every single
                        history for the region…
          and the Caribbean at the World Bank. The fol-
          lowing chart shows the historic performance of
                                                                  commodity that is relevant for Latin
          Latin America’s commodity index, which moni-            America went up.
          tors the 16 most important commodities for the
          region.

                                                                      
          Figure 1: Economies: Share of Commodities Experiencing a Boom
                                                               100                         LAC-7 commodity index in boom
                                                                                           LAC-7 commodity index in bust
                             share LAC commodities in boom %




                                                                80


                                                                60


                                                                40


                                                                20


                                                                0
                                                                     Jan-62
                                                                              May-64
                                                                                       Sep-66
                                                                                                Jan-69
                                                                                                         May-71
                                                                                                                  Sep-73
                                                                                                                           Jan-76
                                                                                                                                    May-78
                                                                                                                                             Sep-80
                                                                                                                                                      Jan-83
                                                                                                                                                               May-85
                                                                                                                                                                        Sep-87
                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan-90
                                                                                                                                                                                          May-92
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sep-94
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     May-99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sep-01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                May-06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sep-08




          Source: PowerPoint presentation of Augusto de la Torre, based on Natural Resources in Latin America and the
                 Beyond
         Caribbean:
                      Booms
                              and   Busts,
                                                 World  Bank,
                                                                        2010.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1

          Commodity prices have a direct effect on the region’s terms of trade. The golden decade proved
          particularly beneficial for South American countries, where significant improvement in terms of
          trade resulted in increased government revenues and higher aggregate domestic demand. Demand
          expanded less in Central America, the Caribbean, and Mexico, where the terms of trade effect was




          2
                   …as well as the evolution of the terms of trade,
                                                      Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean | 3

                   especially
           less pronounced.                graph showsAmerica
                                      in South
                            The following
           commodity price fluctuations in recent years.
                                                         how South America’s terms of trade have “chased”




                         
           Figure 2: South                                    
                           America: Terms of Trade and Commodity Prices
                                                     




           Notes: South America includes Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and Peru.
   PowerPoint
            Source:                  
                                          of
                                   presentation           Augustode
                                                                      based
                                                                       la Torre,     
                                                                                          on
                                                                                             IMS and 
                                                                                                         national sources.   2

           The remainder of this report will focus on South American countries. There, the recent period of
           sustained high commodity prices drove strong economic growth and helped reduce the poverty rate
           to 25 percent in 2012 from 42 percent in 2000. High commodity prices also saw the number of
           people living in the middle class surpass the number of those living in poverty for the first time in
           history. The rise of the South American middle class has had important social implications, with
           those emerging into this economic status demanding better-quality education and health care ser-
           vices, as well as improved security, transportation, and other public services.

           Sustained improvement in the terms of trade significantly increased Latin Americans’ purchasing
           power: even without increasing export quantities, those in the region could buy more imports.
           De la Torre gave the example of Ecuador, an oil producer. Even as the country’s crude production
           remained flat or falling, the high price of oil enabled it to feel richer without increasing the volume
           of oil exports.
           r a l R e s o u r c e G o v e r n a n c e i n L a t i n A m e r i c a a n d t h
4 | N a t u                                                e Caribbean
                                                                        
Figure 3: South America: Domestic Demand and Terms of Trade




Notes: The panel on the left shows the simple averages of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Peru and
Uruguay.
Source:    PowerPoint
                  presentation
                                   of Augusto
                                      de  la Torre,
                                                                               based
                                                                                         on
                                                                                             WDI 
                                                                                                     and national
                                                                                                                            sources.
                                                                                                                         3

The expansion in aggregate domestic demand was pro-poor and progressive in terms of income
distribution. Its effects worked via the labor market, with the wages of unskilled workers increasing
more than those of skilled workers during the commodity super cycle.

In addition, high commodity prices resulted in
large inflows of foreign direct investment to
South America, particularly concentrated in
natural resource sectors. Jorge Familiar, World
Bank Vice President for Latin America and the
                                                                                W
                                                               hile the positive effects of the
                                                               golden decade were welcome,
                                                        they masked a major weakness,
Caribbean, explained that during the commod-
ity super cycle Latin America received 27 per-          unique to Latin America: a strong
cent of global spending on natural resource
                                                        dependence on commodity price
exploration. In Colombia, for example, the
share of public revenues generated by mining            fluctuations.
doubled from 12 percent to 25 percent between
2009 and 2012, while in Peru investment grew
from US$109 million in 2003 to US$3.5 billion
in 2013. While these positive effects were welcome, they masked a major weakness that is unique to
Latin America: a strong dependence on commodity price fluctuations.

Now that commodity prices are much lower and the region has entered its fifth consecutive year
of economic deceleration, Latin American countries have returned to the traditionally low growth
rates they typically experience in the absence of external tail winds: around 2.5 percent to 3 percent.
At those growth rates, countries will find it challenging to sustain the generous spending and pro-
poor growth that characterized the cyclical upswing. After witnessing a period of unprecedented
prosperity, with reduced poverty and inequality and a growing middle class, Latin America faces a
new macroeconomic equilibrium characterized by lower spending and slower growth. Within this
context, policy makers will confront added pressure to meet the expectations of citizens that rose
during the boom.
                                 Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean | 5

South America’s strong dependence on commodity price cycles has historically placed the region
in a vulnerable position. This is especially true given the region’s poor discipline for saving during
the up-cycle, although Bolivia, Chile, and Peru were important counterexamples this time around.
During the recent golden decade of commodity prices, most South American countries used wind-
fall revenues to finance higher levels of spending, including both consumption and investment.
However, they failed to use increased revenues to more forcibly address chronic deficits in infra-
structure, education quality, health, pensions, technology, and environmental sustainability. While
macroeconomic management improved overall, the insufficient strengthening of the region’s long-
term growth fundamentals means it remains vulnerable to the impacts of the current down-cycle of
commodity prices.
3. A New Governance Paradigm
Now that Latin America has entered a period of less abundance, it is an important moment to draw
lessons from the boom years and debate a more efficient model of natural resource governance that
would better shield the region from commodity price volatility in the future. Manlio Coviello, Chief
at the Natural Resources and Energy Unit of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC), explained that his organization has been working on a model governance plat-
form for the region, based on strengthening the ability of governments to produce more efficiently
and stabilize public spending in order to soften the impact of commodity price volatility.

ECLAC’s new governance model is designed around four pillars: long-term policies based on pro-
ductive diversification and social inclusion; updating regressive tax systems to allow for a more
equitable sharing of revenues; adopting stabilization mechanisms for natural resource rents; and
strengthening government capacity to effectively manage natural resource-related conflicts. The
expectation is that countries in the region will adopt a common vision of effective governance that
would address ongoing weaknesses, and then work to achieve that goal together. A new regional
natural resource governance office will be created to centralize the debate around a Latin American
vision of sustainable and effective extractive industry management, based on social inclusion and
environmental protection. The following chart shows the structure of the natural resource gover-
nance model proposal by ECLAC.


Figure 4: ECLAC Proposal for Latin American Natural Resource Governance Structure




Source: PowerPoint presentation of Manlio Coviello.

6
                                Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean | 7

The debate about an effective natural resource governance model for Latin America should include
a review of the relationship between national and subnational governments, in particular les-
sons learned from decentralization processes in Latin American countries. It should also highlight
the importance of the local context when designing natural resource management policies. Dan-
iel Kaufmann, President of the Natural Resource Governance Institute, suggested that the debate
agenda of a new extractive industry governance model for Latin America should focus on issues
such as the reduction of energy subsidies; the strengthening of tax compliance and the broadening
of the tax base; more effective revenue sharing and expenditure at the subnational level of govern-
ment; the reform of inefficient state-owned companies; the adoption of well-managed stabilization
or wealth funds; and programs to address corruption.
4. Transparency: A Key Element of Good Governance
All participants agreed that transparency is a
key element of good natural resource gover-

                                                            T
nance, and that it should be applied broadly—                  ransparency is a key element
not just with regard to revenue management,                    of good natural resource
but throughout the entire value chain. In par-
ticular, transparency should be complemented               governance, and should be applied
with effective accountability. The extractive              broadly, not just with regard to
industry today is characterized by a lack of
                                                           revenue management.
transparency. Contracts are usually not made
public, while communities and local authorities
in some cases do not receive adequate or timely
information about plans for developing extrac-
tive projects in their territories and jurisdictions. Kaufmann warned against “zombie transparency”:
when transparency efforts are not supported with tools for holding authorities accountable or by a
strong rule of law. The quality of governance in some Latin American countries trails behind many
other middle-income economies around the world, in particular with regard to voice and account-
ability, government effectiveness, rule of law, and control of corruption, as measured by the World-
wide Governance Indicators.

Anthony Bebbington, Milton P. and Alice C. Higgins Professor of Environment and Society and
Director of the Graduate School of Geography at Clark University, emphasized five elements per-
taining to transparency around natural resource development. First, transparency should be applied
beyond revenues and expenditures. It should permeate the process of granting licenses, the design
of the natural resource project, and the social and environmental performance of extractive opera-
tions. Second, relationships surrounding extractive industry investments are characterized by acutely
asymmetrical relationships in which communities and civil society (and sometimes government, as
well) are at a great disadvantage. Looking forward, it is necessary to enhance the analytical capac-
ity of stakeholders so they can gain access to, interpret, and also contribute basic data necessary
to ensure transparency. Companies have far greater ability to generate data because they have the
financial and human resources to collect it. This, however, reflects the asymmetries surrounding
extractive industry governance and also raises questions about the credibility of the information
gathered. Important advances in the ability to generate such data have emerged over the years, as
exemplified by the Grupo Propuesta Ciudadana in Peru.

Third, if political obstacles to transparency are not properly identified and addressed, they could
hinder efforts to ensure more openness in the extractive industry. Fourth, transparency mecha-
nisms can be fragile and gains can easily be reversed. For that reason, different actors need to con-
stantly demand the existence and implementation of arrangements that ensure transparency. This
makes the second point (building capacities for transparency) all the more important. Lastly, when
demands for transparency take the form of conflict, it is important to build the capacities to trans-
form such conflict into specific proposals for institutional innovations that increase transparency.
If those capacities are not present, there is a risk of falling into a vicious cycle of escalating conflict,
criminalization, and repression. The Peruvian Ombudsman (Defensoría del Pueblo) represents one
of the best examples in Latin America of how to build capacity to transform conflict into proposals.

As Kaufmann said: “Transparency of payments is a train that has departed.” Proof of that are the
various international schemes aimed at improving transparency, such as the voluntary Extractive

8
                                 Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean | 9

Industries Transparency Initiative, as well as individual country initiatives towards mandatory legal
requirements for companies to publish what they pay, such as the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform
and Consumer Protection Act in the United States. However, much work still needs to be done to
ensure that transparency in the extractive industry is applied more comprehensively, throughout the
entire chain of production and beyond revenue management.

Particularly important for solidifying transpar-
ency in the extractive industry is to build trust

                                                       P
among all stakeholders involved. With that in             articularly important for
mind, various country-level approaches have
                                                          solidifying transparency in the
been initiated to establish permanent dialogue
platforms with the participation of all stake-        extractive industry is to build trust
holders. The goal of such dialogue initiatives is     among all stakeholders involved.
to communicate more effectively the costs and
benefits of extractive industry projects and their
positive and negative impacts. An effective dia-
logue is one that begins with in-depth knowl-
edge of the social and environmental context where the extractive project is taking place. Among
other things, according to Bebbington, this means developing a good understanding of how the
extractive project has transformed the expectations of local communities, altered their outlook
of development, and changed local political incentives, even prior to the generation of revenues
in producing regions. Understanding these facts early on is fundamental to achieving a successful
dialogue.

Examples of dialogue initiatives include the Grupo de Diálogo Latinoamericano (Latin American
Dialogue Group), a regional scheme centered on mining; and, in Chile, the Alianza Valor Minero
(Mining Value Alliance), an initiative launched recently by the government as a platform for engag-
ing companies, governments, labor unions, Indigenous groups, and environmental organizations
in a transparent dialogue process about sustainable mining. In Chile, as in most Latin American
countries, there are two main instances of dialogue during the design of an extractive project: con-
sultation with Indigenous communities and public audiences that are part of the environmental
impact assessment. Alvaro García Hurtado, Executive President of Alianza Valor Minero, explained
that the initiative brings in a third avenue for dialogue—prior to consultations with Indigenous
groups and the public environmental impact assessment audiences—that acts as a sort of conflict
prevention mechanism. This platform is aimed at evaluating the integral impact of the extractive
development in three dimensions: Indigenous,
environmental, and economic.



                                                        C
Social conflicts around the development of                   reating an enabling environment
extractive industry projects in Latin America
have accompanied the arrival of new invest-                  for an early and sustainable
ments in the industry over the last decade. In          stakeholder dialogue is essential for
Chile, US$70 billion in new investments were
                                                        mitigating natural resource-related
held up due to social conflicts. Engaging all
stakeholders in a productive dialogue early on          conflicts.
in the development of the extractive project can
go a long way in mitigating conflicts.
10 | Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean

Ensuring that participating and affected citizens are well informed about the costs and benefits
of extractive projects is important for engaging in a debate. Currently, the lack of transparency
surrounding extractive industry activities often contributes to suspicion regarding their potential
effects.

Gabriel Baracatt, Chief Executive Officer at the Avina Foundation, said that in order to prevent
conflicts associated with extractive industries, it is essential to approach them from an ethical,
long-term perspective, framed by the universal rights that define human dignity. For that, three ele-
ments are fundamental: first, increase and guarantee public knowledge of the extractive industry;
second, build transparent and trustworthy institutions that can sustain an extractive industry model
based on inclusion; and third, use technological innovation to protect all stakeholders, including
the environment.


Figure 5: Human Rights-Based Model of Extractive Industry


           DEL RIESGO A LA OPORTUNIDAD




                                                                                      Restauración
              Riesgo              Seguridad          Defensa        Oportunidad
                                                                     “DIGNIDAD        Compensación
            (“due diligence”)                                             con
                                                                      HUMANA”
                                                                    PROYECTO
                                                                        ÉTICO y
                                                                     compuesto
                                                                   Oportunidad
                                                                       aceptado
                                                                       de Éxito
                                                                 internacionalmente
              Prever              Prevenir          Proteger             “Una
                                                                        por
                                                                  (en IIEE  las
                                                                             u otro
                                                                                      Recuperar
                                                                       campo) de
                                                                    actividad
                                                                   la cual toda la
                                                                  DECLARACIONES
                                                                     gente tiene
                                                                    UNIVERSALES
                                                                           DE
                                                                       orgullo,        Conocimiento
                                                                      DERECHOS
                                                                        quiere
          Conocimiento          Institucionalidad   Tecnología        proteger!”      Institucionalidad
             PÚBLICO               INCLUSIVA          ÉTICA
                                                                                        Tecnología




Source: PowerPoint presentation of Gabriel Baracatt.

Juan Cruz Vieyra, Modernization of the State Specialist at the Inter-American Development Bank,
explained that Latin America is at a complex crossroads. Lack of trust in some governments over-
laps with tensions associated with the impact of fluctuations in commodity prices. To ease these ten-
sions, Vieyra insisted on the need to strengthen trust between citizens, governments, and the private
sector, suggesting that this may represent the single most important challenge of governance in the
extractive sector at all levels of government.

The Inter-American Development Bank has supported initiatives in several countries of the region
aimed at reducing information asymmetries between governments, companies, and communities.
Doing so is necessary to respond to the rightful demands of citizens for the pillars of good gover-
nance, especially accountability, transparency, and reliable delivery of high-quality services.
                                 Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean | 11

The key to restore trust, according to Vieyra, is not just enhancing fiscal transparency but also com-
municating in a more effective, efficient, and transparent way the benefits and potential impacts
(positive and negative) of extractive activities. Improving information management can lead to
greater vertical accountability, by providing stakeholders with timely access to the sector and proj-
ect information that they need.

Outstanding barriers at the subnational level, particularly a lack of transparency and institutional
capacity, hinder the performance of the extractive sectors in many parts of Latin America. Local
governments in the region face a delicate balance. On the one hand, they have been receiving more
resources as a result of transfers of royalties, and have broader responsibilities due to decentraliza-
tion processes. On the other hand, local governments have not developed the institutional capacity
to manage these resources and responsibilities efficiently and effectively, in particular with respect
to public investments. As documented in Transparent Governance in an Age of Abundance: Expe-
riences from Latin America and the Caribbean (Vieyra and Masson, 2014), based on a case study
from Brazil, greater royalty transfers can sometimes be associated with less transparency and fewer
controls.

Vieyra highlighted the need to take advantage of the data revolution, which can help address some
of these challenges. Information infrastructure can support targeted policy reform efforts, as seen in
municipalities and provinces throughout the region. Subnational governments are investing heavily
in integrated platforms to process high-quality information and help make that information more
accessible to and understandable by citizens, and are also helping governments design and imple-
ment better policies.

Finally, Vieyra stressed that technological innovation must be accompanied by more effective com-
munity work and long term strategies for social engagement. In Ecuador, the municipality of Coca
(with 45,000 inhabitants and six Indigenous nations) created a platform on the quality and use of
resources from local extractive industries, “Extracting Transparency,” led by the civil society orga-
nization Grupo Faro. In Colombia, the national government created a georeferenced online plat-
form and integrated management system for mining and energy information called MapaRegalías.
The system provides information on the entire cycle of mining, from production levels to implemen-
tation of investment projects. Countries need to strengthen key second-tier institutions to match the
“voice” of the traditionally stronger ministries, and streamline and coordinate efforts across public
sector institutions. Public investment systems can be seen as an entry point for governance reform.

León Teicher, Executive Chairman of Continental Gold, presented his experience in Colombia
regarding how a group of 15 stakeholders who held a wide range of views about mining succeeded
in reaching consensus on several controversial aspects. Perhaps one of the most striking results of
the exercise was the reverse of opinion among Indigenous groups that participated in the meetings:
from an initial complete rejection of mining activities to welcoming mining developments that were
inclusive, competitive, and sustainable across generations. Likewise, Miriam Villegas of the Colom-
bian Institute for Rural Development (Instituto Colombiano de Desarrollo Rural; INCODER),
talked about two dialogue initiatives led by this government entity that contributed to building
a taxonomy of mining activities in the departments of Bolívar and El Chocó and became a useful
government tool.

A better-informed citizenry can more effectively defend its rights, as illustrated by an account pre-
sented by Adelso Romel Reyes Reyes, Consultant and Representative of Foro Indígena del Abya
Yala (Abya Yala Indigenous Forum), about how his people used the World Bank-financed land reg-
istry to their advantage. He explained that the new registry showed that mining areas overlapped
with Indigenous community land. The affected communities used this information to build a legal
12 | Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean

case in defense of their ancestral territories that they presented in national courts of justice and at
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.

These are eloquent examples of how far concerted efforts at increasing transparency and dialogue
can go in bringing stakeholders together in search of common ground. However, all participants
agreed that the impact of such efforts could weaken significantly in the face of corruption, orga-
nized crime, impunity, and illegality. Teicher described widespread corruption as “the elephant in
the room” that no one wants to talk about because it is difficult to address, but which could distort
or render ineffective national and international efforts for ensuring sustainable extractive industries.
Corruption, he said, is “an invisible, common enemy” that must be tackled head on. For Teicher,
well-established companies that abide by the highest possible international standards could act as
an antidote to organized crime.
5. Conclusion
The commodity super cycle of the past decade greatly benefited Latin American countries, particu-
larly those in South America, which enjoyed the longest economic growth period in their history,
along with a considerable level of social development. However, the region’s strong economic and
social gains were not complemented by commensurate progress on the institutional front. Latin
American countries, and resource-rich nations in particular, struggled to improve the institutions
that promote good governance of natural resources. The current environment of low commod-
ity prices and economic deceleration have made it increasingly important for countries across the
region to improve extractive industry governance, with a focus on ensuring economic, environmen-
tal, and social sustainability. The expert debate organized by the Wilson Center and the World Bank
on March 3, 2016, provided a platform for dialogue and ideas to walk down that path.




                                                                                                13
Appendix A. Biographies of Participants
Walter Arensberg is Managing Director of the Social Capital Group. With offices in Lima, Bogotá,
and Washington, DC, the Social Capital Group provides specialized social risk management services
to private and public sector clients engaged in extractive industries and large-scale infrastructure and
industrial development projects in Latin America, Africa, and Asia. Before joining the Social Capital
Group, Arensberg had been Chief of the Environment Division of the Inter-American Development
Bank, Deputy Director of the Center for Environment and Development of the World Resources
Institute, and a General Partner at the international architecture, engineering, and planning firm of
Skidmore, Owings, and Merrill. He received a Bachelor’s Degree in Political Science and a Master’s
in City and Regional Planning from Harvard University. Arensberg was raised in Cuba and has
worked in Latin America throughout much of his professional career.

Cynthia Arnson is Director of the Latin American Program at the Woodrow Wilson International
Center for Scholars. She is a widely recognized expert on Latin American politics and international
relations, including United States policy in the Western Hemisphere. She is co-editor (with Jorge
Heine) of Reaching Across the Pacific: Latin America and Asia in the New Century (Wilson Center,
2014); co-editor (with Carlos de la Torre) of Latin American Populism of the Twenty-First Cen-
tury (Johns Hopkins, 2013); editor of In the Wake of War: Democratization and Internal Armed
Conflict in Latin America (Stanford, 2012); and author of Crossroads: Congress, the President, and
Central America, 1976–1993 (Penn State, 2d edition, 1993), among other publications. Arnson is
a member of the editorial advisory board of Foreign Affairs Latinoamérica, the Spanish-language
edition of the distinguished journal Foreign Affairs. She is also a member of the advisory boards of
the Social Science Research Council’s Conflict Prevention and Peace Forum and of Human Rights
Watch/Americas, where she served as Associate Director from 1990 to 1994. Arnson was an Assis-
tant Professor of International Relations at American University’s School of International Service
1989–1991, and a foreign policy aide in the House of Representatives during the Carter and Reagan
administrations. She graduated magna cum laude from Wesleyan University in Middletown, Con-
necticut, and has an MA and PhD in International Relations from the Johns Hopkins University
School of Advanced International Studies.

Gabriel Baracatt joined Avina Foundation in 2000, where he served as the National Representa-
tive in Bolivia. Before being appointed Executive Director of Avina, Baracatt served as Director
of Operations and in 2009 was appointed Director of Social Innovation. He was also a civic and
university leader in Bolivia, a member of several boards of national and international organizations,
and received honors and awards for his contributions to conservation in Latin America. In 1990
Baracatt began working on sustainable development in Bolivia and founded Environmental Protec-
tion Tarija (PROMETA)—now an important nongovernmental organization dedicated to conserva-
tion. He subsequently held the positions of National Director of Biodiversity and Director-General
of the National Service of Protected Areas of Bolivia (SERNAP). Baracatt has a degree in Law and
Social Sciences from Bolivia’s Universidad Juan Misael Saracho de Tarija. He has also completed
various courses and postgraduate studies in environmental management, conservation, and senior
management. 

Anthony Bebbington is Director of the Graduate School of Geography and Milton P. and Alice C.
Higgins Professor of Environment and Society at Clark University. He is also a Professorial Research
Fellow in the Global Development Institute, University of Manchester, United Kingdom. He is a
member of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences,
and has been a Guggenheim Fellow and held fellowships at the Center for Advanced Studies in the

14
                                Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean | 15

Behavioral Sciences, Stanford, and the Ibero-American Institute/Free University in Berlin, among
others. His recent work has explored how the rapid expansion of investment in mining, oil, and
gas industries in South and Central America has transformed rural territories, and the extent to
which social conflicts surrounding this process have driven changes in environmental governance.
He recently chaired an expert panel to the Ministers of Environment and Economy in El Salva-
dor, for a strategic environmental assessment of El Salvador’s mining sector. Recent books include
Subterranean Struggles: New Dynamics of Mining, Oil and Gas in Latin America (University of
Texas Press, 2013, ed. with J. Bury); Social Conflict, Economic Development and Extractive Indus-
tries: Evidence from Latin America (Routledge, 2012, ed.); Industrias Extractivas, Conflicto Social
y Dinámicas Institucionales en la Región Andina (IEP/CEPES, 2013); Movimientos Sociales y la
Política de la Pobreza en el Perú (IEP/CEPES, with M. Scurrah and C. Bielich, 2011), Can NGOs
Make a Difference? The Challenge of Development Alternatives (Zed, with S. Hickey, D. Mitlin,
2008); and Minería, Movimientos Sociales y Respuestas Campesinas: Una Ecología Política de
Transformaciones Territoriales (IEP/CEPES, 2007, ed.).

Manlio F. Coviello is Director of Natural Resources and Energy of the Economic Commission of
the United Nations for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), Santiago, Chile, as well as the
Institutional Adviser to the Energy Commission of the Latin American Parliament and the Comis-
ión Presidencial del Litio, established by Chilean President Michelle Bachelet. He is a Professor
of Energy Planning for the Master’s in Energy Engineering program at the Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile. In 2013, he held the position of Visiting Professor at the Kennedy School of Gov-
ernment at Harvard University as part of the international postgraduate course, “Management of
Energy and Environmental Policy.” In 2012, he participated as a Senior Fellow at the Institute for
Advanced Sustainability Studies in Potsdam, Germany. In this capacity he worked directly with the
1984 Nobel Prize winner in Physics, Carlo Rubbia, in areas such as solar energy, thermodynamics,
and superconductivity. Since 1994, Coviello has provided technical assistance to government energy
ministries and agencies in 16 countries of Latin America and the Caribbean. He has participated
as chair and keynote speaker in more than 50 international events and has authored more than 25
international publications in the field of energy. He has a Master’s in Business Administration from
Bocconi University in Milan and is a PhD candidate in Geophysics at the Universidad de Genova. 

Augusto de la Torre is Chief Economist for Latin America and the Caribbean at the World Bank.
Before his appointment as the Region’s Chief Economist, de la Torre was a Senior Adviser respon-
sible for financial matters in Latin America and the Caribbean. Since joining the Bank in October
1997, he has published extensively on a broad range of macroeconomic and financial development
topics. Prior to joining the Bank, de la Torre was President of Ecuador’s Central Bank, an economist
at the International Monetary Fund, and the IMF’s Resident Representative in Venezuela (1991–
1992). He earned his MA and PhD in Economics from the University of Notre Dame and holds a
Bachelor’s degree in Philosophy from the Catholic University of Ecuador.

Jorge Familiar has been Vice President of the World Bank for Latin America and the Caribbean
since 2014, where he leads relations with 31 countries through a portfolio of ongoing projects, tech-
nical assistance, and grants worth more than US$30 billion. Previously, he served as Vice President
and Corporate Secretary of the World Bank Group beginning in August 2010, where he played a
key role in facilitating and promoting cooperation and dialogue between the Board of Governors,
Boards of Executive Directors and Management of the World Bank Group institutions. Prior to
that, Familiar worked as Chief Executive Officer of Mexico’s Instituto del Fondo Nacional para el
Consumo de los Trabajadores, a public financial institution with more than 1 million clients and a
loan portfolio of more than US$1 billion. Between 2004 and 2008, he served as Executive Direc-
tor and Alternate Executive Director for the World Bank Group in Washington, DC, having been
elected to represent Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Spain, and
Venezuela at the boards of executive directors of various World Bank institutions. He started his
16 | Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean

career in the National Banking and Securities Commission of Mexico, where he rose to the position
of Vice Chairman of Securities and Derivatives Markets Supervision and served as a member of the
Governing Board. He was in charge of designing, negotiating, and implementing several regulatory
instruments, such as the Securities Market Law issued by Congress in 2005 and the Investment
Fund Law issued by Congress in 2001. He holds a Bachelor’s degree in accounting and an MA in
finance from the Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México, where he graduated with honors.

Álvaro García Hurtado is currently the Executive Director of Consultoría Estratégica, where he
works to define and manage public and stakeholder policies for private enterprises. In this position,
García has worked with the governments of Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay; with international organizations
such as the United Nations Development Programme, ECLAC, International Labour Organization,
Inter-American Development Bank and World Bank; and with the private sector in the areas of min-
ing, infrastructure, energy, and fisheries. Since 2015 García has served as President of Alianza Valor
Minero, a public-private partnership that defined a long-term plan for the Chilean mining industry
and continues to oversee its implementation. The board of the Alliance comprised representatives
of all stakeholders in mining activity, including the government, industry, labor unions, Indigenous
groups, and the environmental movement. From 1990 to 2006 García served in various senior posi-
tions in the Chilean government, including Minister of the Presidency, Minister of the Economy,
and Minister of Energy. In addition, García has served as President of the Committee for State
Modernization, President of the National Environmental Commission, President of CORFO (the
state development agency), and President of the Development Forum, a multistakeholder dialogue
institution. García holds a PhD in Economics from the University of California, Berkeley.

Daniel Kaufmann is the President and Chief Executive Officer of the Natural Resource Governance
Institute, a policy institute and nonprofit organization operating in more than a dozen countries.
An economist by training, he is a pioneer in the field of governance and anticorruption worldwide.
He has held leadership positions in the field, and together with his teams, has devised innovative
approaches to measure and analyze governance. He has deep practical experience in providing
high-level policy advice and helping countries in all regions of the world to formulate and imple-
ment governance reforms in areas such as anticorruption, transparency, and natural resources. He
has also extensively researched topics such as economic development, political economy, invest-
ment, privatization, and urban and labor economics. Kaufmann was previously a Senior Fellow at
the Brookings Institution, where he remains a Nonresident Fellow. Prior to that, he was a Director
at the World Bank Institute, spearheading work on governance and anticorruption. He also held
other World Bank senior management positions focused on anticorruption, finance, and regulatory
reform, and was Lead Economist in the Research Department. He was the Bank’s first Chief of
Mission to Ukraine, and worked on capacity building in Latin America and on economic reforms
in Africa. Kaufmann serves on various advisory boards and has also been a member of the Faculty
and Global Agenda Council of the World Economic Forum (Davos). He is currently a full member
of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative International Board. In major policy circles and
the international media, he is associated with such innovations as the Worldwide Governance Indi-
cators, the Resource Governance Index, and the study and analysis of “legal corruption” and state
capture. A Chilean national, Kaufmann received his Master’s and PhD in Economics at Harvard,
and a BA in Economics and Statistics from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

Karin Kemper is the Senior Regional Adviser in the Office of the Vice President of the Latin America
and Caribbean Region of the World Bank. In this position she acts as a multisectoral integrator and
fosters work across the World Bank’s Global Practices, countries, and institutions at the regional
level; contributes to the strategic development of multiyear programs based on country-level needs
and priorities; and engages in region-specific policy dialogues. She focuses specifically on the deliv-
ery of infrastructure services to the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, including energy,
                                Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean | 17

water, the urban and rural sectors, transport, information and communications technology, and
social development, and plays a key role in fostering public-private partnerships and in engaging
in climate change issues. Prior to her current appointment Kemper was the Director of Climate
Policy and Finance at the World Bank, providing direction for her department’s work on climate
policy analysis, design, and finance. She has also held positions as Sector Manager for Environment
and Water Resources in the World Bank’s Latin America and the Caribbean Region and as Sector
Manager for Social Development, Water Resources, and Environment in the South Asia Region.
Kemper has over 20 years’ experience working on development at the interface of water resources
and environmental management. In recent years, her work has increasingly focused on the linkages
with climate change and green, inclusive, low-carbon growth. She has published extensively in the
area of water resources management and water allocation in scarcity conditions, and has led a vari-
ety of studies on natural resources and environmental management worldwide. A German national,
she holds a BSc in International Business Administration and Economics and a PhD in Water and
Environmental Studies from Linköping University, Sweden.

Adelso Romel Reyes Reyes is a Guatemalan consultant, educator, conflict resolution specialist, and
representative for Indígena del Abya Yala. He served as the Executive Director of the Asociación
Estoreña para el Desarrollo Integral (AEPDI) from 2012 to May 2015. From 2005 to 2011, he
worked with AEPDI as a project, technical, and department coordinator for the Defense of Q’eqchi’
Program (Programa de Defensoría Q’eqchi’). Romel served as a representative for the rights of
Indigenous populations before the International Conference on Mining and Metals and at the Pre-
Congress Workshop for Protected Areas and Indigenous Peoples. He also worked with the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights regarding the Agua Caliente Indigenous community in the
state of Izabal, and has consulted with Indigenous communities with respect to extractive industries
and collective rights. He received his university degree from the Escuela de Formacíon de Profesores
de Enseñanza Media.

León Teicher served for six years as President of Cerrejón, one of the largest open-pit coal mining
operations in the world, located in La Guajira, northern Colombia. The complex includes the mine,
a 150-kilometer railroad, and a deep sea port. Prior to leaving Cerrejón in 2011, Teicher founded
and served as the first Chair of the four Cerrejón Foundations, dedicated to the promotion and
development of long-term social, economic, environmental, and institutional sustainability in the
area. Teicher’s professional career includes 20 years in the high-technology sector and 16 years in
mining and energy. Starting in Silicon Valley, California, he has held numerous senior positions,
including Commercial Vice President of Carbocol (Colombia) and later member of its Board of
Directors; General Manager of Distributors for Latin America with Unisys Corporation; President
of Unisys Argentina/Uruguay; President of Unisys Colombia; and Chief Executive Officer of Xeon
Technology Corporation of Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. He has served as a Professor at
the Universidad de los Andes and as the Director of its Management Development and Top Man-
agement programs. Teicher was the founder and first Chair of the Board of Colombia’s Large-Scale
Mining Sector (SMGE), an association of the 13 largest mining companies in the country, and served
as a member of the Board of Verano Energy, a Canadian oil exploration and production company
operating in Colombia. Currently, he is a member of the Board of Governors of the Universidad de
los Andes, of Fedesarrollo, an economics think tank, and of Fundación Ideas para la Paz. He is also
a member of the boards of Cementos Argos and Continental Gold. Teicher has a degree in Industrial
Economics from the Universidad de los Andes and an MBA from Stanford University. He was a
Fulbright Scholar and is currently a member of the Development Committee of Fulbright Colombia.
He is a dual Colombian and Canadian citizen.

Patricia Vásquez is a Research Associate with the Center of Conflict, Development and Peacebuild-
ing of the Graduate Institute of Geneva. Her areas of expertise include natural resource conflict
and governance. Her focus areas are Latin America and East Africa. Vásquez recently relocated to
18 | Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean

Washington, DC, after spending three years in East Africa working for the World Bank on issues
related to the recently discovered oil and gas reserves there. She works for various other organiza-
tions as an independent expert, including the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Environment Programme. While a Senior Fellow at the U.S. Institute of Peace, she
wrote the book Oil Sparks in the Amazon: Local Conflicts, Indigenous Populations, and Natu-
ral Resources (University of Georgia Press, 2014), on hydrocarbons-related conflicts in Colombia,
Ecuador, and Peru. Previously, Vásquez was the Latin America Team Leader at Energy Intelligence,
a consulting firm, for more than a decade. She is the author of a forthcoming study for the Wilson
Center on Argentina’s hydrocarbons sector.

Juan Cruz Vieyra joined the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) in 2006. He currently works
as a public sector management specialist in the Institutional Capacity of the State Division of the
IDB, and is the coordinator of the Transparency Trust Fund. Vieyra focuses on public sector opera-
tions aimed at strengthening public management, transparency, and access to information. Before
joining the IDB, he was a researcher at the University of Buenos Aires, Adjunct Professor of Com-
parative Political Systems at the Catholic University of La Plata, and research assistant at the School
of Advanced International Studies, Johns Hopkins University. Vieyra has a degree in Political Sci-
ence from the Catholic University of La Plata and a Master’s degree in International Relations from
Torcuato Di Tella University and Johns Hopkins University. He is currently a PhD candidate in
International Studies at Torcuato Di Tella University.

Miriam Villegas was named Director of the Colombian Institute for Rural Development (INCODER)
in April 2012. In the previous 15 years, Villegas was in charge of international management and
bilateral and multilateral cooperation for Colombia’s Corporación Desarrollo y Paz del Magdalena
Medio. She works with social organizations in rural areas on the creation of development plans and
serves as a liaison to departmental and national bodies. She assists social organizations in the Mag-
dalena Medio region in building their productive and organizational capacity and in the creation of
business plans for agricultural production of such crops as palm, coffee, cacao, and timber. Villegas
works with private banks to secure credit for project implementation and serves as a negotiator
between private and public initiatives. Over the last two years, Villegas has formed part of a dia-
logue group focused on mining in Colombia and is coordinating a study of informal mining in the
Magdalena Medio region that is supported by the Ford Foundation.
Appendix B. Conference Schedule

                          Registration and Buffet Breakfast
    8:15–8:45 am


                                Welcome and Opening
    8:45–9:10 am   Cynthia Arnson, Director, Latin American Program
                   Jorge Familiar, Vice President for Latin America and the Caribbean,
                   The World Bank


    Panel I: Extractive Industries in LAC: The Macro-Economic Impact of the Fall
                in Commodity Prices, Long-Term Trends and Prospects

   9:10–10:45 am   Augusto de la Torre, Chief Economist for Latin America and the
                   Caribbean, World Bank
                   Manlio F. Coviello, Chief, Natural Resources & Energy Unit, ECLAC,
                   Santiago
      Moderator:   James Gibney, Editorial Board, Bloomberg View


                                     Coffee Break
  10:45–11:15 am


                Panel II: Governance, Transparency, and National vs.
                       Local Government Control of Revenue
   11:15–1:00 pm   Daniel Kaufmann, President, Natural Resource Governance Institute
                   Anthony Bebbington, Milton P. and Alice C. Higgins Professor of
                   Environment and Society, Clark University
                   Gabriel Baracatt, Chief Executive Officer, AVINA Foundation
                   Juan Cruz Vieyra, Extractive Industries Governance Specialist,
                   Inter-American Development Bank
      Moderator:   Patricia Vásquez, Research Associate with the Center of Conflict,
                   Development and Peacebuilding of the Graduate Institute of Geneva


                                  Networking Lunch
    1:00–2:15 pm




                                                                                         19
20 | Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean


                      Panel III: Environmental & Social Sustainability:
          Challenges and Opportunities in the Formal and Informal Mining Sectors
       2:15–4:00 pm    Adelso Romel Reyes Reyes, Consultant & Representative, Foro Indígena
                       del Abya Yala
                       Álvaro García Hurtado, Executive President, Alianza Valor Minero
                       León Teicher, Executive Chairman, Continental Gold
                       Miriam Villegas, INCODER, Columbia
         Moderator:    Walter Arensberg, Managing Director, Social Capital Group


                                      Concluding Remarks
       4:00–4:15 pm    Karin Kemper, Senior Regional Adviser, World Bank
Appendix C. Additional Material from Participants*
Excerpts from PowerPoint presentation of Augusto de la Torre.

                                  A veritable commodity super cycle


                                                                          
                                                                          




Source: Bloomberg.
                                                                                                                          1



                                  LAC’s economic activity has bifurcated, with SA
                                  following China/commodities and MCC the US…

                                                                           




Notes: SA includes Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Uruguay. MCC includes
Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Jamica, and México.
Sources:
         Bloomberg          and national
                               statistics.
                                                      2   21
                    
22 | Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean



                                  The end of the commodity bonanza unleashed the
                                  “great deceleration” – sharper than expected…

                                               



                                                                     The Great Slowdown




Source: Consensus Forecasts.
                                                                         3

                                … and disproportionately pronounced by
                                international comparison

                                                    




Sources: Consensus Forecasts and IMF’s WEO.
                                                              4
                           Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean | 23


Excerpts from PowerPoint presentation of Gabriel Baracatt.

        CONOCIMIENTO PÚBLICO


                                                    • Prospección
                                                    • Evaluaciones de impacto
                                                    • Planes de operación
                                                    • Reportes de
                                                      sostenibilidad


                                                   ¿Conocimiento como
                                                   herramienta de poder o de
                                                   diálogo?
                                                   ¿Qué rol ocupa el
                                                   conocimiento tradicional?




     INSTITUCIONALIDAD INCLUSIVA


      • Consultas públicas
      • Política de contratación
      • Prácticas de RSE
      • Cadena de valor
      • Renta e regalías


      ¿És posible radicalizar la consulta – y la
      democracia – con TICS?
      ¿Promotor de desarrollo o activador de
      la violencia y fragmentación social?
24 | Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean




         TECNOLOGÍA ÉTICA



                                                   • Estándares técnicos de la
                                                    operación.
                                                   • Gestión de huella de carbón y
                                                    agua
                                                   • Innovación
                                                   ¿Cómo la innovación en producción
                                                   (ej. manipulación celular y atómica,
                                                   impresión 3D) impactará el
                                                   extractivismo hasta el final del siglo?
                                                   ¿La prehistoria de la extracción o la
                                                   creación de valor compartido para la
                                                   sociedad?




         VISIÓN DE FUTURO


                                                               Construir relaciones de
                                                               confianza entre distintos
                                                               sectores para hacer de las
                                                               industrias extractivas un
                                                               modelo ético de creación
                                                               de riqueza basado en la
                                                               dignidad humana, la
                                                               inclusión económica y el
                                                               responsable cuidado del
                                                               uso de los recursos
                                                               naturales.
                    Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean | 25


Excerpts from PowerPoint presentation of Miriam Villegas.



     TIPOLOGIA Y TITULARIDAD MINERA
      Minería formal
      Minería ancestral y artesanal
      Minería informal (tradicional 30% con titulo y 70%
       sin titulo)
      Minería ilegal
      Minería criminal
      Existen 189 títulos en los 4 municipios (257.000
       hectáreas) de los cuales solo 19 tienen licencia
       ambiental.




    MINERIA ANCESTRAL Y ARTESANAL
      Comunidades ancestrales en sus territorios
      Desarrollada convencionalmente
      De subsistencia no mecanizada
      Recomendación: una política de alternativa de
       ingresos
26 | Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean




         MINERIA INFORMAL
          Minería campesina Agrominera ( no se consideran ilegales.
           Tradicional)
          Sin titulo ni licencia
          A pequeña escala
          Sin capacidad técnica
          No reconoce regalías o contraprestación económica
          Vocación de transición a la ilegalidad.
         Recomendaciones:
          Fiscalización diferenciada . Formalización con incentivos (altos
           costos)
          Empresa mixta de comercialización de oro legal
          Alternativa para el mercurio
          Políticas con alternativas al extractivismo
          Bienes públicos




        MINERIA ILEGAL
          Mecanizada sin vocación de formalización
          Uso de retro, mini draga, motobomba , matraca.
         Recomendaciones
          Reconversión de las áreas degradadas
          Formalización y enfoque civil y administrativo frente al
           incumplimientos de las normas (mineros de la región)
                        Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean | 27




     MINERIA CRIMINAL
      Sin legalidad
      Utiliza la actividad minera para extraer rentas
       extraordinarias
      Destina recursos a actividades delictivas y criminales
     Recomendaciones
      Aproximación integral y a la cadena
      Cuantificación y monitoreo ( igual a cultivos ilícitos)
      Programa de tras habilidad ( proceso Kimberly)




Excerpts from PowerPoint presentation of Alvaro García
Hurtado.


                                
            • 
            • 
              
            • 


                                    
             • 
             • 
             • 
28 | Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean




           
                                                                       
                                                                       

                                                                           


                                                  
                                                
                                                                
                                                             



                                       
                                                                       
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      




                       


                                                                                                               
                                                                                          

                                                                      


                                              


                          
                                                              
                                                                                  
                                                                                


                                                                        
                                  Natural Resource Governance in Latin America and the Caribbean | 29




                         
               
                                            
                                               



                                                                   
                                                                            
                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                    



                                            
                                            
                                               




   A video of the conference along with the complete PowerPoint presentations of the participants can be
*
found at http://bit.ly/1RYW2nq.
LATIN AMERICAN PROGRAM
