Investing Strategically in
       Higher Education
  Aligning Public Funding with Policy Objectives




                                       June 2016
Contents
Acknowledgements ........................................................................................................................... ii
Figures and Tables ............................................................................................................................ iii
Abbreviations ................................................................................................................................... iv
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................... 1
1.     Introducing Strategic Financing: Aligning Allocation with Policy ................................................. 5
2.     Policy Context............................................................................................................................ 6
     2.1.     System Dynamics and Drivers............................................................................................. 6
     2.2.     Common Policy Objectives ................................................................................................. 9
3.     Public Funding: An Instrument for Pursuing Policy Objectives Strategically .............................. 10
     3.1.     The Importance of Public Funding .................................................................................... 10
     3.2.     Options for Allocating Public Funds to Higher Education .................................................. 11
4.     Strategic Financing by Policy Objective .................................................................................... 14
     4.1.     Assuring and Enhancing Quality ....................................................................................... 14
     4.2.     Improving Links between Higher Education and the Labour Market ................................. 16
     4.3.     Boosting Knowledge Generation and Technology Transfer ............................................... 18
     4.4.     Consolidating and/or Diversifying the Sector.................................................................... 19
     4.5.     Optimising HEI Finances ................................................................................................... 21
     4.6.     Increasing Equitable Participation .................................................................................... 23
     4.7.     Fostering Internationalisation and Collaboration.............................................................. 26
5.     Framework for Implementation............................................................................................... 29
6.     Next Steps ............................................................................................................................... 37
Bibliography .................................................................................................................................... 38
Appendix: Summary Table Matching Policy Objectives and Potential Financing Methodology ......... 41




  Standard Disclaimer: This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
  Development/ The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not
  necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The
  World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.




                                                                                                                                                   i
Acknowledgements
This policy note provides an overview to guide and inform how higher education finance can become more
strategic in Central European and Baltic countries. It complements a workshop held in April of 2016 in Zagreb,
Croatia on the topic of higher education financing, at which nine country delegations from Central Europe and
the Baltic countries were present. Given the multitude of experiences and familiarity with the issues of higher
education finance, this document was prepared by the World Bank to serve as a foundation upon which new
ideas and thinking can be developed.

The policy note is researched and written by Jason Allen Weaver and Andrew G. Traveller. The team is grateful
for the guidance and support of Arup Banerji, Cristian Aedo, Christian Bodewig, Roberta Malee Bassett, Nina
Arnhold, Jamil Salmi, and John Hagerty. The team also thanks the peer reviewers — Francisco Marmolejo,
Javier Botero Alvarez, Yoko Nagashima, Xiaonan Cao, and Halil Dundar — for insightful comments.

This policy note draws heavily from the work and outputs of the World Bank Group’s engagement with the
Government of Latvia. To this end, the authors would like to acknowledge the work of the project team,
including Nina Arnhold, Frank Ziegele, Hans Vossensteyn, Jussi Kivistö and Laura Tremaine. The authors would
also like to acknowledge the contribution from the Latvian counterparts in the Ministry of Education and
Science.




                                                                                                             ii
Figures and Tables
Tables
Table 1: Common Higher Education Policy Objectives throughout Central Europe and Baltic Countries   1, 10
Table 2: Input-oriented Formulae Remain the Most Common Allocation Method in the Region             3, 11
Table 3: Potential Advantages and Caveats for Strategic Financing of Higher Education               5
Table 4: Evolution of Public Funding for Higher Education between 2008 and 2014                     6
Table 5: An Overview of Allocation Mechanisms for Allocations across Europe                         11
Table 6: Overview of Design Considerations                                                          31


Figures
Figure 1: Public Funding Represents the Majority of HE Funding in the Region                        2, 10
Figure 2: Public Funding Allocation Mechanisms                                                      2, 11
Figure 3: Framework for Implementation                                                              3, 30
Figure 4: Expenditure on Tertiary Educational Institutions as a Percentage of GDP                   7
Figure 5: Evolution of Higher Education Student Numbers between 2008 and 2015                       9


Boxes
Box 1: EU Policy Priorities and the Focus of the Bologna Process                                    7
Box 2: Latvian Case Study: Part 1                                                                   31
Box 3: Latvian Case Study: Part 2                                                                   32
Box 4: Latvian Case Study: Part 3                                                                   34
Box 5: Latvian Case Study: Part 4                                                                   35


Examples
Example 1: Centres of Research Excellence in New Zealand                                            16
Example 2: England’s Economic Challenge Investment Fund                                             17
Example 3: Innovation Vouchers in Baden-Wurttemberg (Germany)                                       19
Example 4: Diversifying the Sector - Institutional Profiling in the Netherlands                     20
Example 5: Denmark’s Comprehensive Sector Consolidation                                             21
Example 6: Improving Value for Money in the United Kingdom                                          23
Example 7: Widening Participation in England                                                        25
Example 8: Income-contingent Loans in Australia and New Zealand                                     26
Example 9: Super Global Universities in Japan                                                       28
Example 10: Supporting Internationalisation through Funding Formulae                                28
Example 11: Piloting Performance Agreements in Croatia                                              33
Example 12: Setting up an Integrated Data System in Argentina                                       36




                                                                                                         iii
Abbreviations
£               British Pound
€               Euro
$               Dollar
BEEPS           Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Surveys
BG              Bulgaria
CZ              Czech Republic
DKK             Danish Krone
EC              European Commission
ECTS            European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System
EE              Estonia
EU              European Union
EUA             European University Association
EUR             Euro
GBP             British Pound
GDP             Gross Domestic Product
GR              Greece
HEFCE           Higher Education Funding Council for England
HEI             Higher Education Institution
HR              Croatia
HU              Hungary
LT              Lithuania
LV              Latvia
MoES            Ministry of Education and Science, Latvia
MoSES           Ministry of Science, Education and Sports, Croatia
OECD            Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
PFO             Public Funding Observatory
PL              Poland
RESAVER         Retirement Savings Vehicle for European Research Institutions
RO              Romania
SES             Socio-economic status
SI              Slovenia
SK              Slovak Republic
STEM            Science, Technology, Engineering and Match
STINT           Swedish Foundation for International Cooperation in Research and Higher Education
TEC             Tertiary Education Commission, New Zealand
UK              United Kingdom
US              United States
USD             US Dollar




                                                                                                    iv
    Executive Summary
Linking higher education finance and policy, referred to as strategic financing, is increasing in popularity
throughout Central Europe and the Baltic Countries. Strategic financing essentially implies that public funding
mechanisms are aligned with specific higher education policy objectives. Can funding formulae, for instance,
be modified strategically to help realise certain policy objectives? If a government is seeking to enrol more
science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) students, for example, could allocating a premium to higher
education institutions (HEIs) per STEM student help achieve the policy objective? Like many countries around
the world, Central European and Baltic countries are exploring how different financing modalities can provide
additional leverage in steering their higher education sector towards specific policy objectives.

In recent years, many Central European and Baltic countries are facing common economic, socio-political,
and demographic issues. These common challenges can broadly be categorised into three main themes:
challenging economic environment; increasing European integration; and declining demographic trends. First,
the region still faces fiscal constraints as it emerges from the global economic slowdown. Such economic
trends have placed downward pressure on public higher education budgets and increased the call for
collaboration between higher education and the labour market. Second, national higher education policies
across Central Europe and the Baltic countries are impacted by a broader European policy environment,
including the European Higher Education Area. Supranational initiatives, such as the EU’s Education and
Training 2020 Strategy, Horizon 2020, and its Modernisation Agenda for Higher Education, as well as the
intergovernmental Bologna Process, strongly influence national higher education policies. Third, a declining
population in Europe is shrinking the number of working- and student-age people. After decades of growth in
the higher education sector, the number of new students participating in higher education is slowly declining.

In response, many of the Central European and Baltic countries are pursuing a similar set of higher
education policy objectives. For the purposes of this Policy Note, these common policy objectives are
summarized in Table 1, which indicates the specific countries that have included a similar policy objective in
their national strategic documents.

Table 1: Common Higher Education Policy Objectives throughout Central Europe and Baltic Countries
                                             HR     LV     SI    RO     LT    GR     EE     PL     CZ    SK     HU     BG

Assuring and Enhancing Quality                X                   X     X             X      X     X      X      X      X

Improving Links Between HE and the
                                                    X      X                   X      X      X     X      X      X      X
Labour Market

Boosting Knowledge Generation and
                                              X     X      X      X     X             X                          X      X
Technology Transfer

Consolidating and Diversifying the Sector           X      X      X            X                   X      X      X

Optimising HEI Finances                       X            X      X                                X             X      X

Fostering Internationalisation and
                                                    X                                 X            X      X             X
Collaboration

Increasing Equitable Participation            X                         X             X      X     X             X      X

*For the sake of comparability, the table uses generic policy categories, which may be articulated differently in national
strategic documents.




                                                                                                                        1
Since the majority of higher education funding comes from public resources, governments in Central Europe
and the Baltic countries are exploring how their financing approaches can be modified to support these
policy objectives. Though allocated differently in each country, public funding plays a major role in the region,
accounting for (see Figure 1) between 50 and 90 percent of the universities’ income in the region (Pruvot,
Claeys-Kulik & Estermann, 2015).

Figure 1: Public Funding Represents the Majority of Higher Education Funding in the Region

                        % of Tertiary Education Spending from Public Resources in 2012
 100%
  80%
  60%                                                                                                         Private
  40%
                                                                                                              Public
  20%
   0%




*80-100%, **60-79%
Source: OECD Education at a glance: Educational finance indicators; World Bank workshop, Zagreb, April 2016

There are a number of ways that financing can flow to support these policy objectives, conditional upon the
local context. International experience shows that strategic financing is not a ready-made concept, but a
broad label that offers a menu of design options that can be tailored to country-specific conditions. Figure 2
below provides a typology of available allocation mechanisms, each of which can be strategically aligned with
policy objectives.

Figure 2: Public Funding Allocation Mechanisms




Source: Pruvot, Claeys-Kulik & Estermann, 2015

While these different allocation mechanisms provide a promising set of tools that can be aligned with policy
objectives, identifying the most effective funding mechanism for achieving a country’s policy objectives,
given its unique context, can be challenging. Table 2 below highlights which funding mechanisms are used in
countries across the region. While many of these governments have indicated a trend towards more
innovative and strategic funding approaches, the historical precedent of allocating funding according to study
places and other inputs remains the most common approach.

Table 2: Input-oriented Formulae Remain the Most Common Allocation Method in the Region - Percentage
of total public expenditure on HEIs per allocation mechanism


                                                                                                                        2
                                   HR        GR        RO        SI        PL        EE       CZ        LV        LT

Negotiation and/or Historically
                                            70%        5%                           15%
Determined

Input-Oriented Funding
                                  90%                  70%      50%                          50%       74%       80%
Formula

Output-Oriented Funding
                                  7.5%                 5%       50%     95.33%               26%        6%       20%
Formula

Performance Agreements/
                                  2.5%                                              45%
Contracts

Competitive Funds                          10-20%      20%               3.2%       31%      24%        9%

Excellence Schemes                           5%                          1.47%       9%

Other Alternatives                        10-15%                                                      11%

NB: The figures in this table are approximations only, calculated based on a pre-workshop survey, World Bank workshop,
Zagreb, April 2016

A growing number of European countries are recognising the need to take risks with their funding
approaches, and are increasingly revising their mix of allocation mechanisms. The governments of Latvia and
Croatia, for example, have recently undertaken reviews of their higher education financing systems to see how
they can better leverage funding to achieve the government’s strategic goals.

In addition to leverage, strategic financing can offer other potential advantages. It can enhance the strategic
dialogue between the state and HEIs as well as provide more and better information on policy goals and
priorities. It can also clarify for HEIs how they can contribute towards the realisation of national policy
objectives and signal to them what is and is not working. Transparency can be improved by providing greater
and more useful information and indicators. This focus on key indicators can improve the quality, relevance,
productivity, and efficiency of the higher education sector by sharpening the focus on key, measurable
outcomes. This also encourages a greater emphasis on strategic planning and assists in aligning institutional
strategic plans with national higher education strategies.

While those advantages are appealing, any exploration of strategic financing should also take note of
several important caveats. First, an underfunded higher education system will be limited in its abilities
regardless of the allocation mechanisms. Second, specific funding mechanisms may reinforce certain
objectives, while simultaneously hindering others. Third, certain preconditions, such as a certain degree of
institutional autonomy or a well-functioning quality assurance system, are important for the introduction of
strategic funding. A higher education sector functions like an ecosystem, so policy makers must be cognizant of
how certain components work with or against one another when designing or reforming higher education
funding systems.

While the alignment of policy and financing is easy to understand in theory, implementation can be
challenging. This policy note uses a high-level implementation framework to discuss the common activities,
challenges, and recommendations associated with the usual phases of implementing higher education funding
reforms. The successful implementation of higher education financing reforms begins with a well devised plan.
With that developed, a good diagnostic of the current situation, based firmly on evidence, is essential.
Diagnosis requires a careful review of the existing funding mechanisms and the identification of options, taking
into account specific country and sector context. The third stage is to design the reform package(s). Higher
education financing reforms and the introduction of new mechanisms require complex design questions due

                                                                                                                    3
to the often qualitative character of the objectives. A pilot or shadow phase can test the reform at a smaller
scale while providing an opportunity for dialogue, feedback, adaptation and adjustment. The funding model
can then scale up based on the experiences of the pilot phase. On a periodic basis, the stakeholders should
evaluate the approach to financing and make adjustments according to evolving circumstances and policy
priorities.

Figure 3: Framework for Implementation




In summary, strategic financing has the potential to influence the realization of different higher education
policy objectives. While anecdotal evidence in Europe suggests this is a promising practice, a solid research
base is lacking. The current body of research on the impacts of strategic financing is scarce, inconclusive and
focused primarily on the United States; further research, therefore, is needed, especially in Europe where the
context is different and the prevalence of strategic finance is on the rise. Specifically, quantitative research
(e.g. multivariate studies with extensive controls to isolate variables and their impacts) that investigates
possible shifts in HEI performance and their relationship to strategic financing policies would be useful to
inform policy makers.

Even without such research, the challenges facing higher education systems throughout Central Europe and
the Baltic countries, and around the world for that matter, require governments to be increasingly strategic
and to take more risks. Either the same financing approach can be maintained or new strategic approaches
can be tested in the hopes of identifying more effective ways to pursue important policy objectives. A greater
degree of multilateral governmental cooperation would also allow policy makers across the region to benefit
from the transparent sharing of ideas, experiences and results. In this regard, there is a case for international
organizations, like the World Bank and European Commission, to continue supporting governments in their
design and implementation of funding systems that support their policy objectives.




                                                                                                               4
1.       Introducing Strategic Financing: Aligning Allocation with Policy
To optimize their investment in higher education, many governments are strategically re-evaluating their
mechanisms for financing higher education and their alignment with the sector’s objectives. Strategic
financing essentially implies that public funding mechanisms are informed by and aligned with specific higher
education policy objectives. Funding then becomes a key incentive for change.

Strategic financing encompasses both performance-based and other allocation mechanisms that connect
public funding with policy objectives. Input-oriented funding formulae, for instance, can also be used
strategically to realise certain policy objectives. Providing more funding based on the number of STEM
graduates or the number of low-income students can be examples of strategic financing if the government was
seeking to enrol more such students. A competitive fund for proposals aimed at improving labour-market
linkages could also be strategic without necessarily being performance-based (since the money may be
allocated according to the proposal and not based on the actual outcome). Performance-based funding
modalities, in particular, can provide governments with additional leverage in influencing the behaviour of
HEIs and, therefore, greater strategic utility.

In addition to leverage, strategic financing can offer other potential advantages. Table 3 summarizes both
the advantages of strategic financing as well as some important caveats for consideration.

Table 3: Potential Advantages and Caveats for Strategic Financing of Higher Education
                         Advantages                                            Caveats
          To enhance the strategic dialogue between         An underfunded higher education system will
           the state and HEIs                                 be limited in its abilities regardless of the
          To provide more and better information on          allocation mechanisms
           goals and priorities                              In order for certain outcomes to be attributed
          To clarify how institutions can contribute         to a particular funding mechanism in a causal
           towards the realisation of policy objectives       manner, more research is needed
          To signal what is and is not working              While specific funding mechanisms may
          To improve the quality, relevance,                 reinforce certain objectives, they may
           productivity and efficiency of the system by       simultaneously hinder others
           sharpening the focus on measurable                Certain preconditions are important for the
           indicators                                         introduction of strategic funding mechanisms
          To encourage a greater emphasis on planning        in terms of the overall functionality of public
          To improve transparency by providing greater       institutions and governance arrangements
           and more useful information and indicators

This policy note synthesises the literature on higher education financing, draws on The World Bank’s
experience advising governments on the topic and utilises data and insights obtained during a recent
                                                                                 1
workshop with global higher education experts and policy makers from nine Central European and Baltic
countries on the topic of the strategic financing of higher education. It provides an overview of how strategic
financing is being implemented to support the realisation of policy objectives. Chapters 2 and 3 describe and
present the topic of strategic funding in the context of Central Europe and Baltic countries, and Chapter 4
deals more directly with specific funding strategies and how these can be applied to tackle common policy
objectives. Chapter 5 provides a high-level framework for implementation that policy makers can use as a
foundation to be adapted, manipulated and customised according to the unique context of the state and its
proposed reform. The intention is to provide a concise and usable reference resource for those embarking on
higher education financing reforms.

1
 The workshop occured on April 26, 2015 in Zagreb, Croatia with attendees from Croatia, Czech Republic,
Estonia, Greece, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovenia.

                                                                                                                5
2.     Policy Context
In order to understand the impetus for strategic financing, it is pertinent to first look at the economic, socio-
political, and demographic dynamics and drivers throughout Central Europe and the Baltic countries, whilst
recognising the specificity of circumstances in individual countries. These changing circumstances are
generating a number of similar and country-specific higher education policy objectives. As governments
contend with these circumstances and set new policy aspirations for the future, there is a need to examine,
adapt, align and leverage public funding for higher education to achieve ambitious policy objectives.

    2.1.   System Dynamics and Drivers
At a regional level, the dynamics influencing higher education systems can be broadly categorised into three
main themes: economic environment; European integration; and demographic trends.

First, the region still faces fiscal constraints as it emerges from the global economic slowdown. High levels of
unemployment remain widespread, and economic growth remains sluggish. Although it began in early 2010,
the recovery remains fragile, uneven, and slower than in other parts of the global economy, especially in
comparison to other high and upper middle-income countries such as Korea or Malaysia.

Such economic trends have, in turn, placed downward pressure on public higher education budgets. Around
half of the countries in Europe have reduced their higher education spending since 2008, with negative
funding trends particularly acute in EU-102 countries (see Table 4). This trend is not uniform across Europe,
however. Between 2008 and 2014, for example, Norway, Sweden, Belgium, France, the Netherlands, Germany
and Austria all increased the amount of public expenditure for higher education (EUA, 2015).

Table 4: Evolution of Public Funding for Higher Education between 2008 and 2014
                                                                             Country/System
               Changes in Public Funding 2008-2014
                                                                       (Change adjusted for inflation)
            Between 20% and 40% increase                     Germany, Norway, Sweden

            Between 10% and 20% increase                     Austria, Belgium (fr and fl), Denmark, Poland

            Between 5% and 10% increase                      ---

            Between 5% increase and -5% decrease             France (+), Netherlands (+), Portugal (-)

            Between 5% and 10% decrease                      Croatia, Slovakia, Slovenia

            Between 10% and 20% decrease                     Czech Republic, Spain, Iceland, Italy, Serbia*

            Between 20% and 40% decrease                     Ireland, Lithuania, United Kingdom

            Decrease greater than 40%                        Greece, Hungary, Latvia
                     Source: EUA, 2015; *Inflation data is sourced from the World Bank; Source: EUA, 2015

Underfunding is not a new challenge in Central Europe and the Baltic countries, where, in absolute terms,
higher education receives significantly less money—per student, per faculty and per researcher — compared
to their Western European neighbours (and even more starkly so compared to the United States and East
Asia). In noting the “orders of magnitude differences between different regions of the world, resulting in a
large geographical imbalance in financing scientific research at universities, with the least favourable situation
in the post-communist countries,” Keszei (2015) highlights the challenges Central Europe and Baltic countries
face in trying to compete with their western neighbours on budgets that are shrinking instead of growing.
Given the pressures being placed on higher education to provide more relevant teaching and research
outcomes, these fiscal constraints inherently dampen the region’s global competitiveness and potential.


2
  The EU-10 includes Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, the
Slovak Republic, and Slovenia.

                                                                                                                6
    Figure 4: Expenditure on Tertiary Educational Institutions as a Percentage of GDP
      3

    2.5

      2

    1.5

      1

    0.5

      0




Source: OECD Education at a glance: Educational finance indicators; World Bank workshop, Zagreb, April 2016

To fuel the recovery, many governments are attempting to improve the match between the skills of
graduates and labor market demands. Although internationally comparable data on the relevance of higher
education graduates’ skills and competencies for the job market remain scarce, several regional and business
studies have shown widespread perceptions of skills shortages and mismatches even in contexts of strong
educational achievement. For instance, skilled labour shortages were the second most commonly reported
constraint to growth across all sampled countries in the BEEP (Business Environment and Enterprise
Performance) survey in 2008. While the economic downturn may have provided something of a respite, skilled
labour shortages remain important, especially in the Baltic countries (BEEPS, 2015).

Skills mismatches also threaten innovation capacity. The supply of human resources for innovation (e.g.,
scientists, researchers and engineers) in Central European and Baltic countries is insufficient. Tighter and more
effective links between the three sides of the “knowledge triangle”3 - education, research, and innovation - can
fuel the development of entrepreneurial, creative and innovative skills within and across academic specialities.
Such linkages also promote more interactive learning environments and contribute to growth and job creation.

The second theme, European integration, refers and situates national higher education policies across
Central Europe and the Baltic countries in the broader European policy environment, as exemplified by the
establishment of a common European Higher Education Area. Supranational initiatives, such as the EU’s
Education and Training 2020 Strategy, Horizon 2020, and its Modernisation Agenda for Higher Education, as
well as the intergovernmental Bologna Process, have strongly influenced national higher education policies
(see Box 1). Although non-binding, these agendas influence national policy makers (Czarniawska-Joerges &
Sevón, 2005; Zgaga, 2013) and shape higher education policy development, but countries across the region are
integrating these agendas into their policies to differing degrees and at different speeds.

Box 1: EU Policy Priorities and the Focus of the Bologna Process




3
 The knowledge triangle is a concept endorsed by the European Commission as a key driver of a knowledge-
based society, which is a goal of the EU’s Lisbon and EU2020 strategies.

                                                                                                               7
The European Commission fixes five key priorities for higher education in the EU, namely:

          increasing the number of higher education graduates;
          improving the quality and relevance of teaching and learning;
          promoting mobility of students and staff and cross-border cooperation;
          strengthening the "knowledge triangle", linking education, research, and innovation; and
          creating effective governance and funding mechanisms for higher education.

The Bologna Process is a collective effort of public authorities, universities, teachers, and students, together
with stakeholder associations, employers, quality assurance agencies, international organisations, and
institutions, including the European Commission. The main focus is:

          the introduction of the three cycle system (bachelor/master/doctorate);
          strengthened quality assurance; and
          easier recognition of qualifications and periods of study.

In Yerevan in May 2015, the Education Ministers identified four key priorities for the future:

      1.       enhancing the quality and relevance of learning and teaching;
      2.       fostering the employability of graduates throughout their working lives;
      3.       making our systems more inclusive; and
      4.       implementing agreed structural reforms.


Third, a declining population in Europe is shrinking the number of working- and student-age people. The
demographic decline stems from low fertility rates (not exceeding 1.5 in EU-10 countries), rapid aging, and net
emigration.

Consequently, after tremendous growth in the higher education sector in Europe that started in the 1980s
(resulting in the average tertiary education attainment rate4 across the EU reaching 37.9 percent), the
number of new students participating in higher education is slowly declining, particularly across Central
Europe and the Baltic countries (see Figure 5). These demographic challenges and fiscal limitations are
pushing countries in the region to rethink their higher education financing and policy.




4
    those between the ages of 30-34 who have successfully obtained a tertiary qualification

                                                                                                                   8
Figure 5: Evolution of Higher Education Student Numbers between 2008 and 2015




Source: EUA, 2015

Coupled with a decrease in the number of young people, higher education in the region appears to be at a
turning point; a transition from a ‘growth’ to a ‘mature’ sector. With significant growth in the number of
students, institutions, programmes and faculty over the past 20 years, higher education is now facing steady or
even dwindling demand, entering a more “mature” phase. The maturation means that governments raise their
expectations of HEIs regarding efficiency, productivity, and effectiveness. Long accustomed to being viewed as
a ‘growth’ sector, higher education must now compete with other compelling claims on the nation’s resources,
such as healthcare, transportation and prisons, for instance (Leontiades, 2007). The government typically
reduces HEIs’ autonomy, increases regulation and demands greater accountability (Levine, 1997). One need
look no further than the proliferation of quality assurance agencies in Europe and to the increasing
quantification of outputs for evidence of this transition. Given England’s very mature system, for example, HM
Treasury (2015) continues to place a strong emphasis on improving the productivity and performance of the
higher education sector.

Even with these three common themes, it is important to realise that these dynamics and drivers manifest
themselves differently in different countries; the idiosyncratic nature of a country’s higher education
environment should not be underestimated. For example, the skills shortage and the decline in the number of
relevant-age youth is much more acute in the Baltic countries, which have experienced high levels of
emigration in recent years (BEEPS, 2015).

 2.2.     Common Policy Objectives
Given these common regional drivers and acknowledging that certain country-specific dynamics exist, the
national higher education strategies or development plans are targeting similar policy objectives. Table 1
presents some examples of common strategic policy objectives that can be discerned across Central Europe
and the Baltic countries, indicating in which countries they are currently evident. These objectives will be used
later in the document to illustrate opportunities for strategic financing to promote and/or enforce key
government policies.


                                                                                                               9
Table 1: Common Higher Education Policy Objectives throughout Central Europe and Baltic Countries
                                            HR     LV     SI    RO      LT    GR     EE     PL    CZ     SK     HU      BG

Assuring and Enhancing Quality               X                    X     X             X     X      X      X      X      X

Improving Links Between HE and the
                                                    X      X                   X      X     X      X      X      X      X
Labour Market

Boosting Knowledge Generation and
                                             X      X      X      X     X             X                          X      X
Technology Transfer

Consolidating and Diversifying the
                                                    X      X      X            X                   X      X      X
Sector

Optimising HEI Finances                      X             X      X                                X             X      X

Fostering Internationalisation and
                                                    X                                 X            X      X             X
Collaboration

Increasing Equitable Participation           X                          X             X     X      X             X      X

*For the sake of comparability, the table uses generic policy categories, which may be articulated differently in national
strategic documents.



3. Public Funding: An Instrument for Pursuing Policy Objectives Strategically
With the majority of higher education funding in the region coming from public resources, governments are
increasingly exploring how financing can promote policy reforms and help steer the sector towards specific
strategic goals and objectives.

 3.1.      The Importance of Public Funding
Central European and Baltic countries are heavily reliant upon public funding for higher education (see
Figure 1). Public funding represents between 50 and 90 percent of the universities’ income (for institutions
with available data--see Pruvot, Claeys-Kulik & Estermann, 2015). These funding norms are likely to remain
important, given the political climate, the high share of personnel and fixed costs within higher education
institutions (HEIs) and the lack of readily available and/or viable alternatives for funding (ibid.). In some
countries, governments are reaffirming their commitment to sufficiently fund higher education. In Slovenia,
for example, the government is committed to increasing and retaining funding for higher education at 1
percent of GDP.

Figure 1: Public Funding Represents the Majority of HE Funding in the Region

                        % of Tertiary Education Spending from Public Resources in 2012
 100%
  80%
  60%                                                                                                         Private
  40%
                                                                                                              Public
  20%
   0%




                                                                                                                        10
*80-100%, **60-79%
Source: OECD Education at a glance: Educational finance indicators; World Bank workshop, Zagreb, April 2016

Given this reliance on public funding, there is also a recognition that HEIs must diversify their income
streams to non-state sources, such as industry. This is particularly important in Central Europe and the Baltic
countries, where the ongoing financial and economic challenges continue to constrain public budgets.

 3.2.      Options for Allocating Public Funds to Higher Education
There are a number of ways that financing can be allocated to support policy objectives. International
experience shows that strategic financing is not a ready-made concept, but a broad label that offers a menu of
design options that must be tailored to country-specific conditions. Figure 2 provides a typology of the various
mechanisms that governments typically utilize to allocate funding to HEIs, each of which can be strategically
aligned with policy objectives.

Figure 2: Public Funding Allocation Mechanisms




Source: Pruvot, Claeys-Kulik & Estermann, 2015

In Central Europe and the Baltic countries, the most popular approaches are allocating line-item funding
(i.e., separate, non-fungible amounts for salaries, operations, and other expenditure types) or block grants
(i.e., funding that is fungible across expenditure types). The amount apportioned to each higher education
institution can be determined in multiple ways. The amount could be based on history, where last year’s
amount is adjusted up or down according to some inflation factor, or based on negotiations between the
government and the institution. In many instances, a funding formula which distributes the public budget
according to (quantitative) measures of institutions’ past activity), typically utilizing input-oriented drivers, is
employed. A more performance-based approach would be to use a performance contract or employ outcome-
oriented indicators in the funding formula (e.g., using the number of graduates instead of the number of
students). For many Central European and Baltic countries, funding is primarily allocated according to the
number of study places and other input-oriented indicators (see Table 2 below for a breakdown of allocation
mechanisms in the region).

Table 2: Input-oriented Formulae Remain the Most Common Allocation Method in the Region - Percentage
of total public expenditure on HEIs per allocation mechanism
                                   HR         GR        RO        SI        PL         EE       CZ        LV    LT

Negotiation and/or Historically
                                             70%        5%                            15%
Determined

Input-Oriented Funding
                                   90%                  70%      50%                           50%       74%   80%
Formula



                                                                                                                 11
Output-Oriented Funding
                                  7.5%                 5%       50%     95.33%               26%        6%       20%
Formula

Performance Agreements/
                                  2.5%                                              45%
Contracts

Competitive Funds                          10-20%      20%               3.2%       31%      24%        9%

Excellence Schemes                           5%                          1.47%       9%

Other Alternatives                        10-15%                                                      11%

NB: The figures in this table are approximations only, calculated based on a pre-workshop survey, World Bank workshop,
Zagreb, April 2016

Funding formulae can be calibrated to promote specific policy objectives. The choice of indicators is
paramount not only to reinforce policy objectives, but also to ensure that unintended consequences are
avoided. Careful consideration must be given to the choice and weightings of indicators to offset potential
negative side-effects. An allocation system that rewards increases in the number of students or graduates, for
example, might lead to concerns about quality; therefore, a robust quality assurance system would be
necessary to mitigate such risk. Moreover, while performance indicators in funding formulae (and other
instruments) can provide powerful and necessary incentives to strategically influence the quality and
behaviour of HEIs, such criteria may also be seen to encroach upon the autonomy of these institutions. The
involvement of HEIs and other stakeholders in the definition of these indicators, and indeed at all stages of the
funding reform process, is therefore crucial.

Performance agreements or contracts, negotiated bilateral contracts between the government and an
individual HEI, offer an opportunity to define mutual objectives that align with national strategic priorities
and institution-specific missions. The amount of money attached to such agreements differs, and can
determine the degree to which performance agreements incentivise certain objectives (or not). Currently,
performance agreements are used in approximately 15 out of 22 European systems5 (Pruvot, Claeys-Kilik &
Estermann, 2015), with the majority of public funding for HEIs allocated via such agreements in countries such
as Austria, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Colombia, Hong Kong and Chile.

As with all allocation mechanisms, performance agreements come with some risk, including the perception
that such contracts may be punitive, the potential for high transaction costs and the risk that the wrong kinds
of behaviours may be encouraged. If agreements have ‘hard’ mechanisms that result in sanctions or decreases
in funding for HEIs should they fail to meet goals, they could be viewed in some instances as punitive rather
than as an incentive (Salmi & Hauptman, 2006), which could deter HEIs from engaging in constructive
negotiations with the government. Additionally, the design, negotiation, monitoring and evaluation of
performance agreements require significant input from various actors: governments, institutions, agencies and
independent experts. The transaction costs can therefore be substantial (de Boer et al., 2015). Finally, the
incentive structures contained in agreements may actually encourage unintended and overtly negative
behaviours, such as intentional underperformance in order to set low benchmarks that will be used to
measure future performance. One example is the lowering of academic standards (or inflation of grades) to
improve progress toward graduation (Pruvot, Claeys-Kulik & Estermann, 2015a).

Competitive funds - central funds with defined purposes - can act as a stimulus for institutions to focus their
activities on areas conducive to certain policy objectives, such as improving quality and relevance, promoting
innovation, and fostering institutional improvement and profiling, all of which are difficult to achieve through
funding formulae or categorical funds. The criteria against which proposals are peer-reviewed and selected

5
    Only two Central European and Baltic countries (Croatia and Estonia) use this mechanism.

                                                                                                                   12
can be defined in a way to encourage HEIs to focus their strategic planning efforts on such policy priorities,
which not only furthers such objectives but also helps HEIs to develop proposals based on a solid identification
of needs and a rigorous action plan (Salmi & Hauptman, 2006). Competitive funds have been effective
incentives in Argentina, Bulgaria, Chile, Denmark, Finland, Ghana, Hungary, Indonesia and the United States.

Competitive funds may, however, exacerbate hierarchies between HEIs, favoring already strong institutions
and disadvantaging others, which is counterproductive if the goal is to boost the overall performance of the
higher education system. To address (and encourage) the heterogeneity of institutions, several funding
windows can be opened with different eligibility criteria, alleviating imbalances between HEIs. In Indonesia, for
example, three levels of competition were set up so as to cater to differing institutional capacities. This
decision helped to prevent the strongest institutions from winning all of the funding over the weaker
institutions. To provide support to smaller institutions, funding could also require partnerships between
stronger and weaker HEIs (e.g., in China) and/or assistance could be provided to some HEIs to help with the
development of their systems, human resources and proposal development (e.g., in Chile) (Salmi & Hauptman,
2006, p. 21-22).

Excellence schemes, in which funding is directed towards large-scale and strategically concentrated
initiatives, are another funding allocation mechanism that can align with policy objectives. By concentrating
resources in defined areas or institutions, the intention is to promote certain outcomes. Whatever the
intended objectives of the excellence scheme - be it to improve quality or international competitiveness,
increase internationalisation, or restructure the higher education system - it is important that the selection
criteria and administration modalities are aligned to these objectives. While excellence schemes have proved
successful in countries such as Germany, Ecuador, Malaysia and New Zealand, one limitation is that they tend
to benefit only certain HEIs or academic fields (STEM subjects, for instance) while sacrificing support to others
(such as the humanities). Indeed, the funding of excellence schemes does not extend to all participants within
the higher education sector equally. Rather, the strategic concentration of public funding creates a kind of
institutional or thematic hierarchy. This drive towards specialisation has the potential to create tensions within
comprehensive universities particularly, which have traditionally sought to maintain a balance between
academic fields. Policy makers and institutional leaders should also establish an exit strategy to allow the
universities to sustain new and heightened level of activities and collaborations (Pruvot, Claeys-Kulik &
Estermann, 2015a, p. 96).

While these allocation mechanisms provide a promising set of tools that can be aligned with policy
objectives, identifying the most effective funding mechanism for a country’s unique context can be
challenging. Although formula-based allocations are the most prominent way of delivering public funding in
almost two thirds of European systems, negotiated allocations or historically-determined allocations remain
important in France and Italy, as well as in a few smaller systems.

A growing number of European countries are recognising the need to adapt their funding regimes, and are
experimenting with strategically reforming their mix of allocation mechanisms. The governments of Latvia
and Croatia, for example, have recently undertaken reviews of their higher education financing systems to
better reflect the government’s strategic goals. Table 5 provides an overview of allocation mechanisms across
selected European countries and illustrates how countries are increasingly using multiple approaches to
finance their higher education system:

Table 5: An Overview of Allocation Mechanisms across Europe
                                                                                       Negotiated or historically-
                                Funding formula              Performance contracts
                                                                                              determined
Primary mechanism      Brandenburg (Germany), Catalonia      Austria                 Denmark**, Estonia, France,
                       (Spain), Czech Republic, Denmark*,                            Italy, North Rhine-Westphalia
                       England (UK), Finland, Flanders and                           (Germany),           Norway,


                                                                                                                 13
                       French-speaking Community of                                    Switzerland
                       Belgium,     Hesse       (Germany),
                       Hungary, Ireland, Iceland, Latvia,
                       Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
                       Romania*, Sweden*
Secondary              Estonia, France, Italy, North Rhine- Brandenburg                Austria, Catalonia, Czech
mechanism              Westphalia (Germany), Norway,        (Germany),      England    Republic, Hesse (Germany),
                       Sweden**                             (UK), France, Hesse        Hungary, Poland, Sweden
                                                            (Germany),      Ireland,
                                                            Latvia,    Netherlands,
                                                            Portugal
*Teaching funding only; **Research funding only; NB: Slovenia and Lithuania were not   analysed. Source: Pruvot, Claeys-
Kulik & Estermann, 2015

While many countries in Central Europe and the Baltics have begun introducing aspects of strategic
financing, further adaptation to their systems of financing higher education could help meet shifting
demands and new aspirations. Further shifts towards strategic financing may prompt both government and
institutions to be more dynamic, responsive and proactive in their operations. Line-item allocations promote
stability, but do not encourage innovation and academic entrepreneurial behaviour.


      4. Strategic Financing by Policy Objective
This section provides examples of allocation methods that can be matched to policy objectives, highlighting
some promising practices from around the word with a specific focus on Europe. It is organised according to
the common higher education policy objectives outlined in Section 2.2 and are not presented in any order of
preference.

A selection of relevant indicators and a description of the associated risks and the requisite enabling
conditions are also provided for each policy objective. Alongside allocation methods, there is a clear interest
among policy makers across the region to identify and define indicators related to their strategic objectives.
Careful consideration must be given to the appropriateness of these indicators in light of local context. Indeed,
while data is generally available throughout the region, recent national and European-level projects, such as U-
multirank6, have demonstrated that using quantitative indicators to capture quality in teaching, innovation and
engagement remains more challenging than measuring research performance. Experience from EU member
states indicates that using a combination of proxy indicators is a promising way of achieving desired outcomes
(such as quality in teaching and learning), while caution is urged when it comes to using indicators over which
HEIs may have little influence (such as graduate employment outcomes) (EC, 2014).

Likewise, for each financing strategy, there are associated risks (see Section 3.2.) and enabling conditions
that need to be in place to ensure their efficacy. For example, in order to use the graduate employment rate
as a criterion in funding mechanisms, appropriate graduate tracer data need to be available.

    4.1.    Assuring and Enhancing Quality
Enhancing quality is a primary policy objective for most governments throughout Central Europe and the
Baltic countries. Definitions and indicators of quality vary widely, however, ranging from ensuring high
standards of excellence to achieving value for money and fitness for purpose (Harvey & Green, 1993). Quality



6
  U-multirank is a user-driven, multidimensional, world ranking of universities and colleges covering many
aspects of higher education: research, teaching and learning, international orientation, knowledge transfer and
regional engagament. It provides data on a diversity of indicators for over 1,300 HEIs, 3,250 faculties and
10,700 study programmes from more than 90 countries.

                                                                                                                    14
can also refer to educational, research, and administrative activities, and can be tied to processes and
outcomes.

The focus of quality assurance and enhancement initiatives has distinctly shifted in recent years from
research to teaching and learning. In Europe in particular, teaching and learning have received considerable
attention from policy makers, as evidenced by the recent Yerevan Communiqué (2015) issued by the EHEA
Ministers, in which the first priority is to enhance the quality and relevance of learning and teaching.

While funding can support quality, a well-developed quality assurance system at both the national and
institutional level is the foundation for assuring and enhancing quality. A robust quality assurance system can
also be used as a prerequisite for obtaining funding (i.e., HEIs must be accredited to receive any resource
transfers from public funding bodies).

                                       Supporting Funding Mechanism

        Competitive Funds                                         Other     Alternatives   -    Merit-Based
        Performance Contracts                                      Scholarships
        Excellence Schemes
                                             Potential Indicators

        Research publications/citations                           Number of graduates
        Graduate employment                                       Number of Nobel laureates
        Didactical qualifications of teachers                     Student satisfaction
        Exams passed
                        Risks                                              Enabling Conditions

        Exacerbating differences between HEIS and                 A robust quality assurance system
         academic fields                                           Clear and transparent criteria and
        High transactions costs                                    processes for the evaluation of proposals
        Reduced autonomy for HEIs                                  and performance
        Stimulation of unintended, negative                       Exit strategies in place for Excellence
         behaviours                                                 Schemes



Competitive funds can target specific areas that have been identified as a priority for quality improvement
and can be customised for specific sectors or types of institutions. Eligibility can be linked to participation in
or recognition by national quality assurance and accreditation programmes (e.g., such as done in Poland,
Argentina and Chile), or quality improvement (whatever the definition) can be a specific goal of the funds and
a key criterion in the evaluation and selection of proposals.

Performance contracts are also an effective strategy for promoting quality. Given that contracts are
negotiated bilaterally between the government and individual institutions, they can be customised to address
specific aspects of quality, as related to institutional needs. Performance indicators that relate to quality vary
based on how quality is defined but could include completion rates, qualifications of teachers, student
satisfaction, number of citations, etc. In the Netherlands, for example, 7 percent of teaching funds are based
on quality-oriented performance agreements.

Excellence schemes are another tool intended to boost quality. In this context, quality is defined as
“exceptional”. Therefore, the funding of excellence schemes does not extend to all participants within the
higher education sector equally. Rather, the primary intention is to foster excellence via large-scale and


                                                                                                               15
strategically concentrated initiatives, where public funding is directed to HEIs (see Example 1), creating a kind
of institutional or thematic hierarchy.

Example 1: Centres of Research Excellence in New Zealand

The Centres of Research Excellence (CoREs) Fund was established in 2001 to encourage the development of
excellent tertiary education-based research that is collaborative, strategically focused and creates significant
knowledge transfer activities.

CoREs are inter-institutional research networks, with researchers working together on commonly agreed work
programmes. CoREs make a contribution to New Zealand’s development and link to user groups. They also
build research capacity and capabilities through post-graduate programmes and the training of new
researchers.

The CoREs Fund is allocated in accordance with the Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills and Employment’s
funding mechanism issued under section 159L of the Education Act 1989. Funding from the CoREs Fund is
determined through a fully contestable process. Funding is allocated and monitored through a funding
arrangement with the Tertiary Education Commission.


Finally, while not as strong a funding mechanism as the three previous supply-side examples, student
funding can be calibrated to enhance quality. Merit-based scholarships that reward the best students are the
most obvious example. Merit-/ performance-based criteria can also be extended to student loans, as is the
case in German BAFöG loans and Estonian student loans, for example.

 4.2.     Improving Links between Higher Education and the Labour Market
Performance contracts and funding formulae (utilizing both input and output indicators) can support greater
alignment between higher education and the needs of the labour market. Priority-based formulae, in which
governments distribute funds to HEIs to promote enrolment in high priority fields of study, provide a strong
incentive for HEIs to shift resources and attention to these areas. In Finland, for example, the funding of
student places is supply-driven and allocated according to forecast labour market demands.

                                        Supporting Funding Mechanism

        Funding Formula                                           Other     Alternatives    -    Merit-Based
        Performance Contracts                                      Scholarships, Loan Subsidies/Forgiveness

                                             Potential Indicators

        Graduate employment rate                                  ECTS attained
        Length of time to graduation                              Number of students in priority fields

                        Risks                                              Enabling Conditions

        Employment rates can be impacted by                       Robust graduate and labour market data
         factors beyond the control of HEIs                        Capacity and flexibility for HEIs to
        Student choice is motivated by a multitude                 incorporate   employment data and
         of factors in addition to funding                          employer feedback into curriculum
        Labour market forecasts are complex and                    revisions
         reactions are delayed

An indicator related to the graduate employment rate can also be introduced into the funding formula to
encourage HEIs to consider how their programmes contribute to their graduates’ employment prospects, as

                                                                                                              16
used in the Czech Republic, Finland, Hungary, Italy, Portugal, Romania and Slovakia (Pruvot, Claeys-Kulik &
Estermann, 2015). Caution is urged here, as final employment in any given field is not guaranteed and can be
outside the control of universities. Employment depends very heavily on the robustness of the local economy,
which can be particularly challenging in developing economies. In such cases, it is useful to know whether jobs
are being left vacant due to a lack of appropriately skilled workers.

Some countries (e.g., Denmark and Finland) also aim to shorten the length of time that students spend
studying so that gradates can enter the labour market sooner and at a younger age. In addition to completely
restructuring degree cycles, throughput indicators can be utilised in funding formulae that aim to increase the
rate and number of graduates and their time to graduation.

Targeted capacity funding is another mechanism to improve links with the labour market, which can be
included as part of a performance contract or allocated separately. Governments and HEIs agree on how
many students specific HEIs will teach (input) and/or how many graduates they will “produce” (output) within
specific disciplines and against what tariffs. Such funds can also be awarded on a competitive basis, whereby
improved labour market outcomes, for instance, can be a key criterion in the selection of winning proposals
(see Example 2).

Such allocation mechanisms require accurate and appropriate labour market data, which, being volatile and
changeable, can be difficult to obtain and even more difficult to project into the future. Employment
depends very heavily on the robustness of the local economy, which can be particularly challenging in
developing economies. Moreover, the implementation of strategic financing for this policy objective is also
muddied by the fact that there is a time lag between the data and the response in terms of redirecting
resources to specific fields (i.e., governments and institutions are not reacting in real time to data and thus the
response may not be as targeted as hoped for). In any case, it is useful to know whether jobs are being left
vacant due to a lack of appropriately skilled workers. Labour-market projections can, for those countries that
allocate state-funded budget places to students, help guide the allocation process of study places by discipline.

Example 2: England’s Economic Challenge Investment Fund

The Higher Education Funding Council of England (HEFCE) established the 'Economic Challenge Investment
Fund' following the Global Financial Crisis to help the higher education sector address rapidly some of the
labour market challenges. The primary purpose of the funding was to enable HEIs to support individuals and
businesses affected by the recession.

Following this, support for undergraduate and graduate internships has been an ongoing funding priority.
The scheme aims to assist an increased number of unemployed graduates and to support the Government's
priority sectors for economic growth, including small businesses.

Overall, students and graduates reported strong development of employability skills and an increase in
confidence directly attributable to their internship experience. The majority of employers reported that
interns brought new energy and fresh insights to their business, and that the value of the intern exceeded
expectations.

Source: HEFCE, 2011


A number of mechanism can be used to encourage students to attain skills needed in the labor market,
including: grants and scholarships in priority fields of study; favourable terms and conditions for loans made to
students enrolling in higher priority fields of study; tuition waivers for enrolment in priority fields; loan
forgiveness for employment in high priority fields or public service; bonus payments; and bonded scholarships
(i.e., scholarships that require recipients to work for a particular employer for a specified period of time or to


                                                                                                                17
work in rural or remote areas; otherwise they may be required to repay the value of the support they received
from the scholarship). The U.S. Work-Study Program, for example, subsidizes the wages for undergraduate and
graduate students holding part-time jobs, allowing them to earn money to help pay education expenses. Such
a program could be adapted to encourage work related to a student’s course of study for students enrolled in
certain priority fields. This would support greater linkages between HEIs, students and employers. However, it
is important to note that students’ choices are driven by a multitude of considerations, such as personal
preferences, family background, etc., of which public subsidies are only one element.

 4.3.     Boosting Knowledge Generation and Technology Transfer
Funding formulae and/or performance contracts can use output indicators to boost knowledge generation
and technology transfer. Such indicators could include bibliometric criteria, the amount of external funding
obtained, and the number of contracts with business and industry. Catalonia in Spain, the German state of
Hesse, and the Czech Republic all allocate funds as part of their funding formulae based on the amount of
income HEIs receive from science and technology transfer activities, for example.

                                     Supporting Funding Mechanism

       Output-Oriented Funding Formula                           Other Alternatives – Innovation Vouchers
       Competitive Funds
       Performance Contracts
                                            Potential Indicators

       Bibliometric criteria                                     Number of contracts with business and
       Amount of external funding obtained                        industry
       PhD candidates                                            Patent applications

                       Risks                                              Enabling Conditions

       Exacerbation of differences between HEIs                  Firms must view higher education
       Preferencing applied research over basic                   institutions as a source of value-add
        research or, for example, STEM over                        technical assistance and have absorptive
        humanities                                                 capacity for university research


Output-oriented indicators can, however, reinforce existing funding patterns by allocating money to those
research institutions that already perform well and further disadvantaging others. Similarly, applied
research is sometimes favoured over basic and high-risk research, particularly if an indicator rewards contract
research with external partners (Pruvot, Claeys-Kulik & Estermann, 2015).

Other alternatives include funds that are set up to stimulate demand-based university-industry
collaboration. Knowledge or innovation vouchers, for example, are small allocations from the government to
eligible business entities for the purchase of services from HEIs, typically for new or enhanced products,
processes or services. Knowledge vouchers are simple and therefore easy to adopt, provided that firms have a
minimum “absorptive capacity” towards university research and that universities and public research
institutions are willing to co-operate with industry. They have been used, for example, in the Netherlands,
Ireland, the UK, Denmark, and parts of Germany (see Example 3), with promising results.

Example 3: Innovation Vouchers in Baden-Wurttemberg (Germany)

In 2008, the German state of Baden-Wurttemberg introduced an innovation voucher scheme for SMEs
called Innovationsgutscheine. The aim of the programme was to strengthen the innovation potential of


                                                                                                              18
SMEs in selected sectors.

The innovation vouchers were given to enterprises with fewer than 50 employees that have the potential to
make use of R&D services for product, service and process innovation. Each voucher had a value between
€2,500 and €6,000 and could be used with public and private providers across Europe. In the period 2008-
2010, Baden-Württemberg invested €3 million in this programme.

Preliminary investigation shows that not all potential beneficiaries accessed the scheme in the same way.
Larger firms, as well as manufacturing firms (in particular IT firms), were more likely to apply for a subsidy.
Firms located in areas with high innovative capabilities were more likely to apply to the scheme than those
from less developed regions. Approximately two-thirds of vouchers were used with service providers from
the private sector, often engineering companies, while one third were used with public R&D institutions.
Despite the openness to national and foreign service providers, more than 90% of the vouchers were used
in the region.

Requests for innovation vouchers can be submitted continuously to the Ministry of Finance and Economy
and are promptly processed. By March 2013, 2,600 applications for innovation vouchers had been received
and 2,000 had been approved.

Source: Coletti, 2014

 4.4.     Consolidating and/or Diversifying the Sector

The organization of the higher education sector and the network of institutions must be continuously
adjusted to changes in the demand for higher education in both quantitative and qualitative terms.
Diversification requires clearly defined institutional profiles, while comprehensive sector consolidation
includes the merger of HEIs and the internal restructuring of others.

                                       Supporting Funding Mechanism

        Performance Contracts                                     Other Alternatives – Seed Money for
        Competitive Funds                                          Mergers
        Excellence Schemes
                                             Potential Indicators

        Mission specific indicators

                        Risks                                              Enabling Conditions

        Mergers between “equals” may result in                    A clear communication strategy and
         power struggles                                            specified criteria for potential mergers and
        Top-down processes reduce autonomy for                     profiling activities
         HEIs and negatively affect motivation to
         work within the new structures
        Inter-disciplinary tension as a result of
         profiling/specialisation

Performance contracts between the state and individual HEIs can be a useful tool for promoting and
differentiating institutional profiles. By negotiating directly with HEIs, governments can influence institutional
missions and reinforce role differentiation – as well as set mutually-agreed targets and incentives accordingly.
Examples of higher education systems that use performance contracts to stimulate the development of


                                                                                                               19
diverse institutional profiles include Hong Kong (where 10% of funding is allocated through the Performance
and Role-related Funding Scheme), Australia (where universities and the ministry agree in the Mission Based
Compacts what contribution HEIs will make towards national priorities, like equity targets, quality targets,
student satisfaction, etc.), New Zealand, the Netherlands (see Example 4) and many German states.

Policymakers must consider to how best to stimulate the willing involvement of HEIs. Experience indicates
that ‘softer’ agreements, such as letters of intent, are a promising approach to improve interaction and to
create common ground for aligning agendas and seeking consensus (e.g., as in Scotland and Ireland). On the
other hand, in countries like the Netherlands, the perception is that for ‘real impact’ more focused tools (e.g.,
linking the agreements to money) are required (de Boer et al., 2015, p.14).

The amount of money attached to such agreements also differs and can determine the degree to which
performance agreements incentivise profiling (or not). Performance contracts may constitute a small
percentage of the overall funding of HEIs or they may constitute the main public funding allocation
mechanism, such as in Austria, New Zealand and in some U.S. states. Indeed, the experience of some European
countries suggests that too great a percentage of performance-based funding may be counterproductive (EC,
2014).

Example 4: Diversifying the Sector - Institutional Profiling in the Netherlands

Performance agreements between the ministry and individual HEIs have been established in which
institutional profiling is a key criterion. As a first step, HEIs were asked to draft a strategic plan with their
objectives for 2012-2016, in which the strengthening of their education and research profile was a priority
(e.g., portfolio of educational offerings, priorities in research response to strategic priorities in national
innovation policy and grand challenges, etc.).

The universities were free to choose the format of their strategic plan as well as develop their own
objectives, but it had to include targets for 2015 in relation to seven educational indicators, some of which
related to profiling.

Seven percent of the block grant was used to foster quality and profiling separated into two streams: (i) 5
percent is conditional funding (for universities to obtain their share of this stream they have to have a
performance agreement with the ministry), and (ii) 2 percent is selective funding (this stream includes a
competitive element as those universities which have achieved a higher score in the assessment of their
strategic plan receive relatively more money).

In 2016, the review commission will evaluate the performance of HEIs with regard to their targets. If a HEI
does not reach its targets related to the seven educational indicators in 2015, the HEI would receive a
smaller share of the conditional funding for the period 2017-2020.

Sources: Pruvot, Claeys-Kulik & Estermann, 2015a; Ministry of Education, Culture and Science of the
Netherlands

Competitive funds also act as a stimulus for institutions to develop idiosyncratic profiles. In order to deal
with (and indeed encourage) the heterogeneity of institutions, several financing windows can be opened with
different eligibility criteria and funding ceilings (Salmi & Hauptman, 2006, p. 21). This also helps to alleviate
imbalances between HEIs. In Indonesia, for example, three different windows of competition were set up so as
to cater to differing institutional capacities.

Excellence schemes are another tool that can influence the diversification of the sector. While they are
primarily intended to create “hubs” or “centres of excellence” (i.e., hierarchical rather than horizontal
differentiation) in response to evolving economic and social demands, participating institutions are

                                                                                                                20
nevertheless encouraged (obliged even) to identify, strengthen, and capitalise on their strengths and assets.
This drive towards profiling and specialisation, however, has the potential to create tensions within
comprehensive universities, which have traditionally sought to maintain a balance between academic fields.
The pressure to focus on a limited number of flagship disciplines or even niches requires concerted and
effective governance (Pruvot, Claeys-Kulik & Estermann, 2015, p. 164).

Governments can provide seed funding to promote bottom-up sector consolidation processes, in which HEIs
receive funds with the aim of finding mutually acceptable “marriages” by themselves - rather than government
simply mandating mergers (see Example 5). Bottom-up processes may garner greater ownership and support
among HEIs, by enabling them to realize their own plans without too much external interference. Such a
decentralised approach to consolidation is likely to result in a more careful analysis of potential efficiency
gains. In such instances, funding acts as a stimulus, which provides incentives to institutions to plan potential
mergers, to build joint units or to collaborate to increase sector efficiency. Such stimulus funds tend to be
allocated on a competitive basis.

In order to retain some degree of strategic coordination, the government should ensure a clear
communication strategy and specify criteria for potential mergers. Experience also suggests that the most
successful mergers are not between equals, where competition and power struggles may result in negative
attitudes and behaviours, but between HEIs that are dissimilar.

Example 5: Denmark’s comprehensive sector consolidation

The Danish government believed that the Danish higher education and research sector (universities and
non-university research institutions) was too fragmented, and wanted it to be reorganized by forming
critical mass and merging institutions. The political message was very clear, but the government did not
regulate which institutions should merge.

A financial pool to support merger processes was provided, the institutions came up with plans and the
ministry approved. The program combined a clear policy objective with respect for the
autonomy/ownership of HEIs to provide financial incentives for action.

The outcome is a major restructuring of the sector by mergers, plus substantial internal restructuring of the
newly built units (for instance the University of Aarhus, which is well-known in Europe for the
comprehensive change process induced by the mergers).

Source: World Bank, 2014b, p. 47.

 4.5.     Optimising HEI Finances

Optimising the financing of higher education has a twofold agenda: cost containment and income
diversification for HEIs. In a time of constrained public resources, HEIs’ incomes are squeezed, especially given
the reliance of public funding in Europe. As such, HEIs cannot rely solely on the public purse, and must diversify
their income streams to include non-state sources, such as industry, households and the non-profit sector. At
the same time, maximising what limited resources they do have requires doing more with less.

                                      Supporting Funding Mechanism

        Output-Oriented Funding Formula                           Other Alternatives – Matching Funds,
        Performance Contracts                                      Innovation Funds, Demand-side Vouchers

                                             Potential Indicators



                                                                                                                21
       Number of students who took exams                     Years to completion
       ECTS/credits attained                                 Patents received
       Graduate numbers/rates                                External research funding obtained
       Publications/citations                                Amount of income received from science
                                                               and technology transfer activities

                       Risks                                          Enabling Conditions

       HEIs may sacrifice quality to boost quantity          A robust quality assurance system is in
        of outputs                                             place
                                                              Sufficient     capacity   within      the
                                                               administration of HEIs
                                                              Private R&D investment exists as a viable
                                                               source of revenue


Funding formulae and performance contracts have the potential to contain costs. One way in which they can
do so is by stimulating productivity, including the more efficient and selective delivery of core services. A
range of throughput and output indicators can be employed, depending on the specific policy context; for
example, ECTS/credits attained, years to completion, patents received, graduate numbers and/or rates.

One concern with incentivising efficiency is that HEIs may sacrifice quality to boost the quantity of their
outputs and thus qualify for more performance-based funding. Standards may be lowered (or grades
inflated) to improve progress toward graduation, or academics may publish the same or similar academic
papers in multiple journals and repeatedly cite the same authors (who likewise cite them) to increase the
number of publications and citations (Pruvot, Claeys-Kulik & Estermann, 2015). To address these concerns, it
is advisable not to allocate too much funds based on quantitative results or to balance input, throughput, and
outcome indicators (Salmi & Hauptman, 2006, p. 60) and to ensure that a robust quality assurance system is in
place.

Using normative or standard costs per student (differentiated by discipline) within formulae and
performance contracts can encourage HEIs to more closely monitor and optimise their expenditure. By
contrast, mechanisms that are based on actual costs may encourage inefficient institutions to either spend
more or restrict enrolments to increase their expenditure per student (Salmi & Hauptman, 2006, p 58). In
additional to promoting internal efficiency, the use of normative costs can also be more equitable, mitigating
historical inequalities in the amount of funds HEIs have traditionally received.

Additionally, specific innovation funds can be established to stimulate the sharing of ideas, good practice,
and resources between faculties and HEIs to improve operational efficiency and value for money. Through
collaboration, HEIs can drive down costs through more efficient procurement, asset sharing, shared services,
better use of ICT and organisational restructuring (see Example 6). Of course, such initiatives need to be
reinforced by other strategic government and institutional measures.

Example 6: Improving Value for Money in the United Kingdom

A structured dialogue between public authorities and universities about efficiency has developed in the UK
and Ireland, where universities themselves work as agenda-setters and have proactively started
communicating about the topic.

The Higher Education Funding Council of England’s (HEFCE) £1 million Innovation and Transformation Fund
is dedicated to supporting strategically important projects to improve operational efficiency and are
designed to provide examples of good practice for the benefit of the sector as a whole. In particular, its


                                                                                                           22
objective is to improve higher education shared services in UK's HEIs.

Areas of focus include: costing activities, a strategic approach to benchmarking costs, simplifying and
improving internal processes, working with the private sector, and the national co-ordination of
procurement in higher education.

Importantly, the fund is complemented by bottom-up and top-down initiatives with similar goals to improve
the operational efficiency of the sector. In February 2015, Universities UK produced the Efficiency,
Effectiveness and Value for Money report (the Diamond Review) with specific recommendations for the
sector to become financially and environmentally sustainable. Additionally, the government has set up the
Embracing Efficiencies and Shared Services in Higher Education forum to analyse progress made in striving
for shared services and discuss the future challenges of securing further shared services that can lead to
major efficiencies in the higher education sector. And the Efficiency Exchange is an online ‘one-stop shop’
for anyone interested in learning more about efficiency and innovation in higher education, helping
universities and colleges to discover and share ideas, good practice and resources.

Sources: HEFCE, 2015; Universities UK

Demand-side (student) vouchers can also be an effective tool for containing costs. They can encourage
student choice and, correspondingly, competition among institutions for funds. This kind of competitive
mechanism should, in theory, lead to greater efficiency and lower costs per student (Salmi & Hauptman, 2006,
p. 59), on the condition that, like funding formulae, the vouchers are based on normative costs per students.
The use of normative costs can drive down student costs at HEIs and minimise the potential for exploitative
pricing strategies.

In terms of diversifying funding sources, funding mechanisms can encourage the inclusion of private actors
(mainly business and industry), particularly in the funding of research. These mechanisms tend to create a
direct link between external funding coming from private sources and core public funding, which incentivises
universities to actively develop partnerships and strengthen their income diversification strategies. Specifically,
premiums can be awarded for attracting external funding (within funding formulas or performance contracts),
or external funding can be matched with public contributions. In 2010, for example, the Danish government
established a so-called “Matchfund”, setting aside US$17 million to reward HEIs that obtain a high proportion
of external funding compared to their public funding, which they can use at their own discretion.

Finally, auxiliary enterprise services can provide another stream of income for HEIs, which can be supported
by one-off innovation/stimulus funds. Auxiliary enterprise services are self-supporting activities that provide
non-instructional support primarily to individual students, faculty, and staff upon payment of a specific user
charge or fee for the goods or services provided. Such services include dining facilities, bookstores, parking and
transportation services, print shops, etc. Throughout the United States, for example, many HEIs engage in
public-private partnerships to help ensure the cost-effectiveness of these various auxiliary services. Although
such activities are primarily the domain of HEIs, governments can provide one-off innovation/stimulus funds in
order to create the necessary capacity for HEIs to develop and establish sustainable auxiliary commercial
services.

 4.6.      Increasing Equitable Participation
Funding formulae or performance contracts can be used to increase the enrollments and success of
disadvantaged or underrepresented populations. Under such a system, HEIs are rewarded for enrolling and
graduating disadvantaged and non-traditional student populations. Croatia, for example, piloted performance
contracts to: a) increase the share of students from underrepresented groups in the total number of enrolled
and graduated students and b) facilitate access for non-traditional students (i.e., +25 years’ old).



                                                                                                                23
                                      Supporting Funding Mechanism

        Input-Oriented Funding Formula                           Other Alternatives – Scholarships, Loan
        Performance Contracts                                     Subsidies, Special Funds, Tax Breaks
        Competitive Funds
                                            Potential Indicators

        Number of disadvantage/non-traditional                   Number of disadvantage/non-traditional
         students enrolled                                         students graduated

                        Risks                                             Enabling Conditions

        Admissions are increased at the expense of               Verification of student’s financial need
         quality                                                  Strong taxation and administrative systems
        Students default on loan repayments;                      for repayment collection of income-
         increased costs to guarantor (presumably                  contingent student loans
         the government)                                          HEIs are autonomous to determine student
        Funds are spent on students who do not                    numbers
         complete their studies                                   Sufficient institutional capacity (e.g.,
                                                                   academic and student services) to
                                                                   accommodate more and/or more diverse
                                                                   students


When attracting more students, there needs to be sufficient institutional capacity to ensure that HEIs can
provide the requisite quality of education and support timely completion. Moreover, increasing study places
requires a system in which universities are free to decide on their student numbers, which is only the case in
eight out of 29 systems in Europe included in EUA’s Autonomy Scorecard (Denmark, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Luxembourg, Norway, Poland and Sweden).

An intuitive approach to support equitable participation is to increase the availability of financial support to
targeted student groups. Governments and/or institutions can set aside a particular portion of funding or
tuition revenues to be used for attracting students from underprivileged groups through scholarships, loans
and tuition waivers. Means-tested, needs-based grants and scholarships that provide support for tuition fees
and living expenses can provide participation opportunities to all segments of the population, particularly
underrepresented and disadvantaged groups and lifelong learners. There are many examples in Europe and
beyond of such programmes, such as the German Bundesausbildungsförderungsgesetz (BaFöG), the English
National Scholarships Programme, the Dutch Supplementary grants, the Australian Commonwealth Grants
Scheme and the New Zealand Student Allowance Scheme.

Such need-based grants can also be performance-related, as has been done in the Netherlands and Norway.
In both countries, student financial support is paid out as a loan, but can be (partially) converted into a grant
afterwards if certain conditions are met, such as getting a degree within a limited period of time (as in the
Netherlands), or if the student passed all exams and her/his graduate income is below a certain threshold (as
in Norway) (World Bank, 2014b, p. 51).

Mechanisms to support and encourage lifelong learning include the introduction of tax benefits for workers
enrolled in higher education programmes and the supply of study vouchers. The new Dutch student financing
model, for example, provides first-time students with a ‘voucher’ worth 2000 euros, to incentivise retraining in
their future lives (lifelong learning). The voucher can be used to fund retraining 5-10 years after obtaining a
degree.


                                                                                                              24
Some countries choose to establish a fund for widening participation (see Example 7). Such funds are
directed towards HEIs to help them cover the extra costs associated with supporting the recruitment,
education and other services for students coming from disadvantaged or previously underrepresented
backgrounds.

Example 7: Widening Participation in England

The Higher Education Funding Council in England (HEFCE) provides specific funding to support universities
and colleges to undertake long-term, strategic work across the student lifecycle to ensure that all students
from under-represented groups can successfully participate in HE – including progression into further study
or employment.

The Student Opportunity Fund is the main way it supports widening participation. The allocations do not
take the form of funds for individual students, but rather support the extra cost to institutions of recruiting
and supporting students from disadvantaged backgrounds or with disabilities. The funds can be used to
widen access, improve retention and student success, support progression to further study and/or
employment, or provide financial support to students in hardship.

The funds are allocated as one of the targeted allocations within the overall teaching funding. In 2015-16,
HEFCE will allocate £364.2 million under the Student Opportunity fund.

Source: HEFCE, 2015

Governments can also increase the level of cost sharing (usually via student and household contributions)
alongside the mixed provision of student funding to offset any potentially adverse effects of higher fees and
student debt. Countries that have achieved much higher levels of participation by pursuing this approach
include the United States and Canada over the past quarter century and Australia and New Zealand since the
late 1980s (Salmi & Hauptman, 2006, p. 47).

Student loans are an important instrument to support access and equitable participation under such an
approach. In essence, they provide students of all backgrounds access to finance. A key distinction in the
design of student loan schemes is how the loan is to be repaid. There are basically two models: fixed-schedule,
mortgage-type loans and income-contingent student loans.

Publically-subsidized fixed-schedule loans involve fixed repayments with a set time period as, for example,
with a house mortgage. This type of loan can be found in the United States and Canada, for instance (Salmi &
Hauptman, 2006). However, issues concerning defaulting on the loan mean potential students may be
reluctant to borrow, and those that do may find themselves in a weakened financial position later in life if they
are unable to meet repayment obligations (Chapman & Sinning, 2011). To reduce the risk of default,
government interest-rate subsidies are required, as the repayment burden may otherwise be cost prohibitive.

Income-contingent student loans, such as those in Australia (see Example 8), the United Kingdom, Ghana
and the Netherlands, are an increasingly attractive alternative to mortgage-type loans, and can be designed
to avoid certain problems, particularly around the risk of default. Repayment is calculated based on the
amount borrowed and as a percentage of graduates’ income, which allows students of all ages to repay on the
basis of their situation after they complete their education. The advantages of income-contingent loans are
that the risk of default is substantially reduced and because repayments depend on income, there should be
less concern for students with respect to capacity to repay the debt or hardships associated with repayments
(Chapman & Sinning, 2011, p. 8-9). Income-contingent loans depend on an efficient collection mechanism,
usually done via the tax administration, which may not exist in all countries.




                                                                                                                  25
Example 8: Income-contingent Loans in Australia and New Zealand

Australia and New Zealand, which both charged little or no fees at their public institutions until the late
1980s, adopted income-contingent loans as part of a strategy to increase cost sharing. They raised fees but
the student loan programmes enabled students to pay the higher fees over an extended period of time
based on their income after graduation. The two countries, however, took somewhat divergent approaches:
    •        In 1988, Australia adopted an innovative approach to cost sharing through its Higher Education
             Contribution Scheme (HECS). Faced with prospective widespread student opposition to tuition
             fees, Australian policy makers decided to use public funds to pay the fees while students were
             enrolled. All students participating in HECS were then obligated to repay these fees after
             completing their tertiary education with a percentage of their incomes. Students with below
             average incomes were exempted from repayment. HECS applies only to fees and not living
             expenses.
    •        Beginning in 1990, New Zealand took the more traditional approach of imposing tuition fee
             increases that students and their families had to pay upfront. Beginning in 1992, students
             could borrow to cover the cost of tuition fees and living expenses. Repayment of these loans
             occurred through the income tax system based on a percentage of a student’s income upon
             graduation.
New Zealand and Australia have moved in different directions since they first adopted their income
contingent student loan schemes. New Zealand began with a more market-based approach in which
virtually all borrowers (who then constituted a small share of students) repaid on the basis of their income,
with interest rates slightly below market levels. Over time, New Zealand has moved away from market-
based principles by increasing subsidies, including exempting more low-income students from making
repayments and forgiving interest on most loans. As a result, borrowing has grown substantially over time.
The overriding policy concern now is that high debt levels are leading an increasing number of graduates to
emigrate from New Zealand to avoid their loan repayment obligations. The government responded by
making repayments for borrowers who remain in New Zealand interest-free beginning in 2006.
Australia’s HECS system, on the other hand, created a public expenditure challenge at first, as a growing
number of students enrolled in higher education without having to pay fees upfront. To reduce pressure on
the budget, Australia reduced HECS subsidies in 1997, introduced three bands of HECS tuition fees (each
with a fixed rate of student contribution), and reduced the level of income exempted from HECS
repayment. In addition, more market-based loan programmes have been developed for students who do
not participate in HECS, including growing numbers of foreign students and domestic students enrolling in
fields of study not covered by HECS.

In both Australia and New Zealand, the income-contingent loan system has contributed to significant
increases in coverage and improved equity.

Sources: Chapman et al. (2014); Salmi & Hauptman (2006)

 4.7.     Fostering Internationalisation and Collaboration

Borders between national systems and between traditional academic disciplines are increasingly permeable,
which demands greater collaboration, mobility, and new kinds of knowledge, skills and competences. The
implication is that governments must strategically allocate funding to facilitate these goals.

                                      Supporting Funding Mechanism

       Competitive Funds                                      Performance Contracts
       Input-Oriented Funding Formula                         Other Alternatives – Targeted Funds
       Output-Oriented Funding Formula


                                                                                                            26
                                             Potential Indicators

        Number of domestic students/ researchers/                 Degrees awarded to foreign nationals
         faculty going abroad                                      Number of international personnel
        Number of inbound international students/                 Amount of internationally competed
         researchers/ faculty                                       research funds

                        Risks                                             Enabling Conditions

        Exacerbation of differences between HEIs                  Credit transfer system
         and academic fields                                       Reciprocity between systems
        Over-reliance on supranational (EU) funds

Targeted funds, which can be allocated competitively or via performance agreements, can provide
temporary subsidies to encourage HEIs to implement measures that foster greater internationalisation and
collaboration. Such funds (see Example 9) could be used, for example, to develop institutional
internationalisation strategies; establish an international office and/or a welcoming center for foreign staff and
students; establish additional student residencies; provide scholarships enabling students to study abroad;
provide subsidies/scholarships for incoming teachers, researchers and students; or subsidise international
sabbaticals for academic staff, etc. (World Bank, 2014b, p. 52). The Swedish Foundation for International
Cooperation in Research and HE (STINT), for example, offers Strategic Grants for Internationalisation. The
grants are intended to contribute to the renewal and development of internationalisation strategies at the
university level.

Example 9: Super Global Universities in Japan

The Super Global Universities Project, launched in 2014, aims to enhance the international compatibility
and competitiveness of higher education in Japan. It provides prioritized support for 37 world-class and
innovative universities that leads to the internationalisation of Japanese universities. Selected universities
are expected to press forward with comprehensive internationalization and university reform.

The programme’s total budget is ¥7.7 billion ($US 77 million). The funds will be used to hire faculty who are
either foreigners or Japanese nationals who have graduated from foreign universities. Designated
universities will also establish curricula for undergraduate degree programmes, provide financial support for
international students, and actively recruit students worldwide.

The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) adopted a two-track approach,
ranking institutions in one of two categories. Type A is for world-class universities that have the potential to
be ranked in the top 100 in world university rankings. Each Type A university will receive ¥420 million ($US
4.2 million) annually. Type B is for innovative universities that lead the internationalisation of Japanese
society based on continuous improvement of their current efforts. Each Type B university will receive ¥170
million ($US 1.7 million) annually. The institutions were selected from 104 applicants by a ministry-
appointed panel.

Source: MEXT, 2014

Competitive funds can be set up for international, inter-institutional and or/ multidisciplinary cooperation
projects in strategic (research) areas. This not only contributes to the international engagement of HEIs, but
also stimulates internal academic integration (i.e., the creation of new interdisciplinary programmes and
structures). Such competitive funds are perhaps best exemplified in Europe by Horizon 2020 funding.




                                                                                                               27
Funding formulae, though not currently common practice, can also be designed to reward
internationalisation. Both Finland and Denmark provide examples of this approach (see Example 10 below).

Example 10: Supporting Internationalisation Through Funding Formulae

Denmark: Internationalisation Taximeter

As part of the funding formula for teaching, universities in Denmark are rewarded for their
internationalisation efforts based on the number of Danish students going abroad and international
students coming to Denmark. For every incoming and outgoing student who either studies or carries out an
internship linked to their studies, a university receives a fixed amount of 5,000 DKK (roughly €670).

Finland: Rewarding Internationalisation

Finland takes into account the universities’ international teaching and research personnel in its funding
model, and all internationalisation-related criteria (including competitive international research funding)
account for 9% of the public funding. Indicators include:

        -    Master’s degrees awarded to foreign nationals: 1%
        -    Student mobility to and from Finland: 2%
        -    PhD degrees awarded to foreign nationals: 1%
        -    International teaching and research personnel: 2%
        -    Internationally competed research funding: 3%.

Source: Pruvot, Claeys-Kulik & Estermann, 2015a, p. 31; Finnish Ministry of Education and Culture

An alternative, demand-side approach includes making loans and scholarships portable for study abroad.
This can apply to credit mobility or degree mobility. While outgoing degree mobility might be viewed by
governments with caution, it is important to keep in mind that international student mobility often requires
some degree of reciprocity between participating institutions. Indeed, one-way mobility streams may lead to a
gradual disappearance of student exchange practices (World Bank, 2014a, p. 52).

Some innovative funding instruments have also emerged at the European level that support
internationalisation. Schemes like the Erasmus+ Master Loans and the Retirement Savings Vehicle for
European Research Institutions present opportunities to boost internationalisation within Europe. Policy
makers and higher education leaders in EU member states can therefore take steps towards participating in
these programmes.




                                                                                                              28
5.   Framework for Implementation
While the alignment of policy and financing is easy to understand in theory, implementation can be difficult.
The proposed implementation framework (see Figure 3) enables a sequenced discussion of the common
activities, challenges and recommendations associated with the usual steps of implementing higher education
funding reforms – acknowledging, of course, that implementing strategic financing is largely dependent upon a
country’s unique context. The framework is derived from a review of existing literature, discussions with
experts in the area, and the World Bank’s experience supporting the implementation of higher education
finance reforms7.

Figure 3: Framework for Implementation




PLAN: To begin, the successful implementation of higher education financing reforms requires a well devised
plan, based on thorough analysis. Policy makers, in conjunction with an array of relevant stakeholders, should
have a clearly articulated strategy, with priorities and definitions taking into consideration the budget
environment, the resources that are available to work on implementation, and a timeline for potential
reforms.

Aside from the usual planning issues related to project timeline, (internal and/or external) expertise and
resource assessment, developing a solid implementation plan should consider the following questions: Are
there clear and specific policy objectives to guide the redesign of funding strategies and the course of action?
What is the anticipated reaction of different stakeholder groups? Could any mitigation strategies be
incorporated into the implementation plan? What are the trends for public financing of higher education and
what impact will those have on the implementation strategy? Admittedly, some of issues will not surface until
the next phase, Diagnose, is complete, which is why “Manage” is a cross-cutting theme wherein the project
plans are updated as circumstance evolve. The Plan phase, however, is an important first step in thoughtfully
setting any reform up for success. In managing the project, the initial project plans and assumptions are
continuously updated based on the best available information at the time.

DIAGNOSE: A good diagnostic of the current situation, based firmly on evidence, is essential, as it will inform
all other phases, from planning to optimization. Diagnosis requires a careful review of the existing funding
mechanisms and the identification of options, taking into account specific country and sector contextual
factors. This phase is typically grounded in extensive stakeholder engagement to document: 1) the strengths
and weaknesses of the existing approach to financing as well as some international comparisons; 2) an

7
  The authors particulalrly drew upon The World Bank’s Global Delivery Initiative (GDI), which looked at data from
approximately 2000 World Bank projects, including approximately 200 projects in the education sector, to obtain a more
systematic understanding of the implementation challenges. Using a general inductive approach, broad analytical
categories have been identified, accompanied by sub-categories, from which the GDI team can also gauge the frequency
and estimated likelihood that such challenges occur.GDI partners also contribute to building a coherent knowledge base in
the form of a library of case studies of complex implementation processes.

                                                                                                                     29
assessment of how the system aligns with key policy priorities for the higher education sector; 3) criteria for
evaluating potential alternatives; and 4) alternative scenarios and recommended changes to the funding
model.

Box 2: Latvian Case Study: Part 1

The government of Latvia decided to embark on reforming its funding model for higher education following
a recommendation from the EU Council, which suggested a funding model that would better reward quality,
strengthen the links with market needs and research institutions, and avoid fragmentation of budget
resources.

During a plan phase, Latvia’s Ministry of Education and Science (MoES) identified the need for external
support and contracted the World Bank for Reimbursable Advisory Service on Higher Education Financing.
Consequently, between December 2013 and September 2014, the World Bank collaborated with MoES to
evaluate the country’s existing approach to financing higher education and recommend a new model.

As part of the diagnosis, the World Bank and MoES team analysed the strengths and weaknesses of Latvia’s
current approach to financing higher education from public funds, as well as how it aligned with the
government’s specified policy objectives. Ultimately, the report found that the current higher education
system had been largely underfunded in comparison to other European countries, as well as vis-à-vis the
Latvian Government’s objectives. In addition, contrary to many other European systems, Latvia’s system did
not offer significant incentives for greater performance. The recommended models took into account jointly
developed criteria, good international practice and stakeholder consultations.

DESIGN: The third stage is to design and develop the reform package(s). Higher education financing reforms
and the introduction of new mechanisms require complex design questions due to the often qualitative
character of the objectives (Vossensteyn, 2015). There is a myriad of design considerations that will contribute
to the success of any new funding regime, summarised in Table 6 below.

Table 6: Overview of Design Considerations
Strategic Orientation               Promote national strategies
                                    Promote institutional profiles
Incentive Orientation               Provide clear, non-fragmented incentives
                                    Avoid undesired effects
                                    Create performance rewards and sanctions
                                    Create a competitive environment
Sustainability                      Guarantee continuity in funding mechanisms
                                    Allow long-term planning*
                                    Take into account cost differences
                                    Promote risk-spreading and management*
Legitimization                      Provide unambiguous and balanced funding structures
                                    Make funding transparent
                                    Support the perception of fairness
                                    Allocate lump sums*
                                    Guarantee academic freedom
Autonomy and freedom                Implement an adequate level of regulation
                                    Guarantee autonomy of internal resource allocation*
                                    Promote accessibility of diverse income sources*
Practical feasibility               Use available data
                                    Ensure administrative efficiency
                                    Respect methodological standards
                                    Ensure coherence with funding levels and steering approaches


                                                                                                             30
* Only relevant for institutions, not for student funding; Source: World Bank, 2014c, p. 26.

While each of these considerations is important, the choice of indicators requires careful technical analysis
to avoid an overly complex design and to ensure that selected indicators reflect their strategic intent. Each
type of indicator often represents a trade-off between accountability and measurability. An indicator should
preferably meet the following requirements: (i) easy to calculate; (ii) difficult to manipulate; (iii) provide a
reliable estimate of the institution’s value added; and (iv) not be easily influenced by other factors (Thorn,
Holm-Nielsen & Jeppesen, 2004, p. 10). Policy makers should avoid making funding instruments overly
burdensome by focusing first on a limited number of items (those minimally required for success) and to keep
funding mechanisms simple in order to avoid system overload. In terms of choosing the most strategically
relevant indicators, adequate proxies must be identified and indicators that were originally not developed for
funding purposes (such as rankings) should be avoided, as this may lead to a deterioration of the system.
Furthermore, indicators on which universities have little influence, including certain employability and labour
market measures, should be used with caution (Pruvot, Claeys-Kulik & Estermann, 2015a, p. 16).

A stable and continuous financial base can support the sustained freedom and quality of teaching and
research, and also ensures that HEIs can engage in long-term planning. Early in implementation, it is
advisable to limit the share of performance-based funding to avoid volatility in the amount of funding that HEIs
receive. In the Czech Republic, for example, a new funding formula resulted in a significant variation of funding
between HEIs. As a result, some HEIsstruggled financially, which limited their ability for strategic planning and
strained both inter-institutional and governmental relations. The government is now revising the funding
model to ensure a more stable financial base for HEIs.

The implementation of new funding mechanisms will inevitably result in unforeseen and unintended
consequences. Consideration should be given to the weighting and amount of funding attached to various
performance-based indicators to ensure that the incentives and sanctions are appropriately calibrated.

Box 3: Latvian Case Study: Part 2

For the design phase, the MoES developed a “Conceptual Note on the Implementation of a New Higher
Education Funding Model in Latvia” which described the new higher education funding model and the
implementation solutions.

The new funding architecture seeks to find a balance between maintaining the stability of funding for HEIs,
while providing the necessary mechanisms and incentives to shift the system towards a greater
performance orientation. As such, a three-pillar model was proposed, which integrates funding for research
and teaching. Under pillar 1, study places and staff costs remain the basic criteria to maintain stable
funding. Pillar 2 seeks to reward HEIs for performance via the introduction of output indicators, such as the
amount of industry-funded, international research and the total number of students and researchers who
have recently obtained the degree and are engaged in research projects (per full time equivalent). The
amount of performance-related funding remains modest, at €6.5 million, relative to the overall budget for
higher education (€121.5 million), however the share of performance-related funding is planned to
gradually increase. Pillar 3 allocates funding for development and strategic specialization, including profile-
oriented target agreements, primarily funded via EU Structural Funds Programmes.

On June 29, 2015, the new, three-pillar higher education funding model was formally adopted by the
government. The government subsequently passed regulations that introduced new elements in the
financing system according to the new model; these included criteria for performance-based financing
under pillar 2, as well as regulations to strengthen the alignment of studies and research under pillar 1.

Source: Tremaine, 2016

                                                                                                              31
PILOT: A pilot or shadow phase, in which the reform is tested at a smaller scale, improves the likelihood of
success of financing reforms. Successful reform processes – such as those in Chile, the Netherlands, Croatia,
etc. – are typically instituted in stages and in a proper sequence, as opposed to implementing one abrupt
change. Staging allows sufficient time for dialogue, feedback, adaptation and adjustment. Building a funding
system without perverse incentives or unintended consequences requires not only careful consideration of
design options, but trial and error during implementation (Thorn, Holm-Nielsen & Jeppesen, 2004).

The choice of where and how to test new funding allocation mechanisms is important and can include
setting up a shadow phase in which reforms can be modelled and compared to the incumbent system. In this
way, the negative fallout is limited should the new funding model turn out to be untenable for the sector or
specific HEIs. Small and/or young HEIs tend to me more flexible and innovative in responding to new funding
mechanisms, while large, traditional HEIs often struggle. Another option is to test the new model using only
new or additional funds. In this way, HEIs would have sufficient time to adjust to the new model, which can
gradually be expanded to cover a larger percentage of the overall higher education budget. Experimentation
and “learning by doing” help policy makers form better conclusions and better prepare for likely scenarios
(Vossensteyn, 2015).

Throughout the pilot phase and especially at its end, stakeholder meetings should be convened to obtain
feedback on what worked well and what did not. While piloting in itself is an absolutely critical step, it can
lead to a variety of different policy or implementation changes (see Example 11).

Example 11: Piloting Performance Agreements in Croatia

The Croatian Ministry of Science, Education and Sports (MoSES), with the assistance of the World Bank
through a Reimbursable Advisory Service on Higher Education Financing, initiated a pilot to introduce
performance agreements within public universities. The pilot phase took place between 2012-2015.

The pilot agreements covered expenditures related to employees, materials and tuition/students.
Universities had the opportunity to choose the objectives and indicators that were to be included in their
individual agreements. Given the specificity of the agreements, intensive dialogues between HEIs and
MoSES were required, which provided an opportunity for constructive communication about the new
system.

The pilot provided valuable feedback and insights that will inform the re-development of performance
agreements before they are scaled-up and fully implemented in 2017. First, feedback indicated that goals
should be defined at a national level, rather than on an ad-hoc basis by the universities. Second, the
indicators should be simplified and measurable. Third, data needs to be more reliable and comparable,
which will require improvements to data management systems with greater central coordination.

Source: Krznar, 2016

SCALE-UP: The funding model can then be scaled up based on the experiences of the pilot phase. Given the
heterogeneity of institutions in terms of profiles/missions, resources and capabilities, consideration must be
given to how the reform will may impact institutions differently and not exacerbate inequalities between HEIs.
To provide support to smaller institutions during a scale-up, for example, funding could require partnerships
between stronger and weaker HEIs (e.g., in China) and/or assistance could be provided to some HEIs to help
with the development of their systems, human resources, and proposal development (e.g., in Chile) (Salmi &
Hauptman, 2006, p. 21-22).

A ‘readiness assessment’ is a common tool used to inform the scaling-up of a strategic funding reform (Kusek
& Rist, 2002), as has been initiated or completed in Croatia, Latvia, Chile and many other countries. Performing
such an assessment provides the agency leading the reform with an understanding of what capacity (e.g.,


                                                                                                             32
financial, human resource, technological, etc.) the sector has for the reform and what gaps may need to be
addressed to foster success.

OPTIMIZE: Even once the reform has been scaled-up across the sector, the approach to financing should be
revisited periodically and adjusted according to evolving circumstances and policy priorities. To determine
the effectiveness and impact of the new model, policy makers must evaluate how the new system can be
improved, or whether/what new policy solutions might be needed in the future. For example, two years after
implementing performance contracts, Ireland convened a review to determine what was working well and
what could be improved. Evaluation criteria and international comparisons should be built into the reform
from its beginning and then revisited. Revising the approach to financing higher education is an ongoing,
never-ending process. The optimize phase helps identify potential improvements that then lead policy-makers
back to the plan phase and through the cycle once again.

Such monitoring systems could include, for example: management information systems (“early warning
systems”); value-for-money reviews; audits and evaluations; parliamentary commissions; and post-
implementation studies (World Bank, 2010). Such policy monitoring and evaluation systems are particularly
pertinent to higher education, where there are a number of large institutions whose performance may not be
uniform. It is therefore important to document variability in performance as the basis for learning what works
and why.

Box 4: Latvian Case Study: Part 3

Following the adoption of the new funding model, Latvia’s MoES continues to optimize its higher education
funding system.

It has been noted, for example, that the overall amount of funding for higher education remains
insufficient. The low level of funding partially stems from a decision in 2009 to lower the cost of a study
place from €1800 to €1333 despite the number of study places remaining the same. New regulation,
therefore, is in preparation to return the basic study cost to pre-2009 levels and ensure full funding per
study place.

Additionally, the EU Council has recommended that Latvia “ensure that the new financing model of the
higher education rewards quality Better target research financing and incentivize private investment in
innovation on the basis of the Smart Specialization Framework.” As such, the MoES and the World Bank
have planned related assessments to continue optimizing the new higher education funding model and to
ensure that the institutional governance and financing systems align with the principles of the new
financing model. The cooperation project will include:

       Phase 1: University internal governance and performance-based financing in Latvian HEIs;
       Phase 2: Selection, promotion and remuneration of academic staff;
       Results: Recommended models for Latvian HEIs internal governance, financing and HR policies in
        light of best international practice. Proposal for policy planning and further investment for the
        development of human capital in higher education, research and innovation in Latvia according to
        the Smart Specialization Strategy goals and priorities.

Source: Tremaine, 2016

Cross-Cutting Issues
During all phases of implementation, there are a number of cross-cutting themes that will impact the
success of the reform initiative. These include: engagement, capacity and skills, changes to government



                                                                                                           33
administration, transparency and accountability, identity, culture and norms, access to information, and many
more.

Constant and continuous engagement with stakeholders is crucial. Indeed, “not enough attention is paid to
the political economy of higher education reforms on the assumption that a technically sound reform program
is all that is needed for change to succeed. But when it comes to implementation, political reality invariably
proves stronger than the technocratic vision” (World Bank, 2010, p. 158). Accordingly, reforms must assess the
potential impact on various stakeholders, build consensus, communicate a vision, and take proactive measures
to build trust, all of which are crucial to ensure ownership, commitment, and thus the success of any
programme of reform. This is particularly true in the field of higher education, a social institution with a long
and enduring history, in which faculty and students are particularly astute, vocal and well-organised.

Box 5: Latvian Case Study: Part 4

Stakeholder consultations played a vital role in all three phases of the development of Latvia’s new funding
model for higher education. When reforms where first proposed, there was much public debate on a range
of issues from whether higher education is a public or private good to the purpose of higher education.

In response to these difficult public debates, the MoES engaged the World Bank in order to provide
independent, unbiased expertise, an international, comparative perspective and experience. As third-party
brokers, the World Bank team convened multiple rounds of interviews, round-table discussions and
workshops with different stakeholders in the higher education sector over a 10-month period. Stakeholders
included government officials, the Rector’s council, the Higher Education Council, university executives,
professors, students and employers.


To ensure the commitment of stakeholders, it may be appropriate to mobilise and channel additional
resources towards such groups, as recognition that all reforms require efforts over and above the ongoing
commitments of stakeholders, particularly HEIs and government funding bodies. In addition to providing
additional capacity to deal with the reforms, this can also help to transform what could be viewed as a
“destructive” reform into a “constructive” reform. “Grandfather” provisions and transitory funding
arrangements can also be put in place, which guarantee amounts of resources equal to those that would have
been received under the previous system, at least for some period of time (World Bank, 2010, p. 161).

Another prerequisite for the successful realisation of funding reforms is the existence of adequate
implementation capacity, within both government bodies and HEIs. One of the most frequently cited
implementation challenges is a lack of directly relevant experience or skills. Relevant capacity and skills
promote more successful outcomes across a broad range of issues, including: ensuring a strategic approach to
planning and resource allocation; the existence of appropriate governance structures; and sufficient planning
and management capacity to administer new policies.

In the context of Central Europe and the Baltic countries, many higher education systems stem from
organisational legacies that restrict the ability of HEIs to act as strategic, integrated and autonomous
entities. Universities have historically been divided into distinct self-managing units - powerful, legally
autonomous faculties under the symbolic umbrella of public universities. While in many of these systems the
university has been legally integrated (although not in others), this regional idiosyncrasy of fragmentation
often continues to challenge the ability of a central entity to steer a federated university of independent
faculties in a unified, strategic direction and has resulted in a significant variance in funding and quality among
these entities (Zgaga et al., 2013).




                                                                                                                34
 The capacity and readiness of HEIs is especially critical for the introduction of performance-based funding
mechanisms, which require universities to develop a strategic approach towards their internal funding
allocation. A change to the external funding model will have implications and unintended consequences at the
institutional level, which therefore necessitates strong financial and strategic management within HEIs to meet
                                                      these demands (Pruvot, Claeys-Kulik & Estermann, 2015a,
                                                      p. 47). HEIs must develop a strong model for the
  “An internal allocation mechanism of course cannot
                                                      distribution of funds within the institution, which both
  ignore state allocation. To be successful in the
                                                      counterbalances potentially negative consequences of the
  competition for state grants, a university has to
                                                      external funding model and strengthens the organisation’s
  pass on the incentives set by the government to its
  internal units. But copying the external mechanism  capacity to realise its strategic objectives. To do so, HEIs
  1:1 would mean neglecting the specific mission and  require strong decision-making capacity and appropriate
  profile. For example: if the state mechanism does   analytical techniques to predict the direction and
  not take into account the international mobility of magnitude of the consequences of reforms (World Bank,
  students, yet at the same time the university sees  2010, p. 168).
    internationalisation as a key strategic goal, the
                                                       The availability of appropriate8 data and an
    internal allocation mechanism should still take this
    into account. Designing internal allocation        organisation’s ability to collect, analyse and use relevant
    procedures means balancing external revenue        data is a critical element for the success of performance-
    maximisation against the promotion of a specific
                                                       based funding mechanisms (see Example 12). An
    university profile.”
                                                       appropriate data/information management system
                                     - Professor Frank
                                         Ziegele, 2016
                                                       provides knowledge to stakeholders about the status of
                                                       the higher education system and its constituents, enabling
                                                       governments to use the data to optimise their investment
in higher education. Funding formulae, in particular, require accurate data to produce the appropriate
allocation figures. It is inadvisable for a country to move to a formula based on actual costs per student, for
example, if those cost figures are not regularly collected or verifiable (World Bank, 2010, p. 167). Rather,
formulae based on average or normative costs tend to be easier to manage because they do not require as
much detailed information from institutions. Many countries also lack experience collecting and using national
statistics on outgoing or incoming students, making it difficult to integrate student mobility in formula funding.
Additionally, optimising education provision with labour market requirements requires accurate and
appropriate labour market data, which, being volatile and changeable, can be difficult to obtain and even more
difficult to project into the future (Santiago et al., 2008). The implementation of such policies is further
complicated by the fact that there is a time-lag between the data and the response in terms of redirecting
resources to specific fields.

Example 12: Setting up an Integrated Data System in Argentina

In Argentina, when the government started to reform the tertiary education system after 1995 and
attempted to move to a funding formula, audits revealed that several universities had inflated their
enrolment figures to receive more funding.

In the following years, a comprehensive management information system was designed and introduced
within the context of a World Bank–supported project to provide the entire university system and the
government with adequate and reliable information for monitoring progress in implementation of the
reform.

Initiated in 1994 under the Programa de Reforma de la Educación Superior (PRES) the Argentine
Government led the design and operation of an internet-based management information and statistical
data system that integrates various existing modules needed for decision-making at the ministerial and

8
    Data should be comprehensive, relevant, reliable, and timely

                                                                                                               35
decentralized level and provides adequate data and system compatibility with statistical systems of public
universities. The SIU consists of five main software modules: (i) accounting and budget; (ii) staff
management; (iii) university statistics; (iv) library management and (v) student management. All modules
are merged into a single platform and are available through the Internet for all participants. Close
consultation with end-users in the development phase has ensured that modules are easy-to-use and
compile data of high relevance.

This has brought about a culture of transparency embedded in more rational resource allocation
mechanisms (funding formula and competitive grants).

Source: World Bank, 2004; 2010.

There are a number of components that constitute an effective data management system, namely: the
enabling environment (i.e., the sustainable infrastructure and human resources that can handle data
collection, management, and access); system soundness (i.e., the degree to which the processes and structure
support the components of a comprehensive information management system); quality data (i.e., the degree
to which a system accurately collects, securely saves, and produces high-quality, timely information); and
utilization for decision making (i.e., the reality of system implementation and utilization of data in decision
making).

Implementation challenges may also stem from changes to government administrations that arise from
elections or other forms of political transitions. In many countries, the recent financial crisis and, more
recently, the sharp influx of migrants has led to growing political instability and more frequent election cycles.
In the context of funding reforms, such conditions may result in new ruling parties or coalitions reneging on
public funding commitments to HEIs and students (for example, seeking to rewrite the terms and conditions of
performance agreements), depending on their policy priorities and the socio-economic climate.

New administrations must, then, consider the continuity of policies and maintain incumbent commitments
to HEIs and students for a reasonable period of time before embarking on further reforms. Strong stakeholder
engagement that generates sector-wide support for a new initiative can help ensure the proposed reform
survives government transitions.

Fairness and transparency should also be maintained. Whatever the strategic funding allocation mechanism,
be it competitive funds or performance contracts, the establishment of clear criteria and procedures and the
creation of an independent monitoring body are fundamental. This helps not only to define and allocate
responsibility, but also to create a level playing field for the beneficiary institutions. Likewise, incentivising
institutional behaviour only works if the mechanism is clear and understandable to the universities (Pruvot,
Claeys-Kulik & Estermann, 2015a, p. 44).

In countries with a relatively small or isolated academic community, it may be desirable to draw from a
regional or international pool of peer reviewers to assess any competitive funding applications, in order to
reduce the danger of complacency and subjective evaluation among a limited group of national colleagues.
The use of a transnational pool is a long-standing practice in Scandinavian countries and the Netherlands
(Salmi & Hauptman, 2006, p. 21), and has also been established in newer EU member states such as Slovenia
and Croatia.

It is important to support the perception and practice of fairness (with the above mentioned transparency
as a precondition). If discretionary funding decisions are made, everyone should know how these decisions are
made, who decides, and based on which criteria. Fairness depends on the perceptions actors have about the
criteria. In the case of higher education funding, fairness typically implies that the different situations of
institutions have been taken into account when allocating funds (for instance, differences in profiles/subject


                                                                                                               36
structures) and that funding mechanisms should not merely perpetuate the historical distribution of funds
among institutions, especially if these distributions were based on decisions made a long time ago with no
connection to current circumstances (World Bank, 2014a, p 48). Nevertheless, decisions still have to be made
by leaders. Having clear criteria does not remove the burden of setting priorities and being accountable for
decisions.

6.   Next Steps
More Impact Evaluation of Strategic Financing Mechanisms
Strategic financing, in theory, has the potential to influence the realization of different policy objectives.
While anecdotal evidence indicates promising practices as to how policy makers can link funding mechanisms
to particular policy outcomes, a solid research base is lacking. The current state of research on the impacts of
performance-based funding is scarce, inconclusive and focused primarily on the United States. As such,
drawing any sort of generalizable conclusion is impossible.

There is, therefore, an urgent need for further research on the impacts of performance-based funding,
especially in Europe where the prevalence of such modalities is on the rise. Specifically, quantitative
research (e.g. multivariate studies with extensive controls to isolate variables and their impacts) that
investigates possible shifts in HEI performance and their relationship to performance-based funding policies
would be useful for policy makers and academics alike. Future research should investigate organisational
behaviour related to performance-based funding in order to highlight the connections between incentives,
organisational behaviour and performance (Kivistö & Kohtamäki, 2015).

Strategic Risk Taking
The challenges facing higher education systems throughout Europe and around the globe call for
governments to be even more strategic and to take even more risks. The content of this report, in terms of
both the design and implementation of higher education funding reforms, is thus intended to provide
policymakers with a useful overview of alternative ways to address different policy objectives. Though the
impact of strategic financing has not been fully determined, many countries do know the degree to which their
current approach has helped to realize policy objectives. Either the same financing approach can be
maintained or new strategic approaches can be tested in the hopes of identifying effective ways to pursue
important policy objectives.

Knowledge Sharing and Multi-lateral Dialogues
Finally, while this policy note seeks to provide a means for policy makers to share their experience and
expertise, more such learning fora and channels are needed. Although professional networks and consortia
exist, they are predominantly for institutional leaders rather than policy makers. A greater degree of multi-
lateral governmental cooperation would allow policy makers across the region to benefit from the transparent
sharing of ideas, experiences and results. In this regard, there is a case for the EU and other international
organisations, such as the World Bank and the OECD, to assist governments to design and implement the best
possible funding systems to support their policy objectives.




                                                                                                             37
Bibliography
BEEPS (2015), BEEPS V Report, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) & World Bank
Group. http://ebrd-beeps.com/reports/beeps_v_report/

Chapman, B. & Shinning, M. (2011), Student Loan Reforms for German Higher Education: Financing Tuition
Fees, Discussion Paper No. 5532, February 2011, Bonn, Germnay: Forschungsinstitut zur Zukunft der Arbeit
(Institute for the Study of Labor).

Coletti, M. (2014), ‘Creative Industries Innovation Vouchers’, draft report for the for European Creative
Industries Alliance and the Provincia di Milano.

Corbett, A. (2005), Universities and the Europe of Knowledge: Ideas, Institutions and Policy Entrepreneurship in
European Union Higher Education, 1955–2005, Basingstoke: Palgrave.

Czarniawska-Joerges, B. & Sevón, G. (2005), Global ideas: how ideas, objects and practices travel in a global
economy, Malmö, Sweden: Liber & Copenhagen Business School Press.

De Boer, H., Jongbloed, B., Bannewoth, P., Cremonini, L., Kolster, R., Kottmann, A., Lemmens-Krug, K. &
Vossensteyn, H. (2015), Performance-based funding and performance agreements in fourteen higher education
systems, Enschede: University of Twente, Center for Higher Education Policy Studies.

European Commission (2006), Delivering on the Modernisation Agenda for Universities: Education, Research
and Innovation. Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament, Brussels:
European Commission.

European Commission (2011), Supporting growth and jobs – an agenda for the modernisation of Europe's
higher education systems. Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament,
Brussels: European Commission.

European Commission (2014), ‘Performance agreements and their relationship to funding in higher education’,
ET2020 country workshop, The Hague, 25-26 September 2014.

European Commission (2015a), RESAVER - Retirement Savings Vehicle for European Research Institutions,
http://ec.europa.eu/euraxess/index.cfm/rights/resaver

European Commission (2015b), Erasmus+ Master Loans, http://ec.europa.eu/education/opportunities/higher-
education/masters-loans_en.htm

European University Association (2015), EUA Public Funding Observatory 2015, Brussels: European University
Association. http://www.eua.be/Libraries/governance-autonomy-funding/november-2015.pdf?sfvrsn=0

Harvey, L. & Green, D. (1993), ‘Defining Quality’, Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 18(1): 9-34.

HEFCE (2011), Increasing opportunities for high quality higher education work experience, Report to HEFCE by
Oakleigh Consulting Ltd and CRAC, July 2011.

Kivistö, J. & Kohtamäki, V. (2015), ‘Impacts of performance-based funding on higher education institutions: A
literature review’, presented at EAIR 37th Annual Forum, Krems, Austria, 30 August - 2 September 2015.

Krznar, I. (2016), ‘Introducing Performance Agreements in Croatia’, presentation at the World Bank Workshop,
Investing Strategically in Higher Education: Aligning Public Funding with Policy Objectives, April 26 2016,
Zagreb, Croatia.



                                                                                                               38
Kusek, J.Z. & Rist, R.C. (2002), ‘Building Results-based Monitoring and Evaluation Systems: Assessing
Developing Countries Readiness’, Zeitschrift fuer Evaluation, No. 1, pp. 151-158.

Leontiades, M. (2007), Pruning the Ivy: The Overdue Reform of Higher Education, Charlotte, NC: Information
Age Publishing.

Levine, A. (2001), ‘Higher Education as a Mature Industry’, in Philip G. Altbach, Patricia J. Gumport and D.
Bruce Johnstone (eds.), In Defense of American Higher Education, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Matei, L. (2015), ‘Addressing Challenges in Higher Education in the Countries of Eastern Central Europe’,
presented at Central European Higher Education Cooperation Conference, Budapest, Hungary, 28-29 January
2015.

OECD (2015), Education at a Glance 2015: OECD Indicators, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/eag-
2015-en

Pruvot, E. B., Claeys-Kulik, A.-L. & Estermann, T. (2015), Define Project: Designing Strategies for Efficient
Funding of Universities in Europe, Brussels: European University Association.

Salmi, J. & Hauptman, A. (2006), Innovations in Tertiary Education Financing: A Comparative Evaluation of
Allocation Mechanisms, Washington D.C.: The World Bank.

Santiago, P., Tremblay, K., Basri, E. & Arnal, E. (2008), Tertiary Education for the Knowledge Society. Vol. 1,
Paris: OECD.

Thorn, K., Holm-Nielsen, L. & Jeppesen, J.S. (2004), APPROACHES TO RESULTS-BASED FUNDING IN TERTIARY
EDUCATION: Identifying Finance Reform Options for Chile, Washington D.C., World Bank Group.

Tremaine, L. (2016), ‘Implementation of the New System-level Performance-based Funding Model’,
presentation at the World Bank Workshop, Investing Strategically in Higher Education: Aligning Public Funding
with Policy Objectives, April 26 2016, Zagreb, Croatia.

Vossensteyn, H. (2015), 'Peformance agreements across the globe: Myths and realities', presented at EAIR
37th Annual Forum, Krems, Austria, 30 August - 2 September 2015.

World Bank Group (2010), Financing Higher Education in Africa, Washington D.C.: World Bank Group.

World Bank Group (2014a), World Bank Reimbursable Advisory Service on Higher Education Financing in Latvia:
Higher Education Financing in Latvia: Analysis of Strengths and Weaknesses, Riga: Latvian State Education
Development Agency. http://viaa.gov.lv/files/news/24067/lv_hef_output_1_final_18mar14.pdf

World Bank Group (2014b), World Bank Reimbursable Advisory Service on Higher Education Financing in
Latvia: Assessment of Current Funding Model’s ‘Strategic Fit’ with Higher Education Policy Objectives, Riga:
Latvian                   State              Education                   Development                Agency.
http://viaa.gov.lv/files/news/24067/lv_r2_strategic_fit_18april_vfinal.pdf

World Bank Group (2014c), World Bank Reimbursable Advisory Service on Higher Education Financing in Latvia:
Higher Education Financing in Latvia: Final Report, Riga: Latvian State Education Development Agency.
http://viaa.gov.lv/files/news/24067/lv_hef_r3vsub_190922014_c_final.pdf

World Bank Group (2015), Global Delivery Initiative: A partnership for Doing Development Differently,
Washington D.C.: Wold Bank Group.




                                                                                                                  39
Zgaga, P. (2013), ‘Reconsidering Higher Education Reforms in the Western Balkans: “Policy Colonies” or “Policy
Autarchies”?’, in P. Zgaga, U. Teichler & J. Brennan (Eds.), The Globalisation Challenge for European Higher
Education, p. 347 – 370, Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.

Zgaga, P., Klemenčič, M., Komljenovič, J., Miklavič, K., Repac, I. & Jakačić, V. (2013), Higher education in the
Western Balkans: Reforms, developments, trends, Ljubljana: Faculty of Education, University of Ljubljana.




                                                                                                             40
Appendix: Summary Table Matching Policy Objectives and Potential Financing
Methodology
Policy Objective                 Strategic Funding Mechanism

Assuring and enhancing quality          Competitive funds
                                        Performance contracts
                                        Excellence schemes
                                        Other Alternatives
                                              o Merit-based scholarships and loans
                                              o Student vouchers
Improving Links between                 Funding formulae
Higher Education and the                      o E.g., rewards for seats in high-priority fields; throughput
Labour Market                                      indicators to hasten students’ entry to the labour market;
                                                   graduate employment indicator
                                        Performance contracts
                                        Other Alternatives
                                              o Merit-Based Scholarships in priority fields
                                              o Loan Subsidies/Forgiveness
Boosting Knowledge                      Output-Oriented Funding Formula
Generation and Technology                     o E.g., rewards for bibliometric criteria, the amount of external
Transfer                                           funding obtained, the number of contracts with business and
                                                   industry, etc.
                                        Competitive Funds
                                        Performance Contracts
                                        Other Alternatives
                                              o Innovation Vouchers
Consolidating and/or                    Performance Contracts
Diversifying the Sector                 Competitive Funds
                                        Excellence Schemes
                                        Other Alternatives
                                              o Seed money for mergers
Optimising HEI Finances                 Output-Oriented Funding Formula
                                        Performance Contracts
                                        Other Alternatives
                                              o Matching Funds
                                              o Innovation Funds
Increasing Equitable                    Input-Oriented Funding Formula
Participation                                 o E.g., rewards for numbers of (target) students
                                        Performance Contracts
                                        Competitive Funds
                                        Other Alternatives
                                              o Scholarships and grants
                                              o Loan Subsidies
                                              o Special Funds
                                              o Tax Breaks
Fostering internationalisation          Competitive Funds
and collaboration                       Input-Oriented Funding Formula
                                        Output-Oriented Funding Formula
                                              o E.g., rewards for master’s degrees awarded to foreign nationals,
                                                   internal and external student mobility, internationally competed
                                                   research funding, etc.
                                        Performance Contracts
                                        Other Alternatives
                                              o Targeted Funds
Cost containment                        Innovation funds to stimulate the sharing of ideas, good practice and
                                         resources
                                        Funding formulae
                                        Use of normative costs
                                        Demand-side vouchers (based on normative costs)


                                                                                                                      41
