Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland:
The Way Forward


Transport and ICT Global Practice
Europe and Central Asia Region
©2015 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org


This report was prepared by the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World
Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in it do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
                       CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                  (Exchange Rate Effective June 30, 2014)

                            Currency Unit - PLN
                            Euro 1 = PLN 4.1568

                        WEIGHT AND MEASURES
                             Metric system

                              FISCAL YEAR
                          January 1 – December 31




       Regional Vice President:    Laura Tuck
              Country Director     Mamta Murthi
Senior Global Practice Director:   Pierre Guislain
             Practice Manager:     Juan Gaviria
            Task Team Leader:      Carolina Monsalve
                       ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ABT       Account-Based Ticketing
ADCS      Automated Data Collection System
AFC       Automatic Fare Collection
AOM       Organizing Authority of Mobility
AOTU      Autorités Organisatrices des Transport Urbains, Urban Organizing Transport Authority
ATC       Area Traffic Control
AVL       Automatic Vehicle Location
BODS      Bus Passenger Origin and Destination Survey
BTP       British Transport Police
CATCH     Carbon Aware Travel Choices
CDM       Clean Development Mechanism
CF        Cohesion Fund
CO2       Carbon dioxide
COPERT    Computer Programme to Calculate Emissions from Road Transport
DLR       Docklands Light Railway
EC        European Commission
ECA       European Court of Auditors
EEV       Enhanced Environmentally friendly Vehicle
E-PRTR    European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register
ERDF      European Regional Development Fund
ESIF      European Structural and Investment Funds
EU        European Union
FUA       Functional Urban Area
GHG       Greenhouse Gas
GOM       Gdańsk Metropolitan Area
GPS       Global Positioning System
HEAT      Harmonized Emissions Analysis Tool
ITI       Integrated Territorial Investment
ITS       Intelligent Transport System
IVE       International Vehicle Emissions
KM        Kilometer
KPK       Komunalne Przedsiebiorstwo Komunikacyjne
KPKM      Komunalne Przedsiebiorstwo Komunikacji Miejskiej
KZK       Komunalny Zaklad Komunikacyjny
KZK GOP   Public Transport Municipal Association for the Upper Silesia Industrial Area
LU        London Underground
MAPAM     Modernization of Public Territorial Action
MPK       Miejskie Przedsiębiorstwo Komunikacyjne, Municipal Transport Operator
MOVES     Motor Vehicle Emissions Simulator
MZKP      Intercommunal Association for Public Transport
MZKZG     Metropolitan Association for Public Transport in the Gulf of Gdańsk
NMT       Non-Motorized Transport
NUP       National Urban Policy
NSRD      National Strategy of Regional Development
NSDC      National Spatial Development Concept
OECD      Organization of Economic Co-operation and Development
OP        Operational Programme
OPEP      Operational Programme for Eastern Poland
OPIE      Operational Programme Infrastructure and Environment
PKS       Przedsiębiorstwo Komunikacji Samochodowej, Intercity and Rural Bus Operator
PLK       Polskie Linie Kolejowe, Polish Railway Lines
PLN       Polish Zloty
PM        Particulate Matter
PR        Przewozy Regionalne, Regional Railway Company
PSO       Public Service Obligation
SEMITAN   Société d'Economie Mixte des Transports de l'Agglomération Nantaise
SKM       Szybka Kolej Miejska; Fast Urban Railway
ŚKUP      Silesian Public Services Card
SMS       Short Message Service
SUMP      Sustainable Urban Mobility Plan
SUMP      Sustainable Urban Mobility Plan
TfL       Transport for London
UK        United Kingdom
UNFCCC    United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
USD       US Dollar
ZDZiT     Zarząd Dróg Zieleni i Transportu w Olsztynie, Roads and Public Transport Authority
ZTM       Zarząd Transportu Miejskiego, Transport Authority
                                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS




Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................................................i
Introduction ...................................................................................................................................................................1
   Introduction...............................................................................................................................................................4
   National Program for the Development of Low-Carbon Economy ..........................................................................4
   Public Transport Policy ............................................................................................................................................5
   Framework for Regional and Spatial Policy .............................................................................................................8
   Spatial Planning Act ............................................................................................................................................... 10
   OECD Urban Policy Review: Key Findings ........................................................................................................... 11
   Constraints on Public Transport Fares and Parking Rates ...................................................................................... 13
   Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................................. 14
   Key Recommendations ........................................................................................................................................... 15
Assessing Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland .............................................................................................................. 18
  Introduction............................................................................................................................................................. 18
  A Comparative Perspective .................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
  Institutional Structure ............................................................................................................................................. 27
  Public Transport Operators ..................................................................................................................................... 28
  Local Strategies and Planning Context ................................................................................................................... 33
  Financial Arrangements .......................................................................................................................................... 36
  Management of Car Access and Cycling ................................................................................................................ 42
  EU-Funded Investment Program ............................................................................................................................ 44
Conclusions from city-level assessments .................................................................................................................... 48
  Recommendations ................................................................................................................................................... 52
Inter-municipal Coordination ...................................................................................................................................... 55
   Introduction............................................................................................................................................................. 55
   Inter-Communal Transport Authorities: The Case of France ................................................................................. 55
   Polish Experience with Inter-municipal Cooperation ............................................................................................. 57
   Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................................. 64
   Recommendations ................................................................................................................................................... 65
Annex 1: List of Persons Met ...................................................................................................................................... 67
Annex 2: The European Framework ............................................................................................................................ 74
Annex 3: Public Transport Prices ................................................................................................................................ 85
Annex 4: Public Transport Performance, Measurement, and Evaluation .................................................................... 87
Annex 5: Sampel of Customer Satisfaction Survey Questionnaires ............................................................................ 95
Annex 6: Bus Passenger Origin-Destination Estimation and Related Analyses .......................................................... 97
                                    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS




This report was prepared by Carolina Monsalve (Senior Transport Economist) and Frank Allen (Senior
Urban Transport Consultant), together with a World Bank team that included Winnie Wang (Urban
Transport Specialist), Michal Wolanski (Urban Transport Consultant), Radoslaw Czapski (Senior
Infrastructure Specialist), and Nak Moon Sung (Senior Transport Specialist). The team would like to
thank Juan Gaviria (Practice Manager), Mamta Murthi (Country Director), Marina Wes (Country
Manager), Xavier Devictor (Operations Adviser), Ismail Radwan (Country Program Coordinator), and
peer reviewers O.P. Agarwal (O.P. Agarwal, (Executive Director, Institute of Infrastructure at the Indian
School of Business), Shomik Mehndiratta (Lead Urban Transport Specialist), Ajay Kumar (Lead
Transport Economist),Wojciech Suchorzewski (Emeritus Professor at the Warsaw University of
Technology), and Sangjin Han (Korea Transport Institute).

The team would also like to acknowledge the many formal and informal contributions of officials from
the cities of Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów; Podlaskie, Lubelskie, Warmian-Masurian, and
Podkarpackie voivodeships; and the Ministry of Infrastructure and Development. The team is particularly
grateful to the Mayors of Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów, officials from the urban transport
authorities BKM, ZTM Lublin, ZDZiT, and ZTM Rzeszów, the municipal public transport companies in
Bialystok KPK, KPKM and KZK, MPK Lublin, MPK Olsztyn, and MPK Rzeszów, and rail companies.
In addition, we would like to thank authorities in Katowice and Gdańsk Bay for providing us with an
opportunity to learn from their experience with inter-municipal cooperation. We are grateful to all other
stakeholders for their frank and open engagement in the project. Full details of persons met are listed in
Annex 1. Apologies if we missed any persons or institutions.

Finally, we would like to thank Eun Joo Allison Yu (Senior Operations Officer) from the Korea Green
Growth Partnership for her support, guidance, and continuous assistance during this assignment and the
staff of the World Bank Warsaw Office for their support.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                    i




                                  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



Introduction
In the second half of 2013, the World Bank secured grant funding from the Korea Green Growth
Partnership for analytical support and technical assistance related to sustainable urban transport
systems in select cities in Eastern Poland. Established in 2011, the Korea Green Growth
Partnership strengthens cooperation between the Government of Korea and the World Bank
Group to help countries achieve sustainable and inclusive development by developing and sharing
practical knowledge around innovative green growth solutions. The objective of the first phase of
this technical assistance involved assessing the urban transport sector in the selected cities—
Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów—with a primary focus on public transportation and the
aim of identifying areas for improvement. The second phase of this technical assistance will focus
on areas identified in the first phase, subject to agreement from the participating cities, as well as
capacity building activities. This report provides a set of recommendations related to the legal and
institutional framework for urban transport in Poland; summarizes the assessment of urban
mobility for Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów; and assesses the framework for inter-
municipal coordination in Poland.

Poland’s population has been declining gradually in recent years due to emigration to other
European Union (EU) countries and reduced family size. Within Poland, there has been migration
from provincial areas to larger cities such as Warsaw and Kraków, and from city centers to
suburban areas. Despite this stable or declining overall population, there has been a significant
movement of people within metropolitan areas as families move from small apartments in the
heart of cities to apartment blocks or single-family homes in the suburbs. The demographic and
settlement patterns in Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów fit this general pattern.

This shift towards the suburbs in Polish cities has significant implications for urban transport as
well as for other urban services, particularly in the long-term. Importantly, expansion into peri-
urban areas has been occurring at significant distances from the city center with new
developments along main arteries driven by low land prices and improved road access. Residents
in these suburban areas typically depend on private vehicles to commute into the city. As a result,
the hard urban cores that defined Polish cities before 1990 have given way to scattered suburban
developments that make public transport networks in those areas impractical and expensive, and
create challenges for the provision of water, sewage, electricity, and solid waste management
services. All of these aspects also contribute to rising greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. While
Polish municipal and regional authorities recognize that suburbanization has adverse
consequences for provision of transport and other services, there has been little coordination in
spatial planning among the jurisdictions that make up Polish functional urban areas to guide new
developments in a sustainable way. From a long-term perspective, the demographic and
suburbanization trends have important implications on the financial cost and sustainability of
delivering urban services. The costs do not appear pressing due to significant EU funds pouring
into many Polish cities.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                    ii


Given the large investments in Polish cities of more extensive, high-quality public transport
services and infrastructure financed through the EU, an important objective going forward should
be to ensure that these investments translate into increased ridership—or at a minimum ridership
that is not declining. It is equally important to ensure that the cities can afford to finance the
operation and maintenance of enhanced public transport services. An important factor to keep in
mind is that the cost of operating and maintaining the municipal, public transport fleet of
Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów could increase over time. The scale of this cost increase
will depend on a number of factors, including the level of service that would be provided to
suburban municipalities, ridership trends, and neighboring municipalities’ willingness to
contribute to the cost of service. Cities will need to plan for life cycle and other capital renewal of
infrastructure to ensure that public transport continues to provide a service that is competitive
with private cars. At these levels of expenditure, the financial sustainability of the planned level
of service in the functional urban area (FUA) could become a challenge for the cities.


Polish Context
The World Bank has reviewed the policy and legislative environment in which decentralized
government in Poland carries out land-use planning. There is a clear gap between the principles
of sustainable development that inform national policies on regional and spatial planning,
development of a low-carbon economy, and public transport on the one hand and the practice of
land-use planning on the other. As a consequence of residential development in metropolitan
areas being developer-led rather than guided and constrained by effective regional planning many
Polish cities are experiencing significant suburbanization.

Analysis by Government of Poland agencies and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) has recognized that suburbanization conflicts with policies to promote
sustainable development, but policy instruments have not yet been developed to bring local
practice into line with national policies. Many OECD countries have developed regulation and
practice in land-use planning that achieve consistency between plans in national, regional, and
urban areas, and encourage compact urban development. These practices have often developed in
institutional environments where responsibility for local planning and decision-making is
delegated to local authorities, as is the case in Poland.

The absence of effective regulation of land-use development and the trend towards
suburbanization in major cities inevitably leads to a modal shift towards private transport. The
wide distribution of population within suburban areas makes it expensive, and in some cases
impractical, for public transport operators to provide a frequent service that would be attractive to
car owners. Polish cities, which had been characterized by very high modal share for public
transport, are now upgrading their infrastructure in an environment that has become more
challenging for public transport. While the emergence of urban sprawl represents the greatest
challenge for the provision of public transport, other institutional and legislative developments
may also limit cities’ flexibility in making public transport competitive with private cars.

With the above in mind, the following recommendations are made to the Government of Poland
for its consideration:
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 iii


   Introduce minimum requirements for land-use plans to be prepared at all levels of
    government. Planning authorities could be encouraged to demonstrate how their plans are
    consistent with the National Plan for Regional Development, the National Spatial
    Development Concept, and other national policies such as those that seek to control GHG
    emissions. Land-use plans at each level of government could also demonstrate consistency
    with the spatial planning objectives of the plans for the next higher level of government. In
    this way, municipalities and other planning authorities would retain their delegated planning
    authority, but would make decisions within a clear policy context and with the knowledge
    that the same rules apply to neighboring planning authorities.

   Establish a specialist policy unit within the Ministry of Infrastructure and Development that
    would initiate necessary legislation and financing changes to influence policy in areas such as
    spatial planning and climate change, support integration across administrative borders, and
    disseminate best practice in public transport. This unit could establish common technical
    standards for smart-card ticketing schemes, which would facilitate integration across modes
    and jurisdictions.

   Develop policies that would ensure the financial sustainability of commuter transport from
    outside municipal areas and within rural communities after institutional changes planned for
    2017. Existing services are unprofitable and public transport operators often cannot afford to
    replace life-expired vehicles, so the withdrawal of financial support for concessional fares is
    likely to result in withdrawal of services. Many suburban and rural services merit
    consideration for public service obligation (PSO) contracts. Those commuter bus services
    could be integrated with municipal bus and rail services in relation to scheduling,
    information, and ticketing. In addition, initiatives to integrate school transport services with
    contracts to bus services for the wider community would improve service and achieve value
    for money for both commuter and school services.

   Rationalize concessional fare structures and remove obstacles to fare integration. The
    arrangements for concessional fares in Poland appear to have emerged piecemeal and the
    very specific statutory provisions on discounts prevent urban transport operators from
    offering discounted fares across different modes. To address this, the statutory provisions for
    concessional travel could be consolidated allowing greater flexibility for transport authorities
    and public transport operators in setting fares, including integrated fares.

   Assign responsibility for integrated ticketing to a named authority for each region of Poland
    and develop national standards that would facilitate integration across jurisdictions and
    transport modes. There is consensus among municipal and regional transport authorities, as
    well as transport operators in Eastern Poland, that greater integration of ticketing across
    operators and modes would benefit passengers and transport providers. However, no
    authority believes that it has a mandate to lead projects that would integrate ticketing. The
    Ministry of Infrastructure and Development could initiate legislative changes that would
    mandate a single authority to develop integrated ticketing schemes for their respective
    regions. The ministry could also develop standards that would facilitate integration, within
    and across such schemes, including unification of statutory discounts and their compensation.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 iv


   Encourage greater balance between investing in infrastructure improvement and promoting
    complementary measures. The recent investment programs, including projects funded by EU
    Operational Programmes for Eastern Poland, have addressed deficiencies in fixed
    infrastructure and rolling stock resulting from years of underinvestment in public transport.
    While further investment will be required to upgrade infrastructure, the Government of
    Poland could promote complementary initiatives that would make public transport more
    competitive with private cars. The four cities that were part of the World Bank study are
    tentative in their commitment to demand management measures that would impose a greater
    share of the cost of infrastructure on private car users. So there is a role for the Government
    of Poland to promote best practice and pilot schemes. For example, charges for on-street
    parking are controlled by the Government of Poland and apply in restricted geographical
    areas. The maximum charges should be relaxed and cities encouraged to extend their scope.
    The Government of Poland could support pilot schemes for commuter car-sharing, introduce
    lower speed restrictions on national roads to improve safety and environmental performance,
    and promote “walking buses? for school children to encourage them and their parents to walk
    to school in safety rather than drop children off by car.

   Request national railway companies—PKP, PLK, and PR—to prepare joint strategies for
    development of commuter rail services in designated urban agglomerations. Railways are an
    underutilized resource in Polish cities and there is no evidence that national investment
    planning takes into account the spatial plans of urban agglomerations. There is also concern
    that operating decisions systematically give priority to intercity and freight services ahead of
    commuter services. The railway companies could be obliged to consult with city and
    voivodeship authorities on investment decisions that affect the quality of railway services in
    the respective areas. These decisions would include addition or removal of stops, passing and
    turn-back facilities, and electrification of lines.

   Review the provisions for vehicle taxation to ensure that they are aligned with Government of
    Poland’s policies for control of GHG emissions and reduce the incentive for other EU
    countries to dispose of used cars with high emissions in Poland. A car scrappage scheme that
    would incentivize purchase of new cars would not be appropriate for Poland as there is no
    need to stimulate the car market any further and much of the benefits would transfer to car
    manufacturers outside Poland.


Assessing Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland

The four selected cities in Eastern Poland have transformed their supply of city transport with EU
funding and have made public transport a credible alternative to private cars for residents of all
ages and social backgrounds. These EU funded projects have generally included an appropriate
balance between investment in replacing life-expired vehicles, improving accessibility of
infrastructure at stops, upgrading ticketing and passenger information, and investing in traffic
control systems. The scope of the projects is integrated with other urban planning objectives such
as restoring the historic heart of the city and reducing air and noise pollution. While the projects
are not fully implemented, it is clear that they are being well managed and the reported outturn
costs for sub-components completed are reasonable. The management teams in the cities are to be
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 v


congratulated for delivering public transport of high international standards within a short period
of time.

Less progress has been made in upgrading the supply of public transport in the areas surrounding
cities’ administrative borders and for suburban commuters accessing the cities. Poland’s current
institutional arrangements and resourcing for regional bus services are not conducive to reversing
the decline in patronage. Based on the assessment carried out by the World Bank, the following
recommendations are made for the consideration of the cities of Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and
Rzeszów:

       Refocus urban transport policy across city borders. Residents of the four cities and of
        their neighboring municipalities will clearly benefit if investment in transport
        development and management of operations were to be carried out in a more integrated
        way across modes and geographical boundaries. While the mandate of urban transport
        authorities does not extend to railways or to regional bus services, there should be no
        institutional obstacle to initiatives such as coordination of schedules, passenger
        information provision, and an agreement on integration of tickets and fares.

       Integrate spatial land-use planning with transport. Effective integration of spatial land-
        use planning with transport would bring benefits in the medium- to long-term by
        encouraging compact development and limiting suburbanization in keeping with the
        Integrated Territorial Investment (ITI). This is more difficult in the absence of national
        standards for sustainable planning and the devolved responsibility for planning decisions
        to municipal governments. However, marshals of voivodeships have discretion over the
        allocation of investment funds for a range of infrastructural development and when
        exercising that discretion they could give priority to investment in municipal
        infrastructure, such as water and electricity, in areas that are consistent with sustainable
        development. Future urban development and transport strategies for the cities and their
        FUAs should make specific commitments to promote development within walking
        distance of public transport and discourage dispersed development.

       Implement complementary measures. In the next phase of investment, Białystok, Lublin,
        Rzeszów, and Olsztyn may wish to consider a more ambitious program of
        complementary measures that would impose a greater share of the cost of congestion on
        private cars. Examples of measures that would increase the attractiveness of traveling by
        public transport in congested areas of the city include extending the paid-parking zones
        within the city—in the case of Rzeszów the first step would be to introduce paid-parking
        zones; provision of Park & Ride facilities in the suburbs to be served by high-frequency
        public transport; and the creation of bus lanes in the busy access routes to the proposed
        Intermodal Transport Centers. The level of congestion does not call for penal measures
        that would be unpopular with the wider population, but interventions should focus on
        providing higher quality and more reliable public transport services for users. It is
        important that the rationale for changes, such as extending the paid-parking zones, be
        explained to the public as encouraging more efficient use of valuable on-street parking
        spaces and greater use of high-quality public transport services.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  vi


       Upgrade content and timeliness of communication with passengers. Urban transport
        authorities are encouraged to provide information on their websites on public transport
        service performance, including information on passenger journeys, modal share,
        customer satisfaction, improvement in customers’ top concerns, journey time, and fleet
        and stations in service. They should also provide an own-branded, user-friendly Journey
        Planner with information about different modes of public transport and pedestrian and
        cycling links. Some of the cities’ websites have more accessible information about public
        transport services, but in all cases the transport authorities should use the websites as
        marketing tools for customers with Internet and smart-phone access rather than as a
        platform for public-service notices.

       Control the net cost for the cities of operating larger transport networks. The cost of
        operating and maintaining public transport infrastructure in all of the cities will increase
        corresponding to the number of buses serving a wider FUA with lower average
        residential density. The increase in cost in Olsztyn will be greater when tram services
        begin. Urban transport authorities should identify ways to control the net cost of
        operating public transport services, including new services to less densely populated
        communities in the suburbs. The best approach to control the financial exposure for
        gross-cost contracts is to increase passenger numbers. This should receive highest
        priority, but it would also be timely to consider modified gross-cost contracts that allocate
        some proportion of payments to improve customer satisfaction and other features that
        attract additional passengers. Cities should plan for a program of preventative and life-
        cycle maintenance to optimize the whole-life cost of the new vehicles and fixed
        infrastructure.

       Examine scope for broadening the tax base to ensure financial sustainability through a
        review of the local finance system. Given the long-term demographics in cities—
        declining and aging populations—and the large investments in more expensive, high-
        quality public transport services, and infrastructure financed through the EU, there may
        be merit in carrying out a comprehensive assessment of the tax base to finance public
        transport services. Options for consideration could be employment taxes to finance inter-
        municipal transport services or changes to the way in which property taxes are calculated.
        Such a study would need to take into account the existing tax burden, assess whether
        there is scope for additional taxation, and could potentially be financed by technical
        assistance funds under the EU 2014-2020 financial framework.

       Involve relevant agencies in planning Intermodal Transport Centers. If it is confirmed
        that Intermodal Transport Centers are to be built near the cities’ railway stations under
        the 2014-2020 financial framework for EU co-financed projects, the public transport
        authorities should ensure that the other public transport providers are active participants
        in planning for this initiative. Construction of Intermodal Transport Centers would be
        unlikely to alone generate additional patronage. At the very least, the cities should take a
        lead in ensuring better service integration across modes and encourage the marshals of
        the voivodeships and the railway companies to improve rail services. These initiatives
        would be worthwhile, even in advance of building Intermodal Transport Centers.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 vii


       Control growth in GHG emissions from the transport sector. Poland’s car ownership has
        grown rapidly since EU accession in May of 2004. The average age of the car fleet is
        high relative to other EU countries. The cities should monitor and publish energy usage
        and GHG emissions from the transport sector, particularly to assess impact of energy
        efficient or alternative-fuel vehicles, both for the city itself and for the functional urban
        area. Participation in efforts like the Covenant of Mayors could help signal the cities’
        commitment to increasing energy efficiency and use of renewable energy sources on its
        territory.

Intermunicipal Coordination

Some metropolitan areas in Poland have agreed to share responsibility and financing for transport
provision and operations on a voluntary basis. Polish legislation facilitates these structures and
helps to set standards for governance. The Government of Poland has not provided direct
financial support for inter-municipal associations, but it welcomes applications for funding under
EU programs from the associations on behalf of the constituent municipalities. The associations
are also consistent with the ITI policies promoted by the EU and the Government of Poland.

However, the organization of rail transport in Poland and the financial support provided by the
Government of Poland through statutory discounts tend to undermine efforts to coordinate
transport across municipal boundaries. For example, while compensation is available from the
national government for railway tickets for certain categories of passengers, this compensation is
lost if rail tickets are integrated with bus or tram tickets in urban areas. The local authorities
would then need to compensate for this discount from their own budgets. While this is likely to be
an unintended consequence of the statutory discount scheme for rail travel, it is an example of
how national regulations and funding do not give sufficient attention to the need to encourage
metropolitan structures for public transport.

The best examples of intermunicipal coordination of transport provision in Poland are from
metropolitan areas where there are a number of constituent cities of approximately comparable
size. These metropolitan authorities also incorporate small municipalities, but there is little risk
of decision-making and funding being dominated by a single municipality. While there is
complexity in bringing together a large number of autonomous authorities, and the governance
arrangements have evolved over time, it may be easier to establish structures in areas with a
number of large cities than in Eastern Poland where the regional capital dominates in terms of
size and resources.

The cities of Eastern Poland need to develop structures that would promote and support public
transport services for metropolitan areas rather than be based on the needs of city residents. The
following recommendations are made to the Government of Poland, marshals of voivodeships,
and to the cities to encourage intermunicipal structures for public transport planning and
operation:

       Remove existing barriers to intermunicipal cooperation for transport. The statutory
        concession schemes that compensate local transport operators for granting free or
        discounted fares to certain categories of passenger prevent integration of fares and
        ticketing. This is most obviously the case for railway services, but is also relevant for bus
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                viii


        services outside PSO contracts for the time being. The Government of Poland could
        consider reviewing its compensation schemes for statutory discounts and introduce
        structures and payment mechanisms that support integration across municipal boundaries
        and modes of transport. This could be done at the earliest opportunity to avoid suburban
        and regional bus services being withdrawn in anticipation of further market liberalization
        after 2017. The marshals of the relevant voivodeships could consider tendering for PSO
        contracts for bus services between the major cities and their neighboring municipalities.

       Give explicit preference to applications for funding under EU and other programs that
        are based on intermunicipal structures. Applicants for funding under the 2014-2020
        financial perspective are required to demonstrate a commitment to ITI policies.
        However, there is a high level of cooperation implicit in the ITI memoranda of
        understanding entered into by cities and their neighboring municipalities in Eastern
        Poland. It would be appropriate for the Government of Poland to consider giving greater
        strength to ITI policies by allocating more funds to initiatives that demonstrate
        improvement in transport that cross municipal boundaries.

       Formal agreements between cities and neighboring municipalities can mitigate the risk
        of weaker parties being dominated by stronger partners. The size and resources of the
        regional capitals in Eastern Poland, relative to their neighboring municipalities, inevitably
        give rise to concerns that the interests of the stronger partners would dominate those of
        the smaller ones in any agreements. For their part, the city administrations may have
        concerns that neighboring municipalities with limited resources would not contribute
        proportionately to improved public transport. The Ministry for Infrastructure and
        Development could consider developing a draft agreement suited to the needs of a
        metropolitan area that is dominated by a city, but with population sprawl to neighboring
        communes. This draft agreement would set out mutual commitments to transparency,
        shared decision-making, and equitable financial contributions to be negotiated at a local
        level. To further support such agreements, the Government of Poland could commit to
        providing additional financial support to initiatives developed by the inter-municipal
        associations that will make measurable contributions to national policies such as the
        National Plan for Regional Development and National Plan for Spatial Development.

The high-level recommendations made in this diagnostic report are supportive of, and
complementary to, the investments in urban transport being made by the cities of Poland. These
recommendations would require further analytical work. As with the infrastructure investments,
the EU 2014-2020 financial framework provides a unique window of funds for commissioning
technical assistance that would ensure that the policy framework for urban mobility in cities and
their functional urban areas is optimal and financially sustainable in the long-term.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 1




                                      INTRODUCTION



1.      In the second half of 2013, the World Bank secured grant funding from the Korean Green
Growth Trust Fund for analytical support and technical assistance related to sustainable urban
transport systems for select cities in Eastern Poland. Established in 2011, the Korea Green
Growth Partnership strengthens the cooperation between the Government of Korea and the World
Bank Group to help countries achieve sustainable and inclusive development by developing and
sharing practical knowledge around innovative green growth solutions. In the first phase of this
technical assistance, an assessment of the urban transport sector in the selected cities was
conducted with a primary focus on public transportation and a goal of identifying areas for
improvement. The second phase will focus on areas identified in the first phase subject to
agreement from the participating cities and capacity building activities. This report provides a set
of recommendations related to the legal and institutional framework for urban transport in
Poland; summarizes the assessment of urban mobility for Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and
Rzeszów; and assesses the framework for inter-municipal coordination in Poland.

2.      Białystok is the largest city in northeastern Poland and the capital of Podlaskie
Voivodeship. It’s population is almost 300,000. The city functions as the administrative,
economic, scientific, and cultural center of the Podlaskie Region. The city’s location within 50
km of the border with Belarus and close to Lithuania makes it an important transit location for
transporting people and goods between the EU and its eastern neighbors. Białystok’s history of
being at a crossroads for nations contributes to the city’s cultural and religious diversity. The
shape and development of Białystok have also been defined by the forests and lakes within the
city boundaries and in neighboring areas.

3.      The city adopted the Białystok City Development Strategy for 2011-2020 that lays out
ambitious goals for the city in the context of development opportunities offered by the EU’s new
financial perspective. One of the key objectives of the strategy is building regional and
metropolitan bonds with integration of planning in the metropolitan area and shaping
transportation systems in order to foster development in the metropolitan area. In this regard, a
key priority is the institutionalization of local cooperation in the Białystok metropolitan areas.
This renewed focus of thinking of development beyond the city’s border is a move in the right
direction.

4.     Lublin, administrative center of the Lublin Voivodeship, the capital of the Lublin Region,
and home to nearly 350,000 inhabitants, is the largest city in Eastern Poland. The City of
Lublin—the per capita GDP of the region is below the average for Poland as a whole, although
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                           2


that of the city itself is above the national average1—is endeavoring to attract new investment
based on the availability of well-qualified graduates, local agriculture, and tax incentives. The
city is well recognized in Poland and internationally as an academic center and is home to a
number of large universities. It has a student population estimated to be around 75,000. The large
number of students in Lublin, who typically live at home in the region or in private rented
accommodation in the city, contributes to high usage of public transport in peak and off-peak
periods. However, these students generally have concessional fares, which reduces the average
financial yield per trip. The dominant areas of Lublin’s modern economy include trade, various
services and industry, engineering, automotive engineering, power, and furniture production.
Lublin is an important center of food production.

5.       The city adopted the Lublin Development Strategy for 2013-2020.2 One of the key
objectives of this strategy is to build regional and metropolitan bonds with a renewed focus on
regional integration and the establishment of the Lublin Metropolitan Area. Action plans include
the creation of a common transportation system for the Lublin Metropolitan Area, cooperation
between the city and region for purposes of spatial development, and developing a strategic
program for city-region coordination. As in Białystok, this renewed focus of thinking of
development across the city’s border is a move in the right direction. This report focuses heavily
on assessing the current lacunae in the transportation system. The World Bank believes this report
and its findings are in line with and supportive of the city’s strategic objectives for 2013-2020.

6.      Olsztyn is located in northeastern Poland in a region known as the Thousand Lakes in
recognition of the extensive lakes and protected woodland within the city’s boundaries and in the
wider region. It is the capital of the Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship. Forests constitute 21
percent of the city area and lakes 8 percent. Both have limited the development of urban sprawl
when compared to other similarly sized cities in Eastern Poland. Olsztyn, with a surface area of
88 km2, has a population of 174,675, but the average density of 2,000 inhabitants/km2 disguises a
wide range of densities within the city’s boundaries. The city’s extensive woodland areas are
sparsely populated while some residential districts have average densities of 5,000-15,000
inhabitants/km2. The Michelin tire company is the largest employer in the region of Warmian-
Masurian. Other important industries are food processing and furniture manufacturing.

7.       In 2013, the City of Olsztyn adopted a new City Development Strategy—Olsztyn 2020.
The strategy’s overarching objective is that by 2020 Olsztyn should become a modern
agglomeration with well-developed metropolitan functions. Strategic goals include improving
human capital, attracting investments, increasing innovation and development of metropolitan
functions. The strategy stresses the importance of cooperation between the city and surrounding
communes. It also outlines priority business areas, such as “the economy of water? (breweries,
leisure, hydro-power generation, and fisheries), high-quality food production, as well as timber
and furniture. With regard to transport, the strategy aims mostly to improve external accessibility
of the city, stating air connections as “very important, if not the most important? part of the


1
  The per capita GDP of Lublin Voivodeship in 2011 (PLN 34,425) was 86 percent of Poland’s per capita income.
However, a 2008 PWC study found that the City of Lublin’s income was 111 percent of the national average. This
study is available at (http://www.pwc.pl/pl/wielkie-miasta-polski/raport_Lublin_2011.pdf
2
  Lublin Development Strategy 2013-2020 (2013). Available at:
http://www.lublin.eu/images/File/Lublin%20Development%20Strategy%202013-2020.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                   3


transport system. Road accessibility to Warsaw, Elblag, and Elk (two other cities in the region) is
the only indicator regarding transport in the strategy. In the area of urban transport, the strategy
states “proposed investments will aim to calm down car traffic in the city center, improve quality
of public transport, bike and pedestrian traffic as well as development of parking system.?

8.       Rzeszów is the largest city in southeastern Poland and is the capital of the Podkarpackie
Voivodeship. Rzeszów’s political and economic importance historically was based on its strategic
location on the main Kraków-Lviv road and railway lines for east-west traffic and as a hub on a
north-south corridor. Rzeszów is now developing as a tourist destination based on its diverse
cultural heritage and has sensitively restored its city center. Other important industries in the city
and region include some of Poland’s largest metal production plants, food processing, and textile
mills. Some of these industries have not fared well in Poland’s transition to a market economy
and the city is now encouraging investment in knowledge-based industries.

9.      Rzeszów has a surface area of 116.4 km2 and a population of 182,500. The city’s
population has grown in recent years, but this was due primarily to the extension of the city’s
boundaries to incorporate adjoining municipalities with the approval of the Government of
Poland. The surface area of the city increased from 54 km2 to 116 km2 in December 2005 due to
these boundary changes. The mayor of Rzeszów believes that the city should expand further and
incorporate two more municipalities in the northeast of the city where the airport and economic
zone are located. This would require the consent of the local communities and the Government
of Poland, which is not assured, so the decision-making process may take many years.

10.     Rzeszów and Podkarpackie Voivodeship have approved a number of urban development
and transport strategies for the city and region that provide a strategic context for current and
proposed transport infrastructure development. The main thrust of these strategies has been to
support the city’s application for project funding under EU funding programs so the focus of the
documents responds to the priorities agreed between the Government of Poland and the EU for
transport development. The EU funding context may also explain the strong emphasis on
upgrading physical infrastructure rather than setting priorities for spatial planning that would
feature more prominently in comparable strategies in other EU countries.

11.      This report begins by presenting an overview of the Polish context in which cities must
develop their urban mobility plans before presenting the assessment of urban mobility in
Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów. The report then provides a brief overview of experience
with inter-municipal cooperation in France and Poland. The findings are based on work carried
out by the World Bank between December 2013 and June 2014 with a view to making
recommendations to support the cities’ goals of sustainable urban mobility. The report’s scope is
limited to passenger transport and focuses on how to ensure large investments in public transport
infrastructure translate into an increasing modal share for public transport as a key mechanism for
controlling the growth of transport-related GHG emissions.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 4




                                  THE POLISH CONTEXT

INTRODUCTION

12.     With the fall of communism, Poland created a legal framework to give local governments
the authority they needed to be able to meet their responsibilities as delegated by the central
government and as required by their local communities. The administrative division of Poland
has, since 1999, been based on three levels of public administration: 16 regions (voivodeships),
379 counties (sub-regional units powiats), and 2,479 municipalities (gminas). Major cities
normally have the status of both gmina and powiat. Territorial self-government exists at regional,
sub-regional, and local government levels. Regional authority consists of a voivodeship council
and a marshal who is head of the executive body of the regional self-government, while the
governor is a central government representative responsible for supervising the activities of the
voivodeship council. There are three legal categories for municipalities: rural, urban, and urban-
rural.

13.      This chapter provides an overview of key laws and strategic documents that provide the
context in which self-governing municipalities must operate, as well as a review of urban policy
conducted by the OECD in 2012. One of the key challenges facing Polish cities in achieving their
stated objective of developing greener cities and more sustainable transport is the context of
stable to declining populations within the administrative borders of most cities. This is due to the
decline in total population in Poland and population movement to the suburbs or more-developed
cities. A critical piece of the puzzle is the absence of strong legal mechanisms to ensure
coordination of spatial and transport planning within functional urban areas.

NATIONAL PROGRAM FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF LOW-CARBON ECONOMY

14.      The National Programme for the Development of Low-Carbon Economy is currently
under preparation by the Polish Ministry of Economy. Its assumptions have been accepted by the
Council of Ministers in August 2011. The program will aim to “provide development of low-
emission economy, assuring sustainable development of the national economy,? with a time
horizon of 2050 as some of the actions require decades to have appropriate impact. It has six
goals: (i) development of low-emission energy sources, also nuclear power plants; (ii)
improvement of energy efficiency, including for buildings, and the introduction of a smart grid;
(iii) improvement of raw materials and commodities usage; (iv) development and implementation
of low-emission technologies, including clean coal technologies; (v) reduction of waste
production and improvement of waste management, especially recycling; and (vi) promotion of
new consumption patterns, including education. It will be prepared together with a dedicated
social council. Road transport is one of the areas with the highest potential for improvement. The
document aims to be coherent with the current spatial planning and transport development
strategies. It lists some potential actions, but does not refer directly to transport modal share or
integrated transport and land-use planning, an important omission.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                               5


PUBLIC TRANSPORT POLICY

15.      The Ministry of Infrastructure and Development was created in November 2013
following the merger of the Ministry of Regional Development and the Ministry of Transport,
Construction and Maritime Economy. The Ministry of Infrastructure and Development is
responsible for shaping and coordinating numerous policies, including i) development policy,
aiming to ensure a durable and sustainable development of the country and socio-economic
cohesion; ii) regional policy, with the objective of enhancing competitiveness of Polish regions as
well as ensuring territorial and spatial cohesion; iii) spatial policy, with the aim of maintaining
spatial order and a balanced development of Poland; iv) cohesion policy, focusing on reducing
the developmental disparities between EU regions; and v) transport policy, aimed at improving
mobility and accessibility by developing sustainable and integrated transport systems.

16.      The National Development Strategy 2020 aims to increase the efficiency of transport in
Poland. With regard to urban transport, it aims to facilitate the flow of traffic in urban areas.3
Poor traffic flow in urban areas is attributed to the inconvenience of using public transport as well
as significant transit traffic through town centers. The strategy details four key actions to improve
urban transport in Poland: (a) construction of bypasses in large cities, (b) introduction of
integrated ticketing systems in the functional area of cities and towns, (c) implementation of
advanced traffic management and control techniques in big cities, and (d) the organization of the
efficient movement of people and goods within cities and facilitating access to non-urban areas. It
also recognizes the need to develop low-emission, alternatively powered vehicles due to limited
fossil fuel resources and increasing pollution in urban areas.

17.      The Transport Development Strategy until 2020 (with 2030 perspective) explicitly
mentions the important role of urban transport in developing a sustainable transport system in
Poland aimed at improving accessibility and mobility at the local, regional, national, European,
and global levels.4 The strategy outlines the following key directions for urban transport-related
interventions under the overall strategic objective aimed at modernization and integration of the
current transport system:

        transforming urban transport networks into effective and functional components of
         regional and national transport systems coherent with the European transport system;
        improving the efficiency of urban transport systems in line with local communities’
         expectations and improving quality of urban and suburban transport services;
        minimizing impact of heavy traffic on urban traffic and quality of life; and
        assuring balanced role of urban transport systems in stimulating growth and
         improvements of living conditions, while at the same time addressing environmental
         protection issues.

The strategy is also expected to contribute to improved organization, management, and efficiency
of urban transport systems through close cooperation among central and local government


3
  Government of Poland (2012), National Development Strategy 2020: Active Society, Competitive Economy, and
Efficient State, Attachment to Resolution No. 157 of the Council of Ministers of September 25, 2012. Available at:
http://www.mir.gov.pl/english/Regional_Development/Development_Policy/NDS_2020/Documents/NDS%202020.pdf
4
  Ministry of Transport, Construction and Maritime Economy, Transport Development Strategy until 2020 (with 2030
perspective) adopted by the Council of Ministers on January 22, 2013.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                  6


administrations, infrastructure authorities, and transport operators in shaping the demand and
ensuring safe and effective transport services. The strategy lists a number of measures, such as
promoting integration of spatial planning and transport planning, promoting railway transport
within agglomerations, walking and cycling, as well as intermodal integration. It does not detail
how the government will achieve the stated goals, except general statements, such as “providing
optimal legal conditions.?

18.      The Public Transport Act of December 16, 2010, specifies statutory requirements for
local authorities and the Ministry of Infrastructure and Development regarding the organization of
public transport markets, transport planning, and the financing and management of public
transport services. The act specifies local and national authorities’ obligations in the areas of (a)
planning of transport development, (b) organization of public transport, (c) management of public
transport, and (d) financing of public transport. The act requires local authorities—municipalities
or gminy and counties or powiaty—to develop and implement a “Plan for Sustainable Public
Transport? only if they exceed a given number of inhabitants and are willing to contract PSO
services in organizing public transport.5 Public consultation is a key requirement for the
development of these plans. The act also defines requirements for the selection of public transport
operators, based on Poland’s public procurement law, Concession for Construction Activities and
Services Act, and through public service contracts with public transport operators. Such contracts
must be for a defined period not longer than 10 years for road transport. This act helps local
authorities work with the increasing number of private providers of public transport services and
introduces the requirements provided in the Regulation (EC) No 1370/2007 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2007 on public passenger transport services.6

19.     By enacting a public transport plan, municipal authorities introduce a new local law that
is valid only within a particular municipality.7 This plan becomes the second legally binding
planning document, alongside the land-use zoning law.8 The guidelines on how to prepare a
public transport plan can be found in the Regulation of May 25, 2011 on the detailed scope of
sustainable development plans of public transport. A key element of the plan is to determine
which transport routes are financed by a public entity. In theory, such plans are intended to
counteract unregulated development of private non-PSO operators and to coordinate public
transport in voivodeships, powiaty, and gminy, with a particular focus on metropolitan areas.
However, the plan focuses on operators of public transport covered by PSO, states their exclusive
scope of operation and protects them against competition, limiting the role of non-PSO operators
that potentially could either serve at least part of the network more efficiently or without
subsidies or both. A crucial step in the development of such a plan is the definition of the
geographical scope, which should address spatial as well as functional considerations.



5
  A minimum of 50,000 inhabitants for an individual municipality or 80,000 inhabitants for an association of
municipalities, 80,000 for an individual county or 120,000 inhabitants for an association of counties.
6
  Regulation (EC) No 1370/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2007 on public
passenger transport services by rail and by road, and repealing Council Regulations (EEC) No 1191/69 and (EEC) No
1107/70. Available at:
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32007R1370&from=EN
7
  Or other authorities, if they cede their public transport organization competences to the authority, according to a
bilateral agreement.
8
  Tomasz Chaberko and Pawel Kretowicz (2013), Geographical Input to Local Public Transport Planning in Poland.
Bulletin of Geography, Socio-economic Series No.22 (2013):35-46.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                     7


20.      The draft National Urban Policy (NUP) prepared by the Ministry of Infrastructure and
Development in 2014 aims to support sustainable development in urban areas, increase the
quality of life in cities, and recognizes that urban issues need to be solved in a comprehensive and
integrated manner.9 Among other things, the NUP aims to indicate the development lines for
cities and their functional areas, operationalize strategic government documents, and announces
potential solutions—knowledge centers, the need for legislative change, and measures—and is
aimed at supporting cities that will be implementing the NUP’s recommendations. The time
horizon for NUP corresponds to the time horizon of the EU 2014-2020 financial perspective, but
the scope of the policy goes beyond what can be financed through EU funds. The most important
challenges facing Polish cities and their functional areas were identified in the National Regional
Development Strategy, the National Spatial Development Concept, and the OECD Urban Policy
Review for Poland.

21.      Of particular relevance to this report, key challenges identified in NUP include the “low
level of functional links between cities,? as well as the “low level of network-based cooperation
between main urban centers, as well as poor or nonexistent coordination of management in the
urban functional areas.? The NUP recognizes that an important issue is the inconsistent spatial
development of city centers, the lack of coordination of spatial planning, which has led to intense
urban growth in peri-urban areas, and “growing spatial chaos.? It recognizes that the process of
uncontrolled expansion of urban areas leads to a number of problems, including increasing costs
of municipal services and reduced revenues for cities. The NUP recognizes that solving the issues
faced by Polish cities requires planning from the perspective of functional areas and not
administrative boundaries—the latter has largely been the case to date.

22.       One of the NUP’s objectives is the development of the compact city concept through
supporting the sustainable development of urban centers, including “counteracting the negative
effects of uncontrolled suburbanization? and by adopting measures to reduce the role of
passenger cars in urban functional areas. The spatial development of cities, often leading to
suburbanization, is reinforced by the lack of a coordinated and integrated approach to planning,
which reinforces the usage of private vehicles. Investments in public transport do not always lead
to increases in the modal share of public transport in cities, due in part to the failure to keep up
with changing needs in terms of routes and frequency of services.10 The working paper argues
that in the transport sector priority should be given to investments in the public transport system
and that integration of public transport systems should be encouraged through multi-modal
transfer hubs, fare and timetable integration, construction of “park and ride? and “bike and ride?
facilities, and interactive passenger information systems. Essential to this objective is that spatial
planning and transport development planning be integrated even if existing laws are not presently
effective in ensuring an integrated planning approach is adopted. With regard to the financing of

9
   Ministry of Infrastructure and Development (2014), National Urban Policy. The draft National Urban Policy is a
working paper to be discussed with partners before formal interdepartmental and social consultations are held. It should
not be treated as the official position of the Ministry of Infrastructure and Development or the Government of Poland.
10
   The UNHABITAT Report of 2013 reports that in 2001 more than half of all mechanized trips (i.e. excluding
walking) in Hong Kong and Eastern European cities (such as Bucharest, Romania; Moscow, Russia; and Warsaw,
Poland) were by public transport, compared to an average of about 25 per cent for Western European cities. The four
cities of Eastern Poland did not have data available on modal share. See UNHABITAT (2013), Planning and Design
for Sustainable Urban Mobility: Global Report on Human Settlements 2013, Global Report on Human Settlements.
Available at:
http://mirror.unhabitat.org/pmss/listItemDetails.aspx?publicationID=3503&AspxAutoDetectCookieSupport=1
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                   8


public transport, the working paper states that there is a need to analyze the rules for operating
and financing public transport, particularly the development of rules for co-funding and
calculating fares for agglomeration public transport.



FRAMEWORK FOR REGIONAL AND SPATIAL POLICY

23.      The National Strategy of Regional Development 2010-2020: Regions, Cities, Rural Areas
(NSRD), adopted on July 13, 2010, re-formulates the thinking of regional policy in Poland. The
strategy sets out the objectives of regional policy with respect to individual territories of the
country, including, in particular, urban and rural areas, defining their relationships with other
public policies. This document also establishes the manner of action of public entities, and
especially of the government and voivodeship self-governments, which sought to achieve national
strategic development objectives of Poland. The NSRD also considers the need to increase
territorial cohesion on a national and regional scale through the establishment of functional
relationships between voivodeship centers and their surrounding regions. The strategy argues that
the marginalization of the least-developed areas should be prevented and the development of
disparities between individual voivodeships limited.

24.      The National Spatial Development Concept 2030 (NSDC 2030), which was adopted by
the Council of Ministers on December 13, 2011, is the key national strategic document that
addresses the spatial management of the country.11 It has been prepared pursuant to the provisions
of the Spatial Planning and Land Management Act of 2003. The arrangements and
recommendations resulting from the NSDC 2030 are applicable to the preparation of voivodeship
spatial development plans that have also been defined pursuant to the statutory requirements. The
document presents a vision of the country’s spatial development over a 20-year perspective. It
specifies objectives and directions of the national spatial development policy that serve the
purpose of its delivery. It also indicates the rules and mechanisms of coordination and
implementation of public development policies that have a significant territorial impact. Hence,
the NSDC 2030 has many characteristics of a development strategy, combining spatial
development components with socio-economic development elements. Voivodeships are obliged
to delimit them in their spatial development plans. The NSDC 2030 has six objectives:

        To improve competitiveness of Poland’s major urban centers in the European context
         through functional integration while preserving the pro-cohesive polycentric settlement
         structure;

        To enhance internal cohesion and achieve sustainable territorial development by
         promoting functional integration, creating conditions for spreading of development
         factors, multifunctional development of rural areas, and using all territories’ internal
         potentials;

        To improve Poland’s accessibility in different dimensions by developing transport and
         telecommunications infrastructure;

11
   National Spatial Development Concept document is available at:
http://www.mir.gov.pl/english/Regional_Development/Spatial_Policy/NSDC_2030/Documents/KPZK_2030_ENG_sm
all.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 9




       To develop spatial structures supporting the achievement and preservation of Poland’s
        high-quality natural environment and landscape;

       To enhance spatial structures’ resistance to natural calamities and loss of energy security,
        and to develop spatial structures supporting national defense capability;

       To restore and consolidate spatial order.

25.     The last objective aims to introduce an integrated (coherent and hierarchical) socio-
economic and spatial planning system capable of effective coordination of public bodies and
public policies of the greatest significance for spatial development at different governance levels,
reorganize regulations to ensure efficiency and universality of the spatial planning system,
strengthen institutions, and improve the quality of spatial planning. NSDC 2030 recognizes that
one of the symptoms of the lack of spatial order in Poland is unregulated suburbanization, which
destroys space value and is wasteful in economic and social terms with low public space quality.

26.     According to the NSDC 2030, one of the basic measures required to increase the
efficiency of the spatial planning system is to introduce a principle in legal regulations that
brownfields must be used before the development of greenfields, and that greenfield development
will be permitted only when brownfields are already fully developed. This would be a significant
departure from current practice and perhaps too severe a regulation that would be difficult to
implement and would face opposition. While favoring redevelopment of brownfield sites is
appropriate, excluding greenfields until all brownfields have been developed would go well
beyond what most countries do. The NSDC 2030 envisages the need for detailed regulations to be
introduced to prevent scattered development, development alongside national and regional roads,
and development in areas without water and sewage infrastructure and in flood-risk areas. The
NSDC 2030 recognizes that strengthening of spatial planning requires institutional changes at all
administrative levels and the introduction of systems for monitoring and assessing spatial
development.

27.      The integrated territorial approach is oriented toward functionally defined territories,
integration of public measures in the spatial dimension, and multi-level governance. The NSDC
2030 assumes that similar integrated measures should be adopted in areas that share geographic
(socio-economic and spatial) characteristics and are referred to as functional areas. From this
perspective, the subject of the NSDC 2030 is the entire territory of the country and its objectives
and tools are varied depending on the specificity of individual functional areas. After relevant
amendments are introduced in the laws on spatial planning, the functional areas specified in the
NSDC 2030 should be taken into account as an element of spatial planning at the national,
regional, and local levels and, where reasonable, they should constitute a separate category of
spatial planning. In order to achieve the objectives of the NSDC 2030, 22 functional areas have
been designated and will be delimited at different levels of management (national, regional, and
functional).
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                   10


SPATIAL PLANNING ACT12

28.     The key legal document for spatial planning in Poland is the Spatial Planning and Land
Management Act of March 27, 2003. This act regulates formulation of spatial policies and
preparation of land-use plans, and divides power and responsibilities among the different tiers of
administration.13 According to the Spatial Planning and Land Management Act, spatial planning
takes place at the national, regional, and local levels. At the national level the central government
is responsible for preparing the Concept of National Spatial Development, which among other
objectives, establishes the principles of the spatial system of settlement and national infrastructure
development. This concept includes balancing the development of regions. Critically, the
Planning Act cancelled the requirement to prepare local plans, allowing municipalities to decide
whether to prepare such plans. This change, essentially, dismantled the land regulation regime.

29.     By law, regional governments must prepare a Strategy for Regional Development, a
Regional Spatial Development Plan, and Spatial Plan for Metropolitan Areas—the latter for areas
defined as metropolitan areas. Regional Spatial Development Plans identify trends of spatial
development and settlement organization and functioning, current and future location of main
public infrastructure, and are based on the principle of balancing regional and local interests with
those of the nation. Sub-regional levels of government do not have to prepare plans for spatial
development, but may prepare development strategies, which can present general concepts on
economic development.

30.      The municipalities are the key tier of administration preparing spatial development plans.
Two spatial planning documents have been prepared: the Study of the Conditions and Directions
for Spatial Development and the Land Use Development Plan.14 The first document determines
spatial policy in the municipality and rules for spatial management, but is not legally binding. A
Land Use Development Plan can be prepared for a part or for the entire municipality, in line with
the study, and the plan becomes the legal basis for detailed spatial management. However,
municipalities can function without a Land Use Development Plan—the areas to be included in
the plan are indicated in the study. Municipalities can manage spatial development through two
administrative decisions: (a) Decision on Development Conditions, which is prepared for plots on
which investors require building permits; and (b) Decision on Investments Serving Public
Purposes.

31.      The Act for Spatial Development Planning states that agglomerations of voivodeships’
capitals should have their spatial developments plans as part of the regional spatial development
plan. This regulation came into force on September 4, 2014,15 and the regulations will refer to


12
    This section is based on PLUREL (2008), Peri-Urban Land Use Relationships – Strategies and Sustainability
Assessment Tools for Urban-Rural Linkages, Integrated Project, Contract Mo. 036921, D.3.3.4, Analysis of Regional
Spatial Planning and Decision Making Strategies and Their Impact on Land Use in the Urban Fringe, Warsaw Case
Study, Miroslaw Grocowski, Marek Pieniazek, September 2008. Available at:
http://www.plurel.net/images/D334.pdf
13
   Other legislative regulations that impact the planning process in Poland include the Environment Protection and
Management Act (April 27, 2001), the Building Code (July 7, 1994), and the Law on Real Property Management
(August 1997). All three acts have been amended.
14
   The Land Use Plan aims to regulate land use through coordination development activities, infrastructure investments,
delineating protected areas, and dividing area covered by the plan into building plots.
15
   Official Journal, 2014, Item 379, The Act of 24 January 2014 amending the Act on the Principles of Development
Policy and Other Laws. http://isap.sejm.gov.pl/DetailsServlet?id=WDU20140000379
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                11


selected urban functional areas that may be defined in the regional spatial development plan and
should be consulted within a special committee. The amended act states that the municipalities
covered should be consulted in relation to spatial policy for FUAs and that a spatial development
plan should be designed as part of a regional development plan for the FUA of the regional
capital. However, this does not limit municipalities’ primary responsibilities for spatial planning
and does not transfer their rights to a higher (metropolitan) level.

OECD URBAN POLICY REVIEW: KEY FINDINGS

32.     In 2012, the OECD published an Urban Policy Review for Poland, which provided a
comprehensive assessment of Poland’s urban policies, including a review of urban systems and
the challenges they face, national policies for urban development in Poland, and how to adapt
governance for a national urban policy agenda.16 As the findings from this assessment of the
urban system and challenges were used as a key input in preparing the National Urban Policy
Working Paper, this section will summarize some of these key findings, particularly those that are
relevant to improving urban transport in Polish cities. The focus is on urban policy, which goes
well beyond the confines of urban transport, but many of the findings are relevant for urban
transport and provide the context in which urban transport planning decisions are made.

33.      Demographic trends reveal that population growth in Poland is mainly taking place in
suburban areas within urban labor market areas (ULMAs),17 while population data based on
administrative units reveal that urban areas are losing population. At the same time, Poland is
facing a rapidly aging population and is expected, by 2050, to be among the top OECD countries
in terms of aging population with forecasts of slightly more than one active worker supporting an
inactive person, down from three active workers at present. Urban areas are faced with aging and
outmigration, the latter reflecting a suburbanization process that has translated into urban sprawl.
The economic performance of medium-size Polish cities may not be achieving full potential in
terms of economic growth due to falling population. Another important factor limiting the growth
potential of mid-sized cities is transport infrastructure, which fails to properly connect the
national urban system and integrate areas within urban agglomerations. Large urban areas need to
establish ULMA-wide transport infrastructure, as commuters reside beyond existing public
transport routes.

34.      The Urban Policy Review argues for the need to develop a national urban strategy to set
monitorable objectives for urban development. It argues that there is a need to move toward
implementation of a longer-term strategic vision for urban development, which is “currently only
reflected on paper in the various policy documents.? It argues that reforms are needed to (a)
improve inter-municipal planning and service delivery within a single functional urban area; (b)
ensure integrated urban planning across planning sectors; (c) strengthen inter-ministerial co-
operation and coordination across the central government; (d) review the role of intermediate
government levels to optimize urban policy outcomes; and (e) adapt the current local finance
system.



16
   OECD (2011), OECD Urban Policy Reviews: Poland: 2011, OECD Publishing. Available at;
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264097834-en
17
   These are larger functional areas surrounding official urban municipalities.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                         12


35.      Creating effective coordination mechanisms for efficient planning is critical in urban
areas where city administrative boundaries do not match functional areas—something that is not
uncommon in Poland. Current legislation empowers municipalities to cooperate on a voluntary
basis through joint agreements or associations. While there are examples of cooperation, and
most municipalities are involved in some form of inter-municipal co-operation, the review finds
that there is a lack of a legal and financial platform to engage municipalities on a number of
issues, including urban planning. Central government has a role to play in encouraging
cooperation through legislation and financial incentives—for example, in the case of France,
agglomerations can benefit from an additional grant to their existing block grant entitlements,
while in Canada, the federal infrastructure program requires municipalities in a functional region
to apply jointly for major project financing. In addition, in France the payroll tax has been an
essential source of finance for urban transport improvements and has widespread support. In
2013, at the initiative of the Chancellery of the President, a committee was created to review how
to create mechanisms for compulsory cooperation of local authorities within the main
agglomerations of Kraków, ?ódz, Poznań, Silesia, Tricity, Warsaw, and Wrocław, to be financed
through a payroll tax of 0.9 percent. There was little appetite for the introduction of such a system
and this committee is no longer active.

36.      The review argues that stronger national spatial planning regulations are needed to
achieve goals. At present, national spatial planning standards do not require municipal spatial
plans to be integrated with other municipal sector plans. Meanwhile, only a small fraction of any
urban area is covered by municipal physical development plans, with the result that decisions are
made without considering municipal spatial development studies. One approach is to consider
what some OECD countries do, which is to set standards that include common criteria for legally
binding municipal strategic plans that integrate spatial, economic development, and other sectoral
objectives, including standardized criteria to justify decisions. National criteria could specify
which type of municipal spatial decisions would warrant regional approval due to their impact on
regional objectives. Alternative solutions proposed include developing national regulations to
support the creation of metropolitan agencies with spatial planning authority or requiring
application for national and regional urban development funds to demonstrate that municipal
spatial plans align with regional goals, as well as with plans from municipalities within the same
functional area.

37.      On the local finance system, the review argues that in order to solve important
infrastructure gaps there is a need to review the basis for calculating property tax, which is based
on surface area in Poland rather than on property values, which is the norm in most OECD
countries. Poland should also ensure that any changes do not penalize businesses. The general
grant system also needs to be reformed as it does not compensate cities for services they provide
to suburban areas. One solution mooted is the introduction of a metropolitan fiscal equalization
scheme. Such reform could provide funding to operate and maintain more extensive and frequent
public transport services within an FUA.18 19



18
   P. Śleszyński, Delimitacja miejskich obszarów funkcjonalnych stolic województw, Polish Academy of Science,
2012. Available at:http://www.metropolia.bydgoszcz.pl/pliki/delimitacja.pdf
19
   Kryteria delimitacji miejskich obszarów funkcjonalnych, Ministry of Regional Development, Warszawa 2013.
Available at:
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                 13


CONSTRAINTS ON PUBLIC TRANSPORT FARES AND PARKING RATES

38.      Numerous acts establish statutory fare discounts for certain categories of passengers
using public transport in Polish cities, both for within city boundaries and for inter-city transport.
Under Polish law, there are three groups of passengers who have the right to travel free of charge
on urban public transport. These include members of parliament, wartime and military disabled
persons as well as guides accompanying such persons, and civilian blind victims of warfare.20 In
addition, the following groups have a 50 percent statutory discount: veterans, undergraduate
students, engineering or master’s program students, students of teacher training colleges as well
as social worker training colleges, and injured veterans receiving disability benefits due to
injuries or illnesses developed as a result of participation in warfare conducted abroad.21 These
nationally-set statutory discounts are not directly reimbursed, but cities have to recover lost
income from general subsidies they receive from the central government. In addition, many urban
public transport systems offer discounts or free travel to children and elderly passengers by
decision of city councils and not a statutory discount required by central government.

39.      Poland also has statutory reduced fares for inter-city public transport as determined by
the Act of June 20, 1992. The act details a long list of passengers who travel for free or with
reduced fares that are 95 percent, 93 percent, 78 percent, 51 percent, 49 percent, and 33 percent
less than the full fare, for different types of tickets, including single and monthly tickets.
Discounts that apply to inter-city railways using single tickets are as follows: 51 percent fare for
university students until the age of 26, doctoral students until the age of 35; 100 percent discount
for children under the age of 4; 49 percent discount for children from preschool to secondary
school; 33 percent fare reduction for kindergarten, school or university teachers. Children under
four travel free, while children from kindergarten to secondary school are entitled to a 49 percent
discount on inter-city public transport buses. University students are eligible for a 51 percent fare
discount.

40.      The costs related to financing statutory entitlements to free and reduced fares are covered
by the state budget in full amount of the discount given. The differences between both schemes
described above create barriers to fare integration of inter-urban bus and railway services with
urban public transport systems, for when passengers buy integrated tickets, direct compensation
of statutory discounts are not eligible any more. Provisions repealing statutory discounts
financing will come into force on January 1, 2017, in relation to those services that are not
covered by PSO in line with the Regulation (EC) 1370/2007. This may also lead to disappearance
of many non-PSO, privately-operated suburban bus connections for which only a simple
notification was required by the respective self-government.




http://www.kujawsko-
pomorskie.pl/pliki/planowanie/20140211_spotkania/kryteria_delimitacji_mof_o_rodk_w_wojew_dzkich_mrr__luty_2
013.pdf
20
   Respectively, the Act of May 9, 1996, on the exercise of the mandate of a member of parliament or senator, the Act
of May 29, 1974, on the supply of war and military disabled persons and families, and the Act of May 16, 2006, on the
provision of funds and powers available to blind civilian victims of warfare.
21
   Respectively, the Act of January 24, 1991, on the veterans and wartime and post-war victims, the Act of July 27,
2005, on the law of higher education, the Act of September 7, 1991, on the law on higher education, and the Act of
August 19, 2011, on veterans’ warfare abroad.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  14


41.      European countries usually decide on fare discounts at a national level and transport
operators are compensated for loss of revenue based on surveys. This usually involves a transfer
from a national social welfare budget to a national, local or modal transport provider. The
payment is usually based on a discount to the regular fare, on social inclusion policies, and the
value to the payer of a bulk purchase. There are often restrictions on usage, such as second-class
rail or off-peak for urban transport. However, discount schemes are under pressure throughout
Europe. People are living longer and are more mobile in their old age. Transport operators have
become more commercial, both private and public companies, and are demanding better
compensation for free-travel schemes. Older people and people with disabilities are becoming
more assertive about their rights and do not want to be restricted as to when they can travel or
where they sit. Overall, existing discount fare schemes are costing more than intended when they
were introduced and extended in the 1970s and 1980s. While many governments would like to
replace existing public transport fare discount schemes with schemes that are more needs based or
related to income levels, they are difficult to change. The Polish rules, particularly for inter-city
public transport, appear extraordinarily detailed and suggest that agreeing on integrated fares
across operators within a functional urban area could also be quite complex.

42.      The Act on Public Roads from March 21, 1985, and subsequent amendments to the act,
set ceilings on the parking rates in paid-parking zones. Article 13(b) states that the parking rate
for the first hour of parking may not exceed PLN 3 (Euro 0.72), and that rates for the next three
hours may increase, but may not exceed by more than 20 percent compared to the preceding hour
of parking, while the rate for the fourth hour may not exceed the fee for the first hour of parking.
Article 13(f) establishes that the fine for not paying parking fees may not exceed PLN 50 (Euro
12). While cities have freedom in terms of defining the area of paid-parking zones, they cannot
raise parking fees above the values set by the act as part of an effort to discourage driving into the
city center.

CONCLUSION

43.      There are a number of issues related to spatial planning in Poland. A review in 2004
indicated that Land-Use Development Plans covered only 20 percent of Polish territory, which
means that spatial planning is being conducted largely through administrative decision-making.
This is not in keeping with sustainable development of cities. In addition, when spatial plans are
prepared by authorities at lower levels of government, there is no effective requirement to
recognize and implement objectives of authorities at higher levels of administration. This
autonomy in planning and decision-making makes it difficult to coordinate development across
larger areas, such as in functional urban areas or metropolitan areas. In addition, there is a lack of
detailed spatial databases that could support decision-making and monitor implementation of
land-use plans. What this translates into is the lack of an appropriate instrument for managing the
development of complex areas that go beyond municipal administrative borders.

44.     There is also an absence of sectoral integration in planning, which means that there can
be divergence between strategies for economic and spatial development. As a result, a narrow
approach from a single municipality perspective is often adopted due to the lack of incentives for
cooperation, and the absence of a general culture of cooperation. In fact, there is a strong
incentive for a suburban commune to go it alone and attract more development and property tax.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                             15


45.     While the Polish system of spatial planning can be characterized as being decentralized,
with municipal self-governments having become the key level of administration for land-use
planning, planning instruments cannot be automatically copied into a different institutional
context.22 As noted by an academic paper, the “transition from communism to capitalism almost
led to the complete dismantling of comprehensive planning,? with the result that urban
developments are largely determined by pure market forces, which have resulted in unconstrained
urban sprawl.23 In the absence of Land-Use Plans, every owner of a property is allowed to freely
develop it if a permit for construction is given. The decision must be issued if four conditions are
met: (a) at least one neighboring plot should be built up; (b) the plot must have access to a public
road; (c) there is no conflict with special legislation concerning national parks or protected areas;
and (d) the plot is equipped or will be equipped with technical infrastructure. Once abundant
greenfield sites are available in the periphery of cities it becomes difficult to attract investments
towards brownfield sites in the city center in order to reverse the trend of urban sprawl. At
present, there are almost no legal means to pass necessary regulations down to local self-
governments in order to pursue a policy to contain urban sprawl. This means that without legal
changes, it will be difficult to constrain urban sprawl.

KEY RECOMMENDATIONS

46.      This section has reviewed the policy and legislative environment in which decentralized
government in Poland carries out land-use planning. There is a clear gap between the principles
of sustainable development that inform national policies on regional and spatial planning,
development of a low-carbon economy, and public transport on the one hand and the practice of
land-use planning on the other. The consequence of residential development in metropolitan areas
being developer-led rather than guided and constrained by effective regional planning is that
many Polish cities are experiencing significant suburbanization.

47.     Analyses by Government of Poland agencies and the OECD have recognized that this
suburbanization conflicts with policies to promote sustainable development, but policy
instruments have not yet been developed to bring local practice in line with national policies.
Many OECD countries have developed regulation and practice in land-use planning that achieves
consistency between plans at national, regional, and urban areas and encourages compact urban
development. These practices have often developed in institutional environments where
responsibility for local planning and decision-making is delegated to local authorities, as is the
case in Poland.

48.     The absence of effective regulation of land-use development and the trend toward
suburbanization in major cities inevitably leads to a modal shift toward private transport. This
wide distribution of population within suburban areas makes it expensive, and in some cases
impractical, for transport operators to provide a frequent service that would be attractive to car
owners. Polish cities, which have been characterized by very high modal share for public
transport, are now upgrading their infrastructure in an environment that has become more

22
   Grawronski, Van Assche, and Hernik (2010), Spatial Planning in the United States of America and Poland,
Infrastructure and Ecology of Rural Areas, No. 11/2020, Polska Akademia Nauk, Oddzial w. Krakowie, p.53-69.
23
   Halleux, Marcinczak, van der Krabben (2012), The Adaptive Efficiency of Land Use Planning Measured by the
Control of Urban Sprawl. The Cases of the Netherlands, Belgium, and Poland. Land Use Planning 29 (2012), pp. 887-
898
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  16


challenging for public transport. While the emergence of urban sprawl represents the greatest
challenge for public transport provision, some other institutional and legislative developments
may also limit cities’ flexibility in making public transport competitive with private cars.

49.        The following recommendations are made to the Government of Poland:

     Introduce minimum requirements for land-use plans to be prepared at all levels of
      government. Planning authorities could be encouraged to demonstrate how their plans are
      consistent with the National Plan for Regional Development, the National Spatial
      Development Concept, and other national policies such as those that seek to control GHG
      emissions. Land-use plans at each level of government could also demonstrate consistency
      with the spatial planning objectives of the plans for the next higher level of government. In
      this way, municipalities and other planning authorities would retain their delegated planning
      authority, but would make decisions within a clear policy context and with the knowledge
      that the same rules apply to neighboring planning authorities.

     Establish a specialist policy unit within the Ministry of Infrastructure and Development that
      would initiate necessary legislation and financing changes to influence policy in areas such as
      spatial planning and climate change, support integration across administrative borders, and
      disseminate best practice in public transport. This unit could establish common technical
      standards for smart-card ticketing schemes, which would facilitate integration across modes
      and jurisdictions.

     Develop policies that would ensure the financial sustainability of commuter transport from
      outside municipal areas and within rural communities after institutional changes planned for
      2017. Existing services are unprofitable and public transport operators often cannot afford to
      replace life-expired vehicles, so the withdrawal of financial support for concessional fares is
      likely to result in withdrawal of services. Many suburban and rural services merit
      consideration for public service obligation (PSO) contracts. Those commuter bus services
      could be integrated with municipal bus and rail services in relation to scheduling,
      information, and ticketing. In addition, initiatives to integrate school transport services with
      contracts to bus services for the wider community would improve service and achieve value
      for money for both commuter and school services.

     Rationalize concessional fare structures and remove obstacles to fare integration. The
      arrangements for concessional fares in Poland appear to have emerged piecemeal and the
      very specific statutory provisions on discounts prevent urban transport operators from
      offering discounted fares across different modes. To address this, the statutory provisions for
      concessional travel could be consolidated allowing greater flexibility for transport authorities
      and public transport operators in setting fares, including integrated fares.

     Assign responsibility for integrated ticketing to a named authority for each region of Poland
      and develop national standards that would facilitate integration across jurisdictions and
      transport modes. There is consensus among municipal and regional transport authorities, as
      well as transport operators in Eastern Poland, that greater integration of ticketing across
      operators and modes would benefit passengers and transport providers. However, no
      authority believes that it has a mandate to lead projects that would integrate ticketing. The
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                17


    Ministry of Infrastructure and Development could initiate legislative changes that would
    mandate a single authority to develop integrated ticketing schemes for their respective
    regions. The ministry could also develop standards that would facilitate integration, within
    and across such schemes, including unification of statutory discounts and their compensation.

   Encourage greater balance between investing in infrastructure improvement and promoting
    complementary measures. The recent investment programs, including projects funded by EU
    Operational Programmes for Eastern Poland, have addressed deficiencies in fixed
    infrastructure and rolling stock resulting from years of underinvestment in public transport.
    While further investment will be required to upgrade infrastructure, the Government of
    Poland could promote complementary initiatives that would make public transport more
    competitive with private cars. The four cities that were part of the World Bank study are
    tentative in their commitment to demand management measures that would impose a greater
    share of the cost of infrastructure on private car users. So there is a role for the Government
    of Poland to promote best practice and pilot schemes. For example, charges for on-street
    parking are controlled by the Government of Poland and apply in restricted geographical
    areas. The maximum charges should be relaxed and cities encouraged to extend their scope.
    The Government of Poland could support pilot schemes for commuter car-sharing, introduce
    lower speed restrictions on national roads to improve safety and environmental performance,
    and promote “walking buses? for school children to encourage them and their parents to walk
    to school in safety rather than drop children off by car.

   Request national railway companies—PKP, PLK, and PR—to prepare joint strategies for
    development of commuter rail services in designated urban agglomerations. Railways are an
    underutilized resource in Polish cities and there is no evidence that national investment
    planning takes into account the spatial plans of urban agglomerations. There is also concern
    that operating decisions systematically give priority to intercity and freight services ahead of
    commuter services. The railway companies could be obliged to consult with city and
    voivodeship authorities on investment decisions that affect the quality of railway services in
    the respective areas. These decisions would include addition or removal of stops, passing and
    turn-back facilities, and electrification of lines.

   Review the provisions for vehicle taxation to ensure that they are aligned with Government of
    Poland’s policies for control of GHG emissions and reduce the incentive for other EU
    countries to dispose of used cars with high emissions in Poland. A car scrappage scheme that
    would incentivize purchase of new cars would not be appropriate for Poland as there is no
    need to stimulate the car market any further and much of the benefits would transfer to car
    manufacturers outside Poland.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                        18


               ASSESSING URBAN MOBILITY IN EASTERN POLAND




50. Poland’s population has been declining gradually in recent years due to emigration to other
EU countries and reduced family size. Within Poland, there has been migration from provincial
areas to larger cities such as Warsaw and Kraków, and from city centers to suburban areas. There
has been significant movement in population within metropolitan areas as families move from
small apartments in the heart of cities to apartment blocks or single-family homes in the suburbs.
The demographic and settlement patterns in Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów fit this
general pattern. In the case of Rzeszów, while the city’s population has grown in recent years,
this growth has been driven primarily by the decision to extend the city’s boundaries to
incorporate adjoining municipalities. The shift towards suburban sprawl in Polish cities has
significant implications for urban transport as well as for other urban services. Importantly,
expansion into peri-urban areas has been occurring at significant distances from the city center,
with haphazard new developments along main arteries driven by low land prices and improved
road access. Residents in these suburban areas typically depend on private vehicles for
commuting into the city. A main result of this suburban sprawl has been that the hard urban cores
that defined Polish cities before 1990 have given way to scattered suburban developments that
make public transport networks in those areas impractical as well as raise challenges for provision
of water, sewage, electricity, and solid waste management services. All of these aspects also
contribute to rising GHG emissions. While Polish municipal and regional authorities recognize
that suburbanization has adverse consequences for provision of transport and other services, there
has been little coordination in spatial planning among the jurisdictions that make up Polish FUAs
to guide new developments in a sustainable way.

51. Urban sprawl can be defined as unplanned incremental urban development, characterized by
low-density mix of land uses in the urban fringe.24 The phenomenon is driven by a number of
factors, including the price of land, the attractiveness of existing urban areas, individual
preferences for detached or semi-detached houses, demographic trends, as well as land-use
planning policies at both local and regional levels. In the Polish context, there is also a preference
for apartments within the periphery of cities. Evidence from the EU suggests that more compact
forms of development are possible where growth around the periphery of cities is coordinated by
strong urban policy. Compact urban development with higher population density has a number of
advantages, including lower energy consumption and lower CO2 emissions per capita. As
population density falls in cities, private cars dominate transport, particularly as it becomes more
expensive to provide public transport at a level competitive with private cars in low-density
suburbs.

52. Against this backdrop, the four cities launched ambitious programs intended to enhance the
quality of public transport services, making use of EU funds under the 2007-2013 financial
perspective. For public transport users, the impact of these large investments is visible: brand new

24
   European Environment Agency (2011), Urban Sprawl in Europe: The Ignored Challenge. EEA Report No 10/2006.
Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 2006. Available at:
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/eea_report_2006_10
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                      19


buses or trolley buses, introduction of electronic ticketing systems, new bus bays, and real-time
passenger information systems. The integrated approach taken to enhance the quality of public
transport will be an important element in attracting new passengers, in particular “choice riders?
who are not dependent on public transport. Going forward, the cities are likely to benefit from
considerable EU funds for the new 2014-2020 programming period, which presents a unique
opportunity to complete necessary large investment projects aimed at promoting the use of public
transport.

53. This chapter presents an overview of urban mobility in Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and
Rzeszów, including the findings from an assessment carried out by the World Bank team between
December 2013 and June 2014, which evaluated current urban transport issues with the aim of
supporting the cities’ goals of attaining sustainable urban mobility.


A COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE

54. In order to put in perspective Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów, they were compared
to other cities in Europe for which the World Bank has recent data from the Urban Transport Data
Analysis Tool25. This tool has been developed by the World Bank to facilitate a diagnosis of
urban transport problems so that remedial measures can be correctly targeted. The diagnosis is
carried out through a benchmarking process whereby a range of city indicators for a test city is
compared with similar indicators for a selected set of peer cities.26 This allows an assessment of
where a test city is doing well and where it is not doing well so that the specific needs for that city
get identified in a systematic and scientific manner. In comparing cities, it is important to note
that the data provided by cities are based on legal definitions of city boundaries, which may be
more restricted than the metropolitan or FUA.

               Figure 1: Population in Białystok                                   Figure 2: Population in Lublin

     295,500                                           400,000      370,000                                                 500,000
     295,000                                                                                                                450,000
                                                       350,000      360,000
     294,500                                                                                                                400,000
     294,000                                           300,000      350,000                                                 350,000
     293,500                                           250,000                                                              300,000
                                                                    340,000
     293,000                                                                                                                250,000
                                                       200,000
     292,500                                                        330,000                                                 200,000
     292,000                                           150,000
                                                                    320,000                                                 150,000
     291,500                                           100,000                                                              100,000
     291,000                                                        310,000
                                                       50,000                                                               50,000
     290,500
     290,000                                           0            300,000                                                 0


                                                                                    Lublin             Metropolitan area
                        Bialystok       Metropolitan area




25
  http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/transport/publication/urban-transport-data-analysis-tool-ut-dat1
26
   Certain variables are useful for such benchmarking analysis, but are not available from cities now, such as share of
work trips by each type of transport, average trip length to work by car, average travel time to work by public transport
or by car.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                             20



                  Figure 3: Population in Olsztyn                                         Figure 4: Population in Rzeszów

    180,000                                                 250,000
                                                                          185,000                                                  300,000
    179,000
    178,000                                                 200,000       180,000
                                                                                                                                   250,000
    177,000                                                               175,000
    176,000                                                 150,000                                                                200,000
                                                                          170,000
    175,000
                                                                          165,000                                                  150,000
    174,000                                                 100,000
    173,000                                                               160,000
                                                                                                                                   100,000
    172,000                                                 50,000        155,000
    171,000                                                                                                                        50,000
                                                                          150,000
    170,000                                                 0
               2001
               2002
               2003
               2004
               2005
               2006
               2007
               2008
               2009
               2010
               2011
               2012
               2013
                                                                          145,000                                                  0


                  Olsztyn            Olsztyn metropolitan area                          Rzeszow city        Metropolitan area

  Sources: Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów.




 Box 1: Functional Urban Areas

 Although there is no legal act describing the status of Polish agglomerations or their geographical scope,
 the official policy of the Polish Ministry of Infrastructure and Development is based on an analysis,
 prepared in 2012 by the Polish Academy of Science, determining the geographical scope of functional
 urban area. The delimitation was based on seven factors:

             number of people commuting to the core city;
             number of people moving to the given commune from the core city;
             number of people working in non-agricultural sector;
             number of companies;
             number of companies delivering advanced services;
             density of population;
             number of new flats.

 A municipality belonging to a functional urban area has to meet six out of seven minimum criteria (set
 in relation to a regional average), as well as adhere to the core city or other municipality meeting the
 criteria. The table below provides 2011 information on the number of municipalities, area, and
 population for four Eastern Polish cities in the core and within the functional urban area.

                                                                       Area
  Core city        Number of municipalities                                                  Number of inhabitants (’000)
                                                                      (km2)
                Functional                             Functional                           Functional
                                          External                             External                            External
                  Urban        Core                      Urban         Core                   Urban       Core
                                           zone                                 zone                                zone
                  Area                                   Area                                 Area
 Białystok          9            1           8           1 601         102      1 498          387         294        93
  Lublin           15            1           14          1 519         147      1 372          539         349       190
  Olsztyn           7            1           6           1 452          88      1 363          231         175        56
 Rzeszów           13            1           12          1 047         116       931           351         180       171

 Source: Kryteria delimitacji miejskich obszarów funkcjonalnych, Ministry of Regional Development, Warszawa 2013

                                                                                                                     1
55.             output of the Urban Transport Data Analysis Tool shows that Białystok, 1
           TheLublin                                                                     Lublin,
                within range for most key indicators, such as urban density and public transport
and Olsztyn areOlsztyn                                                                   1
                   Rzeszów                                                                                           1

 Source: Kryteria delimitacji miejskich obszarów funkcjonalnych, Ministry of Regional Development, Warszawa 2013
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                     21


usage.27 The increase in private car ownership in all of the cities to a level higher than is seen in
French, Italian, and Swiss cities with higher average incomes is a cause of concern. While its
density of population is lower than that of Western European cities of comparable size, Lublin
has not yet experienced significant migration to suburbs seen elsewhere, which has the effect of
reducing average density for the wider metropolitan area. The bus ridership comparison graph
(Figure 8) suggests that compared with cities of similar size elsewhere in Europe, Rzeszów and
Lublin still have room to improve in order to attract more bus users despite recent investments in
fleets, ticketing, and passenger information systems. International best practices, such as
experience from Transport for London and New York City Transit, but also that of medium-sized
cities, shows that proper marketing and customer outreach can attract more public transport users.
Conducting regular performance measurement and evaluation would help urban transport
authorities identify problems and areas for further analysis.28

56.          Published data on car ownership in Poland may not be reliable as car owners are not
obliged to pay tax and register vehicles annually with the local authority, as is the case in many
other countries. Allowing for these data limitations, it is clear that private car ownership in
Poland increased rapidly during the transition period of the economy and is now at levels
comparable to EU countries with higher per capita incomes. As shown in Figure 6 in the
following comparative analysis, the car ownership per 1,000 inhabitants in Lublin is close to
cities like Geneva, while car ownership in all four cities is higher than in cities like Tallinn,
Nantes, and Bologna. The increased number of cars making trips within the four cities and for
trips transiting through the cities where bypass routes are not complete is leading to longer
journey times and there is evidence of congestion at critical locations in the road networks. The
increase in total road capacity in and around cities, and the transfer of transit trips to new orbital
routes financed through EU-funded programs, is helping to limit congestion to manageable levels.
However, even if current congestion problems were not acute, continuation of recent trends
would lead to much higher levels of congestion with adverse consequences for the efficiency and
cost of operating public transport, for the cities’ quality of life, and economic competitiveness.29
Road and public transport infrastructure investments financed with EU support have been
essential to reducing congestion, but further initiatives, such as demand management and control
of low-density suburban development, will be required to achieve sustainable mobility patterns.




27
   For the comparator cities, the latest data from the 2011 database were used. For the four Polish cities, most data are
for 2013, except air quality data in Bialystok (2007), Lublin (2012), and Rzeszów (2012).
28
   Annex 4 provides a description of how to develop performance measurement and evaluations in urban transport
authorities as well as examples from London, New York City, and other EU initiatives. Annex 5 provides a sample of a
customer satisfaction survey questionnaire that urban transport authorities can adopt to understand the public transport
system from users’ point of view.
29
   An important consequence of increased car dependency in Poland has been a decline in road safety. This is also true
in Lublin where fatalities resulting from road accidents in 2012 reached 25 in the City of Lublin and 243 in the Lublin
Voivodeship.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                     22



                Figure 5: City Population (’000)                           Figure 6: Private Vehicles per 1,000 Inhabitants


                Warsaw                                        1,717    Warsaw                                                            552
                Krakow                    756                           Krakow                                                      515
                 Tallinn          402                                    Zurich                                                    498
                Bologna          377                                    Geneva                                                 477
                  Zurich         373
                                                                         Lublin                                               460
                  Lublin         348
                                                                        Olsztyn                                              440
               Bialystok        295
                                                                       Rzeszow                                             433
                 Nantes        282
    Newcastle upon Tyne        278                                    Bialystok                                       388
                 Geneva       187                                       Tallinn                                      361
               Rzeszow        184                                        Nantes                           233
                Olsztyn       175                                      Bologna                         199


        Figure 7: City Population Density (persons/sq km)                         Figure 8: Bus Trips per Person Per Day


                 Geneva                                   11,768        Zurich                                                        2.25
                 Nantes               4,407
                                                                       Krakow                                 1.14
                  Zurich             4,243
                Warsaw             3,320                                Nantes                                1.13
               Bialystok          2,888                               Bialystok                         0.95
                 Tallinn          2,713
                                                                        Tallinn                        0.85
                Bologna           2,681
    Newcastle upon Tyne          2,448                                 Olsztyn                     0.74
                  Lublin         2,358                                 Bologna                     0.74
                Krakow           2,312
                                                                        Lublin                    0.72
                Olsztyn         1,977
               Rzeszow         1,583                                  Rzeszow                   0.55



       Figure 9: Public Transport Energy Use (MJ/Pass-km)               Figure 10: Private Transport Energy Use (MJ/Pass-km)


                 Tallinn                                  1.16                        Geneva                                         3.26
    Newcastle upon Tyne                                   1.15                       Olsztyn                                  2.79
               Bologna                                 1.06                           Nantes                                  2.79
                Geneva                             0.88
                                                                                    Rzeszow                                   2.79
                Olsztyn                         0.76
                                                                      Newcastle upon Tyne                                     2.73
                Warsaw                          0.73
                                                                                     Krakow                                  2.67
                 Nantes                   0.58
                                                                                     Warsaw                                2.47
                 Zurich                  0.53
                Krakow                   0.50                                          Zurich                         2.10
                 Lublin             0.40                                               Lublin                         2.04
               Rzeszow            0.29                                               Bologna                          2.01
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                 23




57.         Transport is only one of the contributors to air pollution. In cities, large emitters
include the heating systems, especially where coal is an important source of energy and there is
no central heating. Nevertheless, it is important to review air quality, as poor air quality can often
serve as an impetus for cleaner urban transport solutions. At present, the EU air quality standards
and objectives for three pollutants are as follows: up to 350 ug/m3 for sulfur dioxide, up to 125
ug/m3 for nitrogen dioxide, and up to 50 ug/m3 for particulate matter (PM10).30

58.          If we look at the four cities in Eastern Poland they are below the limits set by the EU
and their air quality with respect to nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide is better than in cities such
as Zurich or Bologna. Recent investments in clean public transport fleets, together with policies
such as the introduction of a paid-parking zone will assist in containing transport-related
pollutants from growing.31
             Figure 11: Nitrogen Dioxide (ug/m3)                                 Figure 12: Sulphur Dioxide (ug/m3)

     Newcastle upon Tyne                               34.8           Warsaw                                     16
                 Bologna                             32.1
                   Zurich                          30.1
                                                                        Zurich                         11
                 Krakow                            29.4
                  Geneva                          27.7
                                                                      Rzeszow                        10
                 Warsaw                       22.9
                   Lublin                     22.8
                                                                        Lublin                 4.8
                Rzeszow                     20.5
                  Nantes                    19.9
                                                                       Olsztyn            3.3
                 Olsztyn             13.5
                Bialystok           11.35
                  Tallinn                                            Bialystok           2.4
                                   10.1

 Source: World Bank                                                 Source: World Bank


59.         Road transport generates one-fifth of the EU’s total emissions of carbon dioxide
(CO2), the main greenhouse gas (GHG). At the level of the EU, CO2 emissions from road
transport increased by nearly 23 percent between 1990 and 2010, and without the economic
downturn at the end of the period the increase would have been even larger. Transport is the only
major sector in the EU where GHG emissions are still rising.30 Effective monitoring, reporting
and verification of GHG emissions are critical for tracking progress towards the achievement of
emission reduction targets. As parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol, the EU and its member states are required to report
annually on their GHG emissions. They also have to report regularly on their climate change
policies and measures through national communications. However, while there is a national
obligation to monitor GHG emissions, there is no such obligation at the level of EU cities. Yet,

30
   These apply over differing periods of time as the observed health impacts associated with the various pollutants
occur over different exposure times.
31
   The European Commission adopted a Clean Air Policy Package in December 2013 consisting of a new Clean Air
Programme for Europe with new air quality objectives for the period up to 2030, a revised National Emission Ceilings
Directive with stricter national emission ceilings for the six main pollutants, and a proposal for a new directive to
reduce pollution from medium-sized combustion installations.
30
   http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/transport/vehicles/index_en.htm
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                               24


transport represents 23 percent (globally) and 33 percent (OECD) of all CO2 emissions. The
majority of these come from urban centers, where about three quarters of the EU population
lives.31

60.          In the past decade, cities in the EU have introduced a range of strategies and policies
aimed at reducing CO2 emissions from the transport sector. However, due to a lack of monitoring
and evaluation instruments it is difficult to tell whether these strategies and policies are working
effectively. Initiated by the Covenant of Mayors, the Sustainable Energy Action Plan states that
cities must develop estimates of current CO2 emissions for the transport sector and set a proper
reduction target based on the baseline and planned interventions. Around 28 Polish cities have
signed up to the action plan aimed at CO2 reduction by 2020 ranging from 20 to 44 percent.32
Polish cities that do not have a CO2 emissions baseline inventory will not be able to measure
quantitative progress in reducing CO2 emission growth even when cities are taking actions to
reduce CO2 emission growth in the transport sector. The provision of transport-related CO2
emissions data to planners and policymakers can be seen as an instrument not only for measuring,
but also for motivating decision-makers to adopt more climate-friendly transport policies, as well
as for setting city-level targets.

                                   Figure 13: Particulate Matter (PM10, ug/m3)


                Krakow                                                                                   64
                Rzeszow                                                       39.6
                Bologna                                                  37
                Warsaw                                              32
                  Lublin                                        30.6
               Bialystok                                      29.3
                 Olsztyn                                     28.4
                 Geneva                              22
                  Zurich                            21
                 Nantes                             21
     Newcastle upon Tyne                       17
                 Tallinn               11

Source: World Bank


61.         To date, there are only four countries in the EU that have spatially disaggregated
emissions inventories at a national level, namely, the UK, the Netherlands, Denmark, and
Sweden. Meanwhile, the European Environment Agency in 2011 released a spatial emission
database as part of the European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register (E-PRTR) at a 5km
resolution, making it possible to estimate emissions for cities based on geographic boundaries.
The EU Framework Seven project Carbon Aware Travel Choices (CATCH) sets a goal of filling
this information gap on city-level CO2 using these data, but there are issues relating to the use of
31
  http://www.internationaltransportforum.org/Pub/pdf/10GHGTrends.pdf
32
   http://www.covenantofmayors.eu/about/covenant-of-mayors_en.html. The Covenant of Mayors is the European
movement involving local and regional authorities voluntarily committing to increasing energy efficiency and use of
renewable energy sources on their territories. By their commitment, Covenant signatories aim to meet and exceed the
European Union 20 percent CO2 reduction objective by 2020.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                        25


E-PRTR data. The main one is that the methodology is a top-down approach based on the spatial
disaggregation of national emissions totals. Secondly, the resolution of the data is at a 5 km level
and CO2 emissions data are distributed into 5 km by 5 km grids using geospatial-referenced
datasets, such as road networks for the road transport emissions. As a result, the CO2 emissions
captured through this database at a sub-national level are not as accurate as when a bottom-up
approach was adopted.

Box 2: Estimating City Level Road CO2 Emissions Using E-PRTR Dataset

The CO2 emissions from road transport in Polish cities are estimated using ArcGIS software with the E-
PRTR dataset in 2011 at the 5 km by 5 km grid level. The E-PRTR maps cover emissions of six
atmospheric pollutants (nitrogen oxides [NOx], sulfur oxides [SOx], carbon monoxide [CO], ammonia
[NH3], carbon dioxide [CO2] and particulate matter [PM10]), and divide the emissions across seven sectors
(agricultural, domestic aviation, domestic shipping, industrial releases, international shipping, non-
industrial combustion, and road transport). The maps are intended to cover all EU27 states and the
European Free Trade Association countries (Switzerland, Lichtenstein, Norway, and Iceland), totaling 31
countries. While the data for conventional air pollutants is based on official submissions to United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe under the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution, the
CO2 emissions are based on national submissions to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC). The inventory is produced using a top –down methodology (Lindley et al. 1996) based
on the spatial disaggregation of nationally reported emissions totals.

The regional emissions are then gridded according to: (1) traffic volume and road network from TRANS-
TOOLS33 for highways and partly for rural roads; (2) road network divided by road type from GISCO
(ROAD) (GISCO, 201134) for the roads not covered in TRANS-TOOLS (secondary and local roads); (3)
gridded population density as weighting factor for line sources in relation to rural and urban roads not
covered by TRANS-TOOLS; and (4) degree of urbanization from GISCO, 2011. A conventional Intersect
method was used to capture CO2 emissions estimation by city boundaries.

Source: World Bank



62.          With these caveats in mind, a similar methodology was applied to analyze CO2
emissions from road transport in Polish cities using the E-PRTR database, in order to obtain a
baseline estimate. For this purpose, 31 cities in Poland with a population of more than 100,000
were selected. One of the key challenges in calculating CO2 emissions at the city level is defining
the city limits, as the E-PRTR database does not provide emissions by cities but by 5 km grids,
which means that the actual area used to calculate emissions might be somewhat different from
the actual administrative borders of the cities in question. Nevertheless, these estimates are a good
starting point in the absence of bottom-up measurement of road transport emissions. Figure 14
shows the estimated CO2 emissions per 1,000 persons from road transport in each city. All four
Polish cities perform well, on the bottom range of the emissions. It should be noted that road


33
   A comparison with the UK National Atmospheric Emissions Inventory (UK-NAEI, a bottom-up approach and will
be further illustrated in this chapter), which provides CO2 emissions estimations across a 1 km by 1 km resolution grid,
shows that the estimation of aggregate CO2 emissions from road transport in the functional built-up areas of British
cities from the E-PRTR match sufficiently well with those based on the UK-NAEI data. It should be noted that road
transport CO2 emissions per capita at the city level is used so that the size of the city does not distort the results. This
suggests that in the absence of city-level transport emission data in Poland the E-PRTR data can be used to estimate
road related CO2 emissions. http://energy.jrc.ec.europa.eu/transtools/
34
   GISCO 2011, Geographical Information System of the Commission: Progress Report. Eurostat. Available at:
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/gisco_Geographical_information_maps/documents/-GISCO-2010-
11-Progress-Report.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                       26


transport CO2 emissions per 1,000 persons is likely to be higher within the FUA, given the
predominant use of cars outside the city administrative borders.
              Figure 14: CO2 Road Transport Emission (CO2 Tons per 1,000 Population)


1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
  800
  600
  400
  200
    0




                    Koszalin
                      Radom
                    Szczecin



                     Kraków



                       Toruń




                    Rzeszów




                       Płock
                     Gdynia




                       Kalisz
                      Elbląg
                   Katowice
                     Poznań




                     Rybnik




                     Geneva
               Częstochowa




                  Bydgoszcz

                  Warszawa
                   Wrocław




        Newcastle upon Tyne




                     Tarnów
                     Legnica




               Zielona Góra
                      Tallinn

                     Olsztyn
                     Gdańsk

               Bielsko-Biała




                        ?ódź

                    Bologna



                      Nantes




                      Kielce

                       Opole




                  Wałbrzych
                      Lublin




                 Włocławek
                   Białystok
        Gorzów Wielkopolski




                      Zurich
Source: World Bank estimates

Box 3: Estimating Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Urban Transport

There are at least 40 existing models and tools for estimating greenhouse gas emissions from transport
operations. Some of the more well-known models include: Motor Vehicle Emissions Simulator (MOVES;
US Environmental Protection Agency), Computer Program to Calculate Emissions from Road Transport
(COPERT; European Environment Agency), the World Resources Institute Greenhouse Gas Protocol,
International Vehicle Emissions (IVE) Model, ICLEI Harmonized Emissions Analysis Tool (HEAT), and
the transport Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) methodologies under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Although there are different models and methodologies for
estimating GHG emissions from the urban transport operations, nearly every model that results in a
transport CO2 estimate is exactly the same—the difference lies in the data. There are four components that
may be found, in some form, in every transport GHG emissions model, whether that model is intended to
estimate transport emissions from a project, for a city, or for a country.

Content of fuel – How many kg of CO2 are emitted per unit of fuel combusted?
Using internationally-recognized default parameters, carbon content of fuel can be determined by
multiplying International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) default carbon content values (kg CO2e/kJ) by
a country’s national heating value for that fuel (annually updated by the International Energy Agency)
(kJ/kg).

Vehicle inventory – What types of fuels are being combusted?
For vehicle inventory data, some models require a precise inventory (such as the CDM methodologies),
whereas others rely on traffic count-based samples (IVE), while others rely on registered vehicle data
(COPERT and MOVES). Each of these data choices has implications for what the model tells us about
GHG emissions from transport, the accuracy of the model results, and the level of resources required to
collect inputs.

Fuel efficiency – How much fuel is combusted per kilometer traveled?
Fuel efficiency data tends to be the most elusive and contentious parameter of the four basic components
comprising transport operations GHG emissions models because: (i) vehicle fuel efficiency is difficult to
objectively measure without use of specialized test facilities and/or equipment; (ii) efficiency varies by
vehicle make, model, and year of operation; and (iii) fuel efficiency for each vehicle type is uniquely
affected by a combination of hundreds of external factors, such as weather, road surface conditions, degree
of traffic congestion, average travel speed, and operator behavior.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                         27


Activity level – How many kilometers are vehicles traveling?
While collecting activity data for projects can be relatively straightforward, for urban transport carbon
inventories a variety of sampling, estimation, and default parameters are needed. For New York City’s
transport carbon footprint, for example, activity levels are derived from a sophisticated, proprietary travel
demand model used for city transport planning. The IVE model, on the other hand, relies on survey data
collected over a two-week period specifically for use in the GHG estimation work.

The four components are not arbitrary. They reflect, in some combination, all activities that can be
undertaken to reduce GHG emissions from transport operations. For example, replacement of a traditional
diesel bus system with CNG buses that operate in a well-managed, dedicated bus lane would affect the
carbon content of fuel (from diesel to CNG), the fleet fuel efficiency (though new technology, as well as
improved drive cycle through use of a dedicated lane), and reduction in activity level per passenger
transported (through better traffic management).

Source: World Bank


INSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURE


63.          The organization and oversight of urban public transportation has been the
responsibility of the urban public transport authorities in the cities of Lublin, Olsztyn, and
Rzeszów since a restructuring separated network management and planning from the operation of
bus services (and trolleybus services in Lublin). The restructuring also allowed the cities to take a
strategic approach to the contribution that public transport could make to wider objectives such as
revitalization of the central business district, increasing the quality of public transport, and control
of emissions from transport. The urban transport authorities have developed specialist skills in
transport planning and project implementation. These skills are reflected in the successful
implementation of projects and the publication of strategy documents in relation to the future role
of transport. The institutional restructuring that led to the separation of urban transport planning
and regulation from operations also facilitated the contracting of municipal bus services to private
operators in Lublin and Olsztyn.

64.          In the case of Białystok, the present arrangement is that BKM is a department of
Białystok’s city administration whose director reports directly to the mayor (prezydent). This
model of administration differs from the other cities in Eastern Poland that have established more
autonomous transport administrations that publish their own financial statements. However, the
distinction is not such an important one from the perspective of transport users or the principles of
reform being implemented.

65.      The urban transport authorities of the four cities generally maintain up-to-date websites
that provide information to passengers regarding fares, types of tickets, maps, service diversions,
and customer service information. Some cities have made greater progress in adopting smart-card
ticketing, mobile phone applications, and other Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS), which are
featured on the transport websites. In the case of Białystok, BKM has launched smart-transport
applications to provide advanced traveler information through Internet and phone apps earlier
than other cities in Poland or internationally. The city’s website offered high-quality passenger
information as early as 2002 and bus schedules and journey planners on mobile phones starting
2007/2008. Real-time journey information is also provided at bus stops and on vehicles.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                               28


Białystok can justifiably claim to be a market leader in exploiting the potential of smart -card
technology for a city of its size.


66.     None of the four cities provides public information about service performance, whether it
be passenger journeys, modal share ratio, customer satisfaction, improvement on customers’ top
concerns, journey time, fleet and stations in service. The transport authority websites do provide
information on EU-funded capital investment projects and procurement exercises.


Voivodeships


67.     Poland’s structure of local administration places responsibility for regional planning on
voivodeships and gives them important roles in managing infrastructure that serves all
municipalities in their regions and the areas outside municipal administrations. Voivodeships,
which are led by marshals, have major responsibility in relation to public transport. Marshals of
voivodeships have been given certain approval and coordinating responsibility in relation to the
EU-funded regional Operational Programmes for Eastern Poland. Regional rail services within
voivodeships are contracted by marshals and operated by Przewozy Regionalne (PR) and, in a
limited number of cases, privately owned companies. Regional bus services are licensed by
marshals or other local authorities and in some cases the local operations of regional bus
companies are controlled by marshals, other local authorities, but mostly by private owners.

68.      While marshals appear to have considerable authority to ensure that planning is carried
out in an integrated way within their regions and the ability to influence investment and
management of public transport, the reality is different. Spatial planning authority, including the
powers to zone land and grant planning approval, is fully delegated to municipalities. Marshals’
offices recognize the benefits of integrating modes of transport through ticketing, scheduling, and
other means. However, because they have not been specifically mandated to promote such
integration, they do not exercise a convening role or an ownership role with respect to railways
and regional buses to achieve integration. Marshals could influence patterns of development
through their approval role for investment in transport and other infrastructure, but there is no
evidence that they are motivated to do so in cities in Eastern Poland. If voivodeships were to
assume a more active role in these matters they would need to mobilize project management and
regulatory resources. The reality is that Polish cities have developed these resources and skills,
which has allowed them to take a leadership role in transport and other infrastructure
development in their regions.

PUBLIC TRANSPORT OPERATORS

Municipal bus operators

69.      Municipal bus services in all four cities are dominated by city-owned operators that were
corporatized during earlier institutional reform. Institutional arrangements vary by city.
Unusually for a city of its size in Poland, Białystok owns three separate bus companies. There are
historical reasons for these arrangements, including a prolonged bus strike in 1990. The city
regards the incremental cost associated with separate governance for three operators as modest
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                               29


and justified in terms of the benefits from having a degree of internal competition and it is clear
that they operate genuinely independently of one another. The three companies, Komunalne
Przedsiebiorstwo Komunikacyjne (KPK), Komunalne Przedsiebiorstwo Komunikacji Miejskiej
(KPKM), and Komunalny Zaklad Komunikacyjny (KZK), have the status of internal transport
operators and are of approximately equal size.

70.     Management representatives of the three bus companies were agreed that the gross-cost
contracts with BKM for supply of bus services work better than conditions before 1991 when
they competed directly for passengers, setting their own fares, and selecting service routes. They
argue that the previous arrangements in the city were similar to the present industry structure in
the suburbs where private bus operators compete directly and provide a low quality of service.
Management of the three city bus companies now concentrates on meeting the quality standards
specified by BKM and on improving fuel efficiency and other technical performance criteria.
The companies cooperate with initiatives led by BKM to promote greater usage of public
transport, such as school programs, car-free days, and educating the public on the fleet’s energy
efficiency. The bus companies have considered alternative fuel supply for their fleet and have
experience operating test vehicles powered by Liquefied Petroleum Gas and Liquefied Natural
Gas/Compressed Natural Gas, as well as hybrid-electric buses. The early experience of hybrid
vehicles is positive, but gas-fuelled vehicles were less successful largely due to changes in fuel
taxes.

71.     MPK Lublin traces its origins to 1929 but its current mandate and scope of activities are
based on its 2009 agreement with ZTM Lublin to operate trolleybus and diesel bus services under
gross-cost contracts. MPK Lublin has exclusive route-based contracts for approximately 80-85
percent of services contracted for by ZTM Lublin on behalf of the city council. Three private
operators contract for the balance of services. MPK Lublin receives payment based primarily on
vehicle-kilometers traveled, with provision for performance deductions when the operator does
not meet the published timetable. As the city-owned operator, MPK Lublin provides ancillary
services to ZTM Lublin and to the police, such as maintenance of bus stops, accident response,
and road safety education.

72.     MPK Rzeszów is wholly owned by the City of Rzeszów and it provides services within
the agglomeration. The company carries around 100,000 passengers per workday and accounts
for 80 percent of the bus market, including trips from suburbs. Passenger numbers reached 29.8
million in 2012. Changes to the network coverage in recent years, particularly in services to
neighboring municipalities, make it difficult to identify underlying trends in passenger numbers,
but the urban transport authorities—ZTM Rzeszów and MPK Rzeszów—both recognize that
passenger numbers on city bus services have fallen on a like-for-like basis. MPK Rzeszów had
operated additional services to eight neighboring communes on a commercial basis until August
2012, but management of MPK Rzeszów and ZTM Rzeszów decided that the city could not
continue to bear losses on these services so service to five municipalities was discontinued.

73.     MPK operates services under a gross-cost contract entered into with ZTM Rzeszów in
December 2009 for a 10-year period. The contract has been amended on a number of occasions,
including in 2012, to give direct responsibility to ZTM Rzeszów for revenue protection and
enforcement. The basis of the contract is that ZTM Rzeszów pays MPK per vehicle-kilometer
operated (PLN 6.2/km in 2012; Euro 1.5/km) with deductions for non-performance of contractual
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  30


obligations and lower payments for kilometers travelled outside of passenger service, generally
between the depot and the beginning and end of service. ZTM Rzeszów decides on any changes
to the route structure and is responsible for full fare-box risk.


74.      The City of Olsztyn provides bus services within the city and certain neighboring
communes under gross-cost contracts with two operators. MPK Olsztyn has been designated as
the city’s internal operator, under EU regulations, and it operates approximately 90 percent of city
bus services. A further 10 percent of services are operated by privately owned KDD under a 10-
year contract with the city and it is intended to open up a further 10 percent to third-party
operators in 2014. All city buses bear the same livery as will the new tram service to reinforce the
integration of all city transport services. The city has decided to extend MPK’s mandate to
include operation and maintenance of the new tram service; consideration was given to tendering
the service to third parties, but it was decided that better value and integration would be achieved
by using the city’s internal operator. A joint bus and tram operator will also facilitate
reconfiguration of the public transport network and redeployment of staff when passenger service
begins on the tramway and certain bus services will be withdrawn.

75.      Olsztyn’s city bus services extend to three communes adjacent to Olsztyn; these are
Dywity, Purda, and Stawiguda. The city bus network had served all five communes adjacent to
the city until around 2010, but Olsztyn City Council decided that it could not afford to provide
operating subvention for such an extensive network and some of the neighboring communes were
unwilling to contribute sufficiently for the high-quality service that the city provides. Bus services
that cross city boundaries into adjoining municipalities account for a small proportion of overall
vehicle kilometers.


Rail Services


76.      The rail sector in Poland has been reorganized in recent years with separate entities
responsible for infrastructure management and operations. Responsibility for operations is also
divided between PKP, which operates intercity services, and PR, which operates regional
services. Regional services in the four voivodeships in Eastern Poland are provided under
contract between the respective voivodeship marshals and PR. The marshals also have the lead
role in selecting and managing implementation of regional rail programs to be implemented with
EU funding. There is little evidence that this work is carried out in a coordinated way with the
EU-funded programs for urban transport led by the cities. The local branches of PLK, as
infrastructure manager, and PR, as regional rail operator, also appear to have a very limited role
in project development and implementation. Neither of these companies engages directly with
the public transport authorities of the respective cities in relation to suburban rail investments as
they see that as the responsibility of the marshals.

77.      Greater integration of planning for upgrading rail infrastructure with planning for urban
transport infrastructure would benefit both activities. The potential to increase patronage from
new and upgraded railway stations depends on their location close to areas of population density
and places of attraction, as well as good access to those stations. The Lublin division of PLK, as
rail infrastructure provider, has taken initiatives to change the location of railway stations to
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  31


respond to new residential development, but this has been done independently of the city and
other municipal authorities. Indeed, PR reported that some of the upgraded stations are poorly
served by adjacent road infrastructure due to steep gradients to reach the railway alignment.
There is no evidence that planning authorities in any of the cities have encouraged more or higher
density development adjacent to upgraded railway infrastructure.

78.      Urban transport authorities do not have a direct supervisory role in any aspect of rail
services and there is little evidence of bus routes or operations being planned to integrate with rail
services in the city or region. Similarly, there is no integration of fares or ticketing between rail
services provided by PR, under contract with the marshals and city bus services provided by
public and private bus operators under contract with the cities. While all parties agree that such
integration would be in the interests of passengers, the current institutional structures and
relationships do not appear to encourage any party to take the lead in such initiatives.

Private Operators of City Bus Services

79.      ZTM Lublin selects private operators to provide city bus services through competitive
procurement. ZTM Lublin sets a minimum standard for vehicles, guarantees minimum kilometers
of service to be purchased, and invites tenders based on cost per kilometer. Using this process,
ZTM Lublin is progressively increasing the minimum standard of vehicles and offering longer
contract periods to allow operators to invest in modern vehicles. The City of Olsztyn decided as a
matter of policy to contract with private companies to offer city bus services based on
competitive bidding for gross-cost contracts subject to minimum environmental standards. The
first successful bidder was KDD, which is a privately owned transport, energy, and electronics
company with contracts to provide city bus services in Olsztyn and Bydgoszcz. The rates paid by
the city to KDD are reported to be approximately 25 percent lower per vehicle-kilometer than
payments made to the publicly owned MPK Olsztyn. While this comparison does not take full
account of the internal operator’s legacy costs, as it provides a more extensive range of services,
there seems little doubt that Olsztyn is generating savings through contracting some services to a
third party. The presence of a private operator also gives the city a benchmark against which it
can evaluate the cost of services provided by its internal operator and greater flexibility if it
decides to increase or decrease service frequency over time. During the 1990s, a number of
privately owned bus companies began offering services that competed directly with MPK Olsztyn
and did not receive PSO payments from the city. These operations were not profitable and later
withdrew from the market.

80.     In addition to these PSO services, private bus operators provide services on commercially
viable routes to the city and within neighboring municipalities in all four cities. The quality of bus
and frequency of service is generally lower than for the PSO-contracted services and the urban
transport authorities exercise a limited role in supervising these bus operations. Low service
standards are thought to lead to further decline in patronage and therefore less investment funds
are available to replace the fleet.

81.     The lack of focus on improving the quality of bus services in suburban markets, either by
the national or local governments, is regrettable and particularly problematic when the
demographic trend is towards suburbanization. Extending municipal bus services to the suburbs,
at the quality and cost levels within municipal boundaries, would not be affordable. The lack of
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                               32


investment in renewing bus fleets by private operators is understandable from a commercial
perspective and the ex-PKS companies have become property companies with loss-making bus
operations attached. The commercial viability of non-PSO bus services in the areas of population
growth is in doubt and these services will become even less economic when institutional changes
will be implemented in 2017—payment for fare concessions will be withdrawn for non-PSO
operators. Linked to this, the increase in car dependence by suburban communities will have
consequences for congestion on access routes to the cities and for parking requirements there.
These developments have important social as well as environmental consequences as there will
remain a group of residents who do not have access to cars due to age or income level.

82.     The marshals of the voivodeships may wish to consider offering PSO contracts to
commercial operators for bus services on routes connecting suburban centers of population with
city center destinations or important interchange points. The routes should be selected based on
forecast demand. While some of the demand is now served by bus operators based on full cost
recovery and limited payment of fare discounts to passengers entitled to concessional fares, the
financial return from this business is insufficient to cover the cost of fleet renewal and will
decline further in 2017 when payment for fare concessions is withdrawn by the Government of
Poland. This issue should be addressed with some urgency before the supply of transport on a
commercial basis is reduced further. There is a risk that losses from bus operations will lead
operators with local depots and terminals to dispose of those facilities for non-transport
development and the cost of developing a new physical and managerial infrastructure for
suburban bus services in the future could be much higher. This adds to the urgency of addressing
the gap in service provision.

83.      Consideration should also be given to combining the supply of bus services for general
traffic in suburban areas with school bus services. Combining school transport with general bus
transport would strengthen the financial sustainability of both services. It would not be practical
to offer PSO contracts for bus services to suburbs with low population density, but by paying
commercial bus operators to carry school children on general services, transport authorities would
support the viability of these services at a modest cost. It would also provide the incentive to
impose higher safety requirements, ticketing, and other standards on those services for the benefit
of all passengers. Dedicated school buses would be retained for routes where population density
requires that service.

Regional Bus Operators

84.     National bus services in Poland were historically operated by the state-owned PKS,
which also managed bus stations. After liberalization of the intercity bus market in the 1990s,
PKS experienced financial difficulties nationally and in 2008 was divided into a number of
regional companies. In all four cities, passenger numbers on regional bus services are declining
annually due to a declining population in their catchment areas and the increase in private car
ownership. While the companies operating regional services would like to renew their own fleets
of buses, their pessimistic outlook for future passenger growth, and in some cases their debt,
make renewal of fleets from own resources unlikely. Operating costs for the PKS operators
owned by regional governments are likely to be higher than for privately owned operators due to
legacy issues associated with being a state-owned company. The PKS companies sometimes
operate long-distance bus services, connecting their home cities with other cities in Poland and
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  33


the outlook for these services is more favorable due to higher entry barriers and reasonable
demand for service quality.

85.      All of the bus operators in Poland that operate services outside of PSO contracts are
concerned about their commercial viability in the period after 2017 when statutory concessional
fares will be withdrawn and there will be even easier market access for commercial bus operators.
While operators of regional bus services are now required to seek a license from the voivodeship,
it will be sufficient to inform the voivodeship of intention to provide bus services from 2017.
Elsewhere in Europe, the financial performance of bus operators, whose business is based on
stable or declining rural populations and who are not providing PSO services, is generally poor.
In some countries, arrangements to integrate school bus services with general bus traffic in
sparsely populated areas have provided support for bus operators and value for money for school
services. There is no such integration in Poland.

LOCAL STRATEGIES AND PLANNING CONTEXT

86.      The cities of Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów have approved urban development
and transport strategies for their respective cities and regions, which provide a strategic context
for the current and proposed transport infrastructure development. In addition to qualitative
objectives, some published strategies provide benchmark data for current transport operations and
set target values for future years. Where these targets are indicated, the commitment to
measurable outcomes is welcome and even if those targets are not achieved the approach of
publishing targets for passenger numbers, service reliability, modal share, and other operating
criteria should be encouraged.

87.      The preparation and approval of urban planning and transport strategy documents in
Polish cities is at an early stage of development relative to other cities of comparable size in the
EU. In many cases, the current strategy is the first such strategy to be approved for the city or
region so there is variability in their structure and content. In some cities, the strategy documents
are of a high standard in setting clear objectives for the city and in explaining how public
transport can contribute to achieving those objectives, but in other cases there is greater emphasis
on listing infrastructure projects to be constructed. Some of the cities’ recently approved
strategies recognize that investment in physical infrastructure is insufficient to retain passengers
on public transport, but that soft measures focusing on the passenger experience are also required.

88.      The preparation of strategy documents has also been strongly influenced by EU regional
development policies and the availability of funds from the EU to support infrastructure
development. There are areas where planning and transport strategies in Eastern Poland could
benefit from experience and practice in Western Europe although it should be acknowledged that
progress in some of these areas would depend on changes in legislation and practice in a wider
Polish context.

89.      Firstly, strategies approved by cities and regions in Eastern Poland place little restriction
on patterns of land use that are likely to give rise to more car-dependent trip making. Polish
cities’ historic settlement patterns for residential, educational, and employment purposes were
served well by public transport routes. Economic and social changes associated with Poland’s
transition to a market economy inevitably gave rise to more dispersed residential and employment
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  34


settlement. The suburbanization trend that sees new residential development taking place in
suburban municipalities leads to a shift from public transport use to commuting by private car for
work or education. City investment in improved public transport is essential to limit this modal
shift to private cars, but experience elsewhere in Europe suggests that improving the
attractiveness of public transport infrastructure and operations is insufficient. Urban sprawl has
been constrained elsewhere in Europe through complementary measures that place tight
restrictions on greenfield residential and commercial development in suburbs. Such restrictions
appear to be largely absent in Poland’s planning regime, which is facilitating a pattern of
suburban development that will be difficult for public transport to serve in an effective way, even
with further investment in capacity and improved quality.

90.      The absence of planning restrictions to limit sprawl cannot be addressed by individual
municipal authorities introducing such restrictions on their own. Suburban development is taking
place largely outside cities’ jurisdiction and tight controls within cities would have limited impact
in controlling sprawl or may even encourage it further. Suburban municipalities are less likely to
restrict development as they benefit from additional property tax revenue and do not bear the cost
of congestion for commuters accessing city centers. The devolved responsibility for spatial
planning in Poland makes it difficult for any single authority to impose effective restrictions on
suburban sprawl in municipalities adjoining urban areas. It is likely that changes to national
policies would be required to set standards and that would require suburban planning authorities
to take into account the external consequences of planning decisions.

91.      The need for balance between “carrot? and “stick? in strategy documents extends to other
policy areas that are within the control of a city. While the cities of Białystok, Lublin, and
Olsztyn have imposed charges for on-street parking and all four cities have introduced public
transport priority in limited areas, the main emphasis to date has been on improving the supply of
public transport. The cities’ decisions to give highest priority to offering the public a credible
alternative to private cars for their commuting needs was appropriate for the first phase of urban
transport investment. However, it would now be appropriate to consider further measures that
would impose some of the congestion and other external costs of private cars on their users. For
example, a paid-parking zone should be introduced in Rzeszów and for the other cities should be
extended to wider areas. Similarly, the cities should consider greater segregation between public
transport and other road users in priority areas of the city. All four cities are considering
developing Intermodal Transport Centers near central railway stations, so it would be particularly
important to provide dedicated bus routes for access to the proposed transport centers.

92.      The third area where future planning and transport strategies for FUAs would benefit
from international experience is in relation to the practice of regional planning. All four cities
have responded to the ITI requirements to coordinate strategies between the regional cities and
their neighboring autonomous municipalities, but the degree of cooperation between cities and
their neighbors varies significantly. In some cases there have been preliminary discussions on
how to cooperate. At the most advanced level of cooperation, urban transport authorities are
committed to improving public transport services to suburban municipalities. While these
initiatives are positive, they fall short of transport planning based on trip origins and destinations
within the FUA, independent of municipal boundaries. For example, a bus network review for the
full FUA is likely to lead to different conclusions from one based on a city’s boundaries, even
where there is a commitment to serving the commuting needs of the suburbs. The decentralized
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                        35


nature of municipal government in Poland makes it difficult to achieve regional planning that
would be effective in restricting suburban municipalities from allowing development that results
in urban sprawl. However, the trade-off between municipalities having full freedom to allow or
even encourage suburban development on the one hand and the consequences of suburban sprawl
in terms of congestion on access routes and the higher cost of providing services in dispersed
communities should be recognized.


 Box 4: Accessibility Planning

 There is a clear “cause-effect? relation between planning policy (zoning regulation, infrastructure
 investment, and urban development) and future urban accessibility. Accessibility is the fundamental
 measure of the effectiveness of the transport system, i.e. the ability to reach employment areas, service
 locations, Central Business Districts etc., within reasonable time and at a reasonable cost. Many studies
 have concluded that accessibility can have strong implications for economic growth (providing access
 to employment) and environmental sustainability (enabling public transport service competitive with
 private cars). Accessibility planning can help policy makers visualize land use and transport
 accessibility by analyzing how different areas within the same metropolitan area compare with each
 other in terms of accessibility for metropolitan inhabitants, to jobs and urban services, and how future
 development of urban transport infrastructure, such as tram, urban rail, or new master-planned areas,
 may enhance or hinder accessibility.

 Data needed for such an exercise will be mostly land-use maps of the metropolitan area and multi-
 modal transport networks with adjusted design speeds. There are already tools and cutting-edge
 technologies available that could help cities integrate accessibility planning into their urban and
 transport planning process, such as available open source tools that build on the combination of
 OpenStreetMap and the General Transit Feed Specification. The General Transit Feed Specification
 defines a common format for public transportation schedules and associated geographic information.
 Such “feeds? allow public transit agencies to publish their transit data and developers to write
 applications that consume that data in an interoperable way.

  Source: World Bank

93.     The phenomenon of cities growing beyond their historic boundaries and into
municipalities that have autonomy in making their own spatial planning decisions is not unique to
Poland. In other European countries that are committed to limiting urban sprawl, regional or
national standards have enforced planning regulations that protect suburban greenbelts from
developer-led construction. These zoning decisions encourage compact residential development
in suburbs, with high-capacity public transport links to city centers. The absence of effective
mechanisms for coordinating the spatial plans of adjoining planning authorities and mediating
their conflicting interests is the main gap between the planning process in a city and the
corresponding processes in cities of comparable size in EU countries where planning is more
developed.

94.      Zoning decisions can be reinforced by giving priority allocation of investment funds to
infrastructure projects that are compatible with policies that promote sustainable development.
Suburban development can be accommodated in a more sustainable manner by designating areas
within reach of commuter rail services for high-density development and giving lower priority to
investing in services for areas with little potential for high-capacity public transport.

95.    In all four cities in Eastern Poland there is real potential for encouraging more compact
development in suburban areas that could be served by high-capacity rail services. This could be
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                36


achieved through priority funding for transport and other municipal services in areas immediately
adjacent to existing or potential railway stations. Similar benefits would not be available in
greenfield sites. Such an approach would require tight integration of the planning, municipal
services, and transport functions of the respective cities in their neighboring municipalities and
with the marshals of respective voivodeships. While marshals does not have authority over the
municipal authorities within their voivodeships, in relation to planning decisions they have an
important role in funding and supervising suburban rail services and in funding other
infrastructure that is necessary for new residential development. Placing strong emphasis on the
need for sustainable planning and the importance of linking approvals of new residential
development to the availability of sustainable transport would also be consistent with the EU’s
policy objectives.

FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS

Gross-Cost Contracting

96.      A gross-cost contracting model for public transport services has been adopted in
Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów, as in many cities in Poland. The urban transport
authority as the contracting authority retains responsibility for specifying service frequency, fare
levels, and for promoting public transport usage. Public transport authorities throughout Europe
believe that they achieve value for money through regular procurement of services from private
operators, which also provides a cost benchmark for internal operators. The public transport
authorities in Olsztyn and Lublin already contract out limited bus services and Białystok achieves
competitive tension through owning three bus operators. Rzeszów has not contracted with third
parties. The experience of gross-cost contracting is relatively short in the four cities so a direct
comparison of operating cost per kilometer between the municipal and private operators would
not be reasonable. It is also the case that the municipal operators typically retain wider
responsibilities and continue to bear legacy costs associated with the historic structure of public
transport services in Poland. However, the four cities should be able to achieve better value for
bus services through a greater commitment to contracting out services over the coming years and
encouraging internal operators to achieve comparable costs of operation and maintenance. It
would be appropriate for the public transport authorities in each of the cities to advise municipal
operators of their plans to benchmark costs against market comparators at the end of current
contractual periods so that those operators have the opportunity to implement cost-reduction
programs, if necessary.

Fare Structure and Types of Tickets

97.      Ticketing and fares for city bus and trolleybus services are approved periodically by the
city councils of the respective cities and generally offer passengers a wide range of fares. Rail
fares are set by the marshal of the voivodeship, which contracts with PR to provide services, and
the operators set fares on commuter bus services. Fares are generally changed infrequently. The
city councils also approve discounted fares for school children, certain college students, people
with moderate disability, and pensioners. Separate national legislation grants free-of-charge or
discounted travel benefits to certain groups of passengers, such as members of parliament,
disabled veterans, students attending certain categories of school on their way to or from those
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                               37


schools, and university students. Figure 15 shows the price comparison of public transport fares
for different types of tickets in Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów. The fares are similar for
single-journey and 24-hour tickets, while fares in Olsztyn and Rzeszów are much higher than
fares in Lublin and Białystok for the 30-day all-route pass—this may reflect the geographical
reach of the routes.




                                           Figure 15: Public Transport Fare Comparison
                        120

                        100
     Full price (PLN)




                        80

                        60

                        40

                        20

                         0
                              single journey               24 hour ticket        30 day ticket for all routes


                                           Lublin   Bialystok     Olsztyn   Rzeszow
Sources: Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów



98.      The level of fares among the four studied cities is within range for Polish cities, but could
be regarded as high relative to municipal transport fares elsewhere in continental Europe. This is
especially the case when relative income levels are taken into account, as shown in Figure 16.
The fare structure gives appropriate incentives to passengers to purchase fares in advance, rather
than on the vehicle, and for non-cash payment. The cities are at various stages of introducing
smart-card ticketing, which will give transport authorities and operators the opportunity to
simplify fare structures, reduce the cost of cash handling, and facilitate more targeted marketing
by category of passenger. The highly-segmented menu of fares depending on time validity and
routes included offers passengers a wide range of choices and can be accommodated and checked
with smart-card technology. Many transport providers are now simplifying the range of ticket
choices and dispensing with the need for passengers to commit to multiple fares in advance.
Smart-card technology offers the facility to cap cumulative fares depending on the number of
journeys taken and allowing validity periods to commence on any date rather than at the
beginning of a week or month. Capped fares are more in keeping with changing lifestyles and
transport users’ reluctance to pay in advance for extended validity periods. Smart-card ticketing
also facilitates integrated fares and integrated ticketing across modes where the smart-card reader
can recognize that a prior stage of the journey was begun or completed within a defined period.
The current institutional arrangements will need to be changed to allow transport providers
greater flexibility in setting fares and negotiating arrangements across operators and modes.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                                              38




                                                      Figure 16: City per Capita GDP vs. Bus Fares per Trip (2007 PPP US$)37

                                             3
     Bus fares per trip (PPP US$ in 2007)




                                            2.5                                                    Newcastle upon
                                                                        Olsztyn                        Tyne
                                                                   Rzeszow
                                             2
                                                                         Lublin
                                                                        Bialystok
                                            1.5                                         Nantes
                                                                                        Krakow
                                             1
                                                                                                                     Zurich   Geneva
                                            0.5                                        Tallinn   Bologna
                                             0
                                                  0        10000         20000       30000       40000       50000       60000         70000
                                                                           City Per Capita GDP (PPP US$ in 2007)
Source: World Bank

99.         Polish cities have followed international practice in introducing smart-card ticketing
that offers convenience to the passenger and savings to the operator through reduced fraud,
shorter dwell times at stops, and less cash handling. Smart cards also offer more flexibility in
setting and varying fares. However, one of the main benefits of smart-card ticketing
internationally is in relation to integrating fares and ticketing across operators and modes. This
potential benefit has not been realized in Poland and little effort has been made to establish a
common platform for ticketing, even within metropolitan areas. Integrated ticketing would
encourage more multi-modal trips through integration of fares and greater convenience to
passengers. In many countries it has been an important step in facilitating better integration of
information provision and scheduling.

100.     A commitment to integrated ticketing in Poland would require the Government of Poland
to set a common technical platform that transport providers would be obliged to subscribe to for
all new ticketing schemes. Such a national standard would not restrict transport providers to
purchase from a single supplier, but would require all suppliers to the Polish market to meet the
standard. International suppliers of ticketing equipment and systems would oppose such
restrictions and would argue that modifications to their proprietary technology would increase the
cost to the operators, but they have accepted such policies in other countries and the net cost to
transport in these countries has not increased as a result of common standards.

Integration of new ticketing systems with legacy schemes adds complexity to integrated ticketing
and it may be argued that such integration in Poland may not be practical considering that

37
  Fares per trip are calculated using the price of network monthly pass divided by 40, assuming that frequent riders
would use monthly pass and make two trips per day with 20 work days/ travel days a month.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  39


ticketing schemes on municipal transport in Polish cities were introduced only recently and in
some cases is still under implementation. It is true that the cost of integrating new schemes with
the range of proprietary technologies now in place could be very high, but this should not
discourage the Government of Poland from implementing a national standard. Rail services and
most commuter and regional bus services in the four cities studied do not have smart-card
ticketing, but are likely to upgrade their ticketing systems at some point in the future. A national
policy that would require all new PSO services for buses and any new rail-ticketing system for
rail to adopt the national standard would give critical mass to such a standard. Moreover, the
expected life of all ITS systems is shortening as new systems offer better functionality at lower
prices. Some European transport authorities are adopting Account-Based Ticketing (ABT) in
partnership with financial institutions and mobile phone operators. ABT systems require less
technical sophistication on readers and smart cards with fare processing taking place remotely or
cloud-based. It would be appropriate for the Government of Poland to adopt a common ticketing
standard now before cities embrace a next generation of technology in an uncoordinated
way.Revenue Control

101.    Urban transport authorities rely on independent surveys of passengers and in some cases
representative samples of public transport users. These interviewees report a very low level of
fare evasion. However, public transport operators internationally, with access to vehicles similar
to those in use Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów, report fare evasion levels of 4-10
percent even when significant resources are invested in revenue protection. It is likely that cities
in Poland have similarly high levels of fare evasion, particularly considering that revenue
protection did not attract high priority in Polish cities prior to the transition to a market economy.

102.     Public transport authorities and operators invest considerable management effort and
financial resources in minimizing revenue lost through fare evasion. International experience
shows that in the absence of effective enforcement, large numbers of otherwise law-abiding
citizens can rationalize traveling on public transport without paying the appropriate fare or
without paying at all. However, it is also the case that passengers who pay fares resent fare
evasion by others and welcome effective revenue control. Revenue lost through fare evasion in
European public transport systems can range from as little as 2 percent in London’s Docklands
Light Railway to up to 50 percent in Athens LRT when it was launched. Investment in effective
revenue protection offers a very high return on investment up to a certain point, but generally the
effort required to apprehend the final cohort of determined evaders is not worth the incremental
investment. The level of fare evasion at which it is uneconomic to invest further resources
depends on cultural issues such as attitudes to public authorities and the legislative support
available for enforcing penalties.

103.      Some of the techniques that are generally successful in reducing fare evasion include
ensuring that penalties are a genuine deterrent in terms of the multiple of fare evaded and that the
penalty increases for repeat offenders. Successful prosecution of fare evaders can lead to criminal
conviction in some countries such as the UK and Ireland. Transport operators often need to
convince their own staff that fare evasion is a serious concern and that while certain staff is
designated as revenue protection officers, there is a shared responsibility to remind passengers of
their obligations and to be vigilant for patterns of evasion. Docklands Light Railway management
attributes their low fare evasion to incentives paid to revenue protection staff for successful
convictions. The pattern of fare inspection should be sufficiently random that passengers cannot
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 40


accurately predict when they will be checked, but concentrated at times or locations where poor
compliance has been observed.

104.     In open systems, transport authorities designate zones on stops where inspectors may
check tickets for alighting passengers who may be evading detection. Teams of revenue
protection officers can be deployed at times so that there is very good coverage between stops.
Transport authorities should ensure that regulations are displayed prominently and fare collection
equipment is well maintained so that evaders are deprived of excuses such as ambiguity of rules
or ticketing equipment being out of service. The high rate of evasion in Athens, referred to
above, was related to ticketing equipment being out of order frequently making it difficult for
honest passengers to purchase fares. Lastly, revenue protection needs to respond to “innovation?
by evaders. Revenue protection officers should adopt new techniques regularly so that all
passengers are aware of the seriousness of the transport authority in enforcing revenue control
rules.

City Expenditures on Transportation

105.    The studied cities are committing substantial financial resources to upgrading and
operating their transport infrastructure, both for roads and public transport. For example, the total
transport expenditure by the City of Lublin in 2013 was Euro 124 million, which represented 28
percent of the city’s budget. Investments made by MPK Lublin, financed through EU funds,
make the total higher. Urban transport has consistently received a higher proportion of capital
expenditure than roads and some road expenditure, such as area traffic control and new access
roads, benefits public transport. Figure 17 demonstrates the percentage of city expenditures on
transport among the four studied cities. Two of the cities are showing declines of city
expenditures on transport.


                               Figure 17: Percentage of City Expenditures on Transport

 30%

 25%

 20%

 15%

 10%

   5%

   0%
                    2010                           2011                   2012             2013

                                          Olsztyn         Bialystok   Lublin     Rzeszow

Sources: Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  41


Financial Sustainability of Planned Transport Services

106.      The net cost to the City of Lublin of subventing bus and trolleybus services under PSO
contracts reached EUR 27 million in 2013, which represented 6 percent of the city’s budget. For
Białystok and Rzeszów subventions represented 7.5 percent and 5.8 percent of the cities’ budgets,
respectively. However, this very low net cost to the city disguises the continuing cost of operating
and maintaining city transport services. In 2013, the expenditure on maintaining new fixed
infrastructure and fleet was likely to have been minimal as much of the new infrastructure was
still being built or under warranty and very old vehicles were being withdrawn from service. The
cost of operating and maintaining city transport services could increase by a multiple of costs
reported in 2013 as EU-funded capital expenditure programs near completion and a regular
program of maintenance will be required.

107.     The replacement of life-expired buses and trolleybuses in Lublin with EU funding has
reduced the net cost of operating and maintaining the public transport fleet for equivalent service.
New buses and trolleybuses are more fuel-efficient than the vehicles being replaced and are
unlikely to need replacement of parts for around the first 400,000 kilometers of passenger service.
Regular preventative maintenance and well-planned life cycle maintenance should result in this
new fleet of vehicles operating reliably for 15 to 20 years. Major overhaul of the public transport
fleet could extend their working lives by many more years. Municipal transport operators will
need to budget for this maintenance program, which is likely to require additional subvention
rather than be covered by additional passenger revenue.

108.     Even taking account of the greater efficiency and reliability of a new fleet of vehicles, the
cost of operating and maintaining the municipal, public transport fleet of Białystok, Lublin,
Olsztyn, and Rzeszów will increase substantially over time. The new vehicles have significantly
more ancillary functions, which are important to attract passengers. However, the cost of
operating and maintaining air conditioning, passenger information, on-board ticketing, and other
modern features adds to the full cost of passenger service. The improved facilities at bus stops
also add to the cost of maintaining service, including lighting and communications, revenue
collection, cleaning and repair of damage due to vandalism or wear and tear.

109.     In addition to factors that add to the operations and maintenance cost for an equivalent
level of passenger service, the cities will need to maintain an expanded fleet of buses and a wider
trolleybus and tram network in Lublin and Olsztyn that are being implemented with EU funding.
As public transport is provided under gross-cost contracting, there is a high risk of these
additional costs not being covered by increased fare-box revenue so the cost will be borne by the
urban transport authorities. It is very unlikely that the incremental revenue will be sufficient to
cover the additional costs.

110.    An important consequence of a wider distribution of population in the FUA, particularly
for Lublin and Rzeszów, is that the cost of operating and maintaining public transport in areas
with lower density of population is substantially higher than for dense urban neighborhoods. The
main costs of operating and maintaining public transport vehicles are for fuel and wear and tear,
which are directly related to the kilometers traveled, and for labor costs, which depend on hours
of operation. Suburban transport services, particularly to areas with low population density, will
require substantially higher subvention than for city services. While municipal governments in
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 42


the wider areas to be served may contribute to the additional cost of operations, the practice in
Poland has been that suburban governments have been reluctant to contribute financially at a
level that would compensate the city transport authority or private operators for the full costs of
serving low-density neighborhoods.

111.     The combined effect of these factors is that the cost of operating and maintaining the
planned level of bus services in the FUAs (and trolleybus and tram services in Lublin and
Olsztyn) will increase substantially over the coming years and that it would be unrealistic to
expect fare-box revenues to cover that increased cost. The scale of the cost increase will depend
on the level of service that will be provided to suburban municipalities and the net impact on the
cities’ budgets will depend on the increase in passenger numbers and neighboring municipalities’
willingness to contribute to the cost of service. However, it would be reasonable to foresee a
requirement to increase the cities’ annual subvention to transport operations. Cities will need to
plan for life cycle and other capital renewal of infrastructure to ensure that public transport
continues to provide a service that is competitive with private cars. At these levels of expenditure,
the financial sustainability of the planned level of service in the FUA will be a challenge for the
cities. This analysis supports the need for the urban transport authorities to focus attention on
increasing passenger numbers and achieving cost efficiencies in existing and replacement
contracts with municipal bus operators and third-party operators. More detailed analysis of the
direct and indirect operator costs should also inform decision making on the frequency of service
to suburban communities.

MANAGEMENT OF CAR ACCESS AND CYCLING

112.     Białystok has regulated parking in the Market Square and adjoining streets for many
years and modest charges for on-street parking were introduced in 1999. The paid-parking zone
has been extended and charges increased over time in line with increased demand. Differential
rates were introduced to reflect higher demand for parking and the need to increase turnover of
spaces in the central business district. Payment by SMS is now allowed in addition to paper
ticketing. While paid parking was controversial when it was first introduced, the benefits to
business and greater availability of spaces through charging are now well recognized.

113.    Transport planning in Lublin has emphasized improving the quality of public transport
supply, but the city has recognized the need for complementary demand management measures.
Lublin introduced paid parking in designated zones in the city center in 2012. Payment is required
between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. for approximately 1,600 spaces. There is evidence of informal parking
taking place immediately outside the boundaries of the paid-parking zones so the city is
considering extending the geographical reach of the zones. Changed parking habits to avoid even
modest charges are common when cities introduce new paid-parking schemes. Extending the
zones should address this practice. It should also improve the take-up of the discounted add-on
bus fares that are not used much at present. The initial paid-parking zone is well within walking
distance for most people, but if the zone is extended to cover a larger area of the city, more
people are likely to use buses.

114. Olsztyn has implemented paid parking in three zones extending from the City Center, but
not including major residential areas. Most of the historic core of the city and business area is
included in the Red Zone, which is bordered by a Yellow Zone with a lower rate, and a smaller
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                                43


Green Zone that is located north of the City Center with an even lower rate. The city intends
extending areas subject to parking charges and reducing the spaces available in the City Center as
more street space is allocated to public transport. Charges apply from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. on Monday
to Thursday and from 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. on Friday with no charges on weekends or holidays.
Parking charges are modest and are structured to encourage greater circulation of spaces,
particularly where the demand is likely to be highest. The city’s approach of extending the total
coverage of paid parking, but reducing the number of spaces where public transport supply is
being increased, is appropriate.

                   Figure 18: Daily Parking Rate (US dollars; 2011, unless otherwise indicated)

                                                                                                            18.7         19.0


                                                                                                14.7
                                                                                   13.1
                                                                      10.9
                                             10.0        10.1

                                 7.1
                    6.3
       5.0




     Lublin     Bialystok     Olsztyn      Vilnius       Riga        Zagreb      Warsaw        Sofia       Lisbon     Budapest
 Note: Data for Lublin, Olsztyn, and Białystok is for 2014. Available at: http://lublin.spp24.pl/wysokosc-oplat-za-parkowanie/
 Sources: Colliers International (2011), Global/Central Business District Parking Rate Survey, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Białystok


115.     One pricing mechanism to discourage using private cars is to adopt a policy of high
priced parking, particularly if parking is expensive in relation to mass transit. An annual survey of
daily parking rates from 2011 shows that parking fees vary widely in Eastern European cities. In
the EU, changing parking policies are part of larger goals, such as complying with air-quality
standards or reducing GHG emissions. As Figure 18 reveals, the rates in Eastern Poland are
generally lower than for other European countries, particularly so for Lublin. While there is scope
for increasing parking charges to encourage greater use of public transport, the World Bank
considers that the most pressing policy priority is to extend the paid-parking zones to wider areas,
rather than raise parking fees. Rzeszów should give priority to introducing charges for on-street
parking in the Central Business District and extend that zone over time.

116.    Non-motorized transport (NMT), namely cycling and walking, is an integral part of a
sustainable urban mobility plan. Confronted with severe congestion and the negative
environmental impact of increasing car traffic, many industrialized countries (including Canada,
Denmark, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, and the UK) are now giving more attention to the
potential benefits and complementary role of non-motorized transport. The full benefits of
integrated transport systems are best seen in the Netherlands, which has actively pursued a pro-
NMT strategy over the past decade. In the Netherlands, the bicycle accounts for over 30 percent
of total daily trips, which places it second right after the private car. The experience of
Copenhagen, Denmark, also has relevance for Poland. The modal share for cycling in
Copenhagen had declined to a very low level through the 20th century, but through investment in
cycle infrastructure and promotion of NMT it now accounts for a substantial share of all trips
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                   44


(more than 30 percent and 150,000 people cycle each day to work or educational institutions) in
the city.38 The full potential of NMT is best achieved through the development of comprehensive
strategies and policies that involve all relevant levels of government with participation from all
stakeholders in NMT.

117.    Having the ability to move around safely, comfortably, and conveniently, on foot or by
bicycle, will provide a number of benefits to residents and businesses, such as mobility, economy,
health, and environment. Dedicating space to NMT has the additional benefit of calming
motorized traffic and improving safety for all road users. It is therefore important to integrate
NMT into the strategic plan in order to (a) increase cycling and walking as active modes of
transport; (b) make cycling and walking comfortable and enjoyable choices for transport; (c)
expand the network of pedestrian walkways and bike paths throughout the city; (d) create safe
and inviting walking and biking environments for residents and visitors; and (e) coordinate
planned improvements with other agencies having jurisdiction over elements of the transport
network.

118.     Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów generally have all invested in recent years to
develop bike path networks, which have been extended through projects co-financed by the EU.
The push to improve infrastructure for cyclists and pedestrians is being led by the desire to make
the cities more attractive to tourists, but it is also creating the infrastructure that will allow more
individuals to travel within city borders using bicycles.

EU-FUNDED INVESTMENT PROGRAM

EU 2007-2013 Financing Perspective

119.          Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów all prepared Integrated Public Transport
Projects with the aim of increasing the attractiveness of the wider public transport system through
its comprehensive reconstruction. These projects are enhancing urban mobility by: (a) increasing
the reliability and efficiency of public transport; (b) improving the comfort of traveling by public
transport; (c) improving accessibility to public transport for people with mobility impairment or
other disabilities; and (d) reducing the negative impact of the urban transport system on the
environment. These projects finance infrastructure, new vehicles, modern information, and
ticketing systems for public transport users, and traffic management systems. Implementation of
Area Traffic Control (ATC) systems for the cities will give priority to public transport at
junctions and provide real-time passenger information for display at stops and on vehicles. The
cities have also invested in public transport vehicle management systems that improve the
efficiency of transport operations and allow real-time regulation of buses. The projects have been
implemented on a phased basis and there has been good integration between increasing capacity
of the road network and improving facilities for public transport. The subcomponents of the road
investment have allowed the cities to redirect transit traffic away from city centers and ensured
that the design of upgraded streets in the historic core of the cities gives effective priority to
sustainable modes of transport, including walking, cycling, and buses.




38
     http://kk.sites.itera.dk/apps/kk_pub2/pdf/823_Bg65v7UH2t.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                        45




 Box 5: Electricity Supply in Poland

 Poland’s electricity generation is dominated by coal: 90 percent of electricity came from coal-fired
 power plants in 2009. Gas?fired generation accounts for 2 percent and grew substantially over the past
 decade to reach just over 3 TWh in 2009. The use of hydropower remains marginal as the potential is
 limited. Wind power is just beginning to make inroads into Poland’s electricity generation with a share
 of just 0.7 percent in 2009, but there is potential for further development. Oil?fired generation has been
 falling slowly but steadily since 2004 in response to higher oil prices. The decline of coal’s share has
 already started at a slow pace. In 1990, 97 percent of electricity generation was coal-based. This share
 fell to 96 percent in 2000 and to 90 percent in 2009. Progress has been made in recent years to reduce
 dependence on coal reflecting efforts to comply with the European Union’s Emissions Trading Scheme
 and the EU?wide renewable energy target. As of 2012, according to the Polish regulator, the amount of
 electricity generated by coal had gone down to 88.6 percent.

 Source: OECD/International Energy Agency (2011), Energy Policies of IEA Countries: Poland 2011, Review. Available at:
 http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/Poland2011_web.pdf



120.         Cities have replaced worn and outdated rolling stock with modern, comfortable, and
environmentally friendly vehicles complying with applicable emission standards, which will
contribute to reducing emissions and noise. In Lublin, new vehicles include the purchase of 70
modern trolleybuses and 100 modern buses that meet the emission standard Euro 5 and Enhanced
Environmentally friendly Vehicle (EEV). Olsztyn has decided to restore tram service to the city
after an absence of more than 50 years. The project now being implemented comprises 11 km
double track and is intended to connect the city center with residential estates with high
population density to the south of the City Center. An important fact to bear in mind is that 88.6
percent of electricity in Poland—2012 data of the electricity regulator—is coal-generated and that
electric vehicles, trams, and trolleybuses are less carbon friendly than would be the case if
electricity were generated from other sources. Nevertheless, a modal shift from passenger
vehicles to public transportation has positive GHG impacts, irrespective of the source of
electricity.

EU 2014-2020 Financial Perspective


121.     Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów all intend applying for co-funding for projects
under the Operational Programs (Infrastructure and Environment or Development of Eastern
Poland) for the period 2014-2020. Applicants for funds under this new phase of EU funding are
required to demonstrate how the proposed projects would contribute to the overall objectives of
the strategies agreed in the Partnership Agreement between the Government of Poland and the
EU. Central to these objectives is public transport system development in the area covered by
“voivodeship Integrated Territorial Investments (ITI) Strategy.? In response to this requirement,
the main objectives of the proposed investments are developing sustainable urban transport and
eliminating capacity deficiencies in the most important transport connections within the FUA,
compared to projects under the 2007-2013 program, which focused on transport within city
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  46


boundaries. In the case of Olsztyn, the focus of the projects remains within the city’s boundaries
as there has been less development in the suburbs. The projects in all four cities are likely to be a
continuation of the integrated public transport projects initiated under the 2007-2013 framework,
as well as development of Intermodal Transport Centers.

122.     The cities propose to implement Intermodal Transport Centers around central railway
stations that would upgrade interchange facilities for city bus, provincial bus, and rail services.
This concept appears to have strong support and there is agreement among city and voivodeship
authorities and relevant transport operators on the choice of location. The respective cities are
taking the lead in developing the concept and preliminary designs for the centers, but there
appears to be limited direct involvement in the project planning by stakeholders other than the
city transport authorities. If the Intermodal Transport Centers are to achieve genuine integration
between modes of transport, planning and implementation need to take into account the
experience and requirements of the relevant operators. The proposed locations of the centers are
at varying degrees of distance from the historic core of the cities, but reconfigured bus networks
and other initiatives to integrate services across modes could overcome any disadvantages of
remote location.

123.    The mayors and other city managers recognize that investing in public transport is central
to improving the quality of life and economic competitiveness of their cities and neighboring
communities. The projects being implemented under recent EU programs for Eastern Poland have
resulted in public transport offering a credible alternative to private commuting for residents of all
ages and social backgrounds. Most of the sub-projects are at the final stages of implementation
and appear to be well-designed and effectively implemented. It is too early to assess the impact of
these investments, but the scope and scale of interventions are appropriate for mid-sized cities
and are essential for achieving an objective of retaining modal share for public transport.

124. The full potential of the investment in public transport infrastructure will not be realized
until there is greater integration between public transport modes and city and commuter services.
Cities have made good progress in upgrading their fleets of city buses and in investing in
passenger information, ticketing, and other ITS within city boundaries. They have extended these
services to a limited number of suburban communities, but generally the quality of suburban bus
services is poor relative to city services and they do not offer a credible alternative to commuters
who have access to private cars. Heavy rail does not play a significant role in offering services to
commuters and the current national investment program to upgrade railways appears to prioritize
improving intercity services. Intermodal Transport Centers adjacent to central railway stations in
the four cities will, on their own, achieve little in increasing patronage on heavy rail within the
city agglomerations.

125. All relevant parties acknowledge the absence of modal and regional integration of public
transport in Poland and the consequences of these gaps are apparent in declining service quality
in city suburbs where more people live. All parties also acknowledge that it would be in the best
interests of passengers to have integrated ticketing and other initiatives to facilitate interchange
from one mode to another as part of an integrated network. The decentralized nature of local
government in Poland and municipal authorities’ autonomy in decision-making means that no
agency is mandated to lead initiatives to integrate transport. In other countries, local authorities
are often incentivized to cooperate through allocation of investment funds. The requirement for
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                              47


cities in Eastern Poland to demonstrate commitment to ITI initiatives is a first step in this
direction, but the level of integration is still high and does not extend to integrating transport
operations.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  48




                CONCLUSIONS FROM CITY-LEVEL ASSESSMENTS




126.     The demand for high-quality public transport in the four cities of Eastern Poland that are
the focus of this study has developed rapidly in keeping with changes to economic conditions and
the expectations of residents of the cities and their neighboring municipalities. The mayors
recognize the importance of upgrading the supply of public transport as part of the cities’
strategies to attract modern industry and to protect their environmental and cultural heritage.
These objectives are aligned with the goals of the Government of Poland and the EU in
supporting regional development in Eastern Poland resulting in substantial funding being made
available to transform public transport supply. The cities have risen to the opportunity and have
replaced a large portion of their fleets of life-expired buses with modern vehicles and associated
fixed infrastructure and ITS.

127.    The decision to separate the functions of a transport authority from operations is in
keeping with good practice internationally. The urban transport authorities have made good
progress in developing strategic skills necessary for long-term planning and project management
in implementing the EU-funded projects. All of this has been achieved for most cities since 2009
and with limited staff. In planning the next phase of public transport investment and the period
beyond then, when less funding will be available from the EU, it would be appropriate for urban
transport authorities to consider the skills that they will need to promote greater use of public
transport and to control costs. Public transport regulators internationally are seeking to exploit the
value of large volumes of data being gathered by ITS to help improve service performance and
customer satisfaction. They also recognize that for many users the decision to use public transport
is more complex and dynamic than just the expected journey time relative to private cars so they
systematically survey users, publish the data, and change service patterns.

128.     The urban transport authorities are now at a stage of maturity at which they should
consider developing performance management techniques and publishing the results on their
websites. The output from these tools would be of value in developing future PSO contracts for
the period when current contracts expire. Most transport services in the four cities in Eastern
Poland are provided under contracts with municipal bus operators that will expire in the coming
years, so it would be useful to have published performance data on a range of performance
criteria in advance of preparing contracts for the next contractual period. The Annexes to this
report give examples of how performance management regimes have been developed by other
transport authorities internationally, how passengers are surveyed for a wide range of transport
attributes, and how Transport for London makes use of data gathered from smart-card readers on
its buses.

129.   The four cities in Eastern Poland have transformed their supply of city transport with EU
funding and have made public transport a credible alternative to private cars for residents of all
ages and social backgrounds. The projects have generally included an appropriate balance
between investment in replacing life-expired vehicles, improving accessibility of infrastructure at
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 49


stops, upgrading ticketing and passenger information, and investing in traffic control systems.
The scope of the projects is well integrated with other urban planning objectives such as restoring
the historic heart of the city and reducing air and noise pollution. While the projects are not fully
implemented, it is clear that they are being well managed and the reported outturn costs for
subcomponents completed are reasonable. The management teams in the cities are to be
congratulated on their achievements in delivering public transport of high international standards
within a short period of time.

130.    Less progress has been made in upgrading the supply of public transport in the areas
surrounding cities’ administrative borders and for suburban commuters accessing the cities. There
has been a strong modal shift from bus to private cars among suburban residents of driving age
who can afford cars. Officials responsible for regional transport have low aspirations for public
transport and see it as largely for people who do not have access to cars due to age or income
levels. Passenger numbers on regional bus services serving cities and neighboring municipalities
are declining. The majority of connections are run commercially (with statutory discounts
reimbursed by the state budge, but not covered by public service obligation contracts) and with
lack of optimization of bus services related to school services and general transport services often
provided by the same bus companies. The decline in patronage is due to demographic trends,
increased car ownership, aging regional bus fleets, and low frequency of bus services. Poland’s
current institutional arrangements and resourcing for regional bus services are not conducive to
reversing the decline in patronage. The fortunes of the regional bus company in some cities
appear to be based on their property portfolios more than on their success in attracting passengers.

131.     The four cities have a valuable resource in their inter-city rail connections and some
regional services, even if they are less extensive than in some other Polish cities. Recent
investments include new Electrical Multiple Units, track renewal, and, in Lublin, relocation of
stops to take account of changes in settlement patterns in the metropolitan area. However,
passenger numbers on commuter railway services are low and the resources of railway
infrastructure are not being exploited to their potential. There is little evidence that investment
decisions for system upgrading, rolling stock or new lines are integrated with spatial plans or
based on population projections. The regional management teams of PR, which operates railway
services, and of PLK, which manages the infrastructure, are very committed to greater use of rail
transport, but are not directly involved in planning for new projects. The short length of PR
contracts with marshals is not conducive to long-term planning and PR’s national management
appears to be focused on how to reduce the company’s large debt rather than on maximizing
passenger numbers. PLK’s decision-making appears to be quite centralized. Cities and regions
recognize the need to upgrade tracks to achieve competitive journey times vis-à-vis private cars,
but there are concerns about possible priority being given to freight over passenger service and
the high track access charges for operators of local services.

132.     While it makes sense to build on the success of the earlier program of investments, the
cities and voivodeships should now consider whether the combination of proposed sub-projects
and the present institutional arrangements best meet the needs of the population in the FUAs. A
growing proportion of people who work, study, and shop in the cities do not live within city
boundaries. There is a widening gap between the quality of public transport offered to suburban
commuters and to people within the city boundaries. This inevitably leads to greater car
dependence among suburban commuters and to congestion on access routes to the City Center.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                50


All four cities have accepted the goals of the ITI strategy in their strategic planning and in their
proposals for public transport development. However, the present institutional arrangements have
not yet resulted in projects being planned or operations being managed in an integrated way.
There is an absence of effective integration between city transport and regional services and
between road-based and railway services. While this poor integration is a result of responsibility
for different transport services being based on geographical allocation of responsibility, there
should be no obstacle to the city and voivodeship authorities agreeing to better integration on a
bilateral basis. Such an approach would be in the interests of residents within and outside the city
boundaries.

133.     The experience of most European countries is that expansion of urban areas based on the
convenience of private developers tends to be car-dependent and is unlikely to take account of the
full cost of providing transport and other municipal services to residents over the long term.
Transit-led development requires careful zoning of areas that can develop in a sustainable way
and where other municipal services can also be provided in an affordable way. It appears that
municipal authorities adjacent to the cities in Eastern Poland have already zoned greenfield land
for residential development and that there are no regional or national requirements that would
encourage compact development adjacent to high-capacity transport links. The clear delegation
of planning authority to individual municipalities, which collect property taxes from new
development, make it extremely unlikely that the municipalities that make up the FUAs would
agree voluntarily to tighter restrictions on suburban development. The consequences of these
distributed planning powers should be recognized, including the increased cost of providing high-
quality public transport and other services to suburban residents. It appears that imposing
requirements for spatial development to take place in a more sustainable way would require
intervention at a national level. This may involve development of national standards or legislative
change. Any such change would be outside the remit of planning authorities in Eastern Poland.

134.    All four cities propose to increase public transport usage in the FUA through
development of Intermodal Transport Centers. If these proposed centers are to achieve their
objective of offering high-quality interchange between rail and bus, the existing rail offer will
have to be improved in parallel with development of modern buildings. The poor integration
between city transport services overseen by the urban transport authorities on behalf of the cities
and railway services overseen by the marshals of the voivodeships will need to be addressed.
While it is appropriate that the cities should take the lead in these developments as they have
project management resources, the marshals’ staff and the operators of the other transport
services should also be involved in planning and implementation.

135.     The cities and voivodeships are all committing substantial resources to improving and
operating transport infrastructure. A large proportion of the capital cost is being met by EU
funds, but expanding the supply of public transport and developing an organizational
infrastructure to manage contracts and services commits the authorities to continuing expenditure
for operations and maintenance. This expenditure will be met from their own resources. The
scope for generating increased funds from fares is limited by demographic trends and the already
relatively high fares. Some ancillary revenue is generated from advertising and property leasing,
but the scope to increase funds from these sources is limited.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                               51


136.     The cost of operating and maintaining public transport will increase as city bus services
serve lower density suburban communities. Regional buses will need to be replaced and the cost
of operating railways for few passengers remains high. The convergence in salary levels between
Poland and Western Europe will also increase operating costs. This suggests the need for the
cities and voivodeships to focus attention on controlling the cost of providing services. City bus
services are provided on a gross-cost contract model, which was an appropriate choice of contract
to achieve a transformation in the quality of service. Urban transport authorities have the
opportunity to encourage municipal transport operators to reduce their operating costs between
now and when current contracts expire. The cities should also consider modified gross-cost
provisions for procurement of future contracts that would incorporate rewards and penalties for
operator performance that affects attractiveness to customers. Such contracts would retain the
main responsibility for attracting passengers with the authorities, but could achieve a better
alignment between the authorities’ objectives and those of the operators by offering specific
payments for behavior that is demonstrated to attract additional passenger numbers.

137.     City management has been focused on improving the performance and attractiveness of
public transport relative to private cars, which is appropriate, but it should also consider the
environmental consequences of the age profile of private cars. The rapid increase in car
ownership in Poland since EU accession has resulted, to some extent, from import of used cars
from other EU countries. The high level of emissions from old cars aggravates the growth in
emissions from transport, which has prompted other EU governments to introduce initiatives to
improve the emissions performance of the private car fleet. The Government of Poland should
also consider such initiatives and reduce the risk of Poland being seen as an attractive market for
the sale of high-emissions used cars.

138.    The main policy intervention by EU countries has been to give financial incentives to
remove old cars from use. The details of these “car scrappage? schemes have varied across the
EU, but in most cases car owners have been given a cash or tax incentive of around Euro 1,000 to
replace a car that is more than 10 years old with a new car. Variations on the scheme include a
matching premium from car suppliers in Germany and Spain or an additional Euro 750 premium
offered by the City of Amsterdam. The case made for car scrappage schemes is that they
stimulate the economy and achieve environmental improvements. Car scrappage schemes have
been so successful that the principle has been extended in some countries to initiatives to replace
other appliances that emit GHGs such as refrigerators and central heating boilers.

139.     Governments in the UK and Ireland have modified their car taxation rules to incentivize
motorists to choose low-emission vehicles. Car tax in the UK and Ireland had traditionally been
based on the size of engine, but over the last 10 years this system has been modified to assess car
tax based on CO2 emissions as well as engine size and fuel type. All car models are assigned to
tax bands based on approved emissions standards and in Ireland the annual tax on a low-
emissions hybrid car is around 10 percent of the tax on high-emissions cars. The modifications to
the car tax regime were designed to be revenue neutral to the exchequer, but to change consumer
behavior to favor low-emission vehicles. This objective has been realized and with less of a
market stimulation effect than earlier car scrappage schemes. A car scrappage program that would
stimulate demand for new cars would not be appropriate for Poland, but it would be appropriate
to consider changes to tax rates on vehicles that would recognize the environmental impact of
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                52


cars with poor emissions performance, many of which are imported second-hand from other EU
countries.

RECOMMENDATIONS

140.    Based on the assessment made above, the following recommendations are made for the
consideration of the cities of Białystok, Lublin, Olsztyn, and Rzeszów:

       Refocus urban transport policy across city borders. Residents of the four cities and of
        their neighboring municipalities will clearly benefit if investment in transport
        development and management of operations were to be carried out in a more integrated
        way across modes and geographical boundaries. While the mandate of urban transport
        authorities does not extend to railways or to regional bus services, there should be no
        institutional obstacle to initiatives such as coordination of schedules, passenger
        information provision, and an agreement on integration of tickets and fares.

       Integrate spatial land-use planning with transport. Effective integration of spatial land-
        use planning with transport would bring benefits in the medium- to long-term by
        encouraging compact development and limiting suburbanization in keeping with the
        Integrated Territorial Investment (ITI). This is more difficult in the absence of national
        standards for sustainable planning and the devolved responsibility for planning decisions
        to municipal governments. However, marshals of voivodeships have discretion over the
        allocation of investment funds for a range of infrastructural development and when
        exercising that discretion they could give priority to investment in municipal
        infrastructure, such as water and electricity, in areas that are consistent with sustainable
        development. Future urban development and transport strategies for the cities and their
        Functional Urban Areas (FUAs) should make specific commitments to promote
        development within walking distance of public transport and discourage dispersed
        development.

       Implement complementary measures. In the next phase of investment, Białystok, Lublin,
        Rzeszów, and Olsztyn may wish to consider a more ambitious program of
        complementary measures that would impose a greater share of the cost of congestion on
        private cars. Examples of measures that would increase the attractiveness of traveling by
        public transport in congested areas of the city include extending the paid-parking zones
        within the city—in the case of Rzeszów the first step would be to introduce paid-parking
        zones; provision of Park & Ride facilities in the suburbs to be served by high-frequency
        public transport; and the creation of bus lanes in the busy access routes to the proposed
        Intermodal Transport Centers. The level of congestion does not call for penal measures
        that would be unpopular with the wider population, but interventions should focus on
        providing higher quality and more reliable public transport services for users. It is
        important that the rationale for changes, such as extending the paid-parking zones, be
        explained to the public as encouraging more efficient use of valuable on-street parking
        spaces and greater use of high-quality public transport services.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 53


       Upgrade content and timeliness of communication with passengers. Urban transport
        authorities are encouraged to provide information on their websites on public transport
        service performance, including information on passenger journeys, modal share,
        customer satisfaction, improvement in customers’ top concerns, journey time, and fleet
        and stations in service. They should also provide an own-branded, user-friendly Journey
        Planner with information about different modes of public transport and pedestrian and
        cycling links. Some of the cities’ websites have more accessible information about public
        transport services, but in all cases the transport authorities should use the websites as
        marketing tools for customers with Internet and smart-phone access rather than as a
        platform for public-service notices.

       Control the net cost for the cities of operating larger transport networks. The cost of
        operating and maintaining public transport infrastructure in all of the cities will increase
        corresponding to the number of buses serving a wider FUA with lower average
        residential density. The increase in cost in Olsztyn will be greater when tram services
        begin. Urban transport authorities should identify ways to control the net cost of
        operating public transport services, including new services to less densely populated
        communities in the suburbs. The best approach to control the financial exposure for
        gross-cost contracts is to increase passenger numbers. This should receive highest
        priority, but it would also be timely to consider modified gross-cost contracts that allocate
        some proportion of payments to improve customer satisfaction and other features that
        attract additional passengers. Cities should plan for a program of preventative and life
        cycle maintenance to optimize the whole-life cost of the new vehicles and fixed
        infrastructure.

       Examine scope for broadening the tax base to ensure financial sustainability through a
        review of the local finance system. Given the long-term demographics in cities—
        declining and aging populations—and the large investments in more expensive, high-
        quality public transport services, and infrastructure financed through the EU, there may
        be merit in carrying out a comprehensive assessment of the tax base to finance public
        transport services. Options for consideration could be employment taxes to finance inter-
        municipal transport services or changes to the way in which property taxes are calculated.
        Such a study would need to take into account the existing tax burden, assess whether
        there is scope for additional taxation, and could potentially be financed by technical
        assistance funds under the EU 2014-2020 financial framework.

       Involve relevant agencies in planning Intermodal Transport Centers. If it is confirmed
        that Intermodal Transport Centers are to be built near the cities’ railway stations under
        the 2014-2020 financial framework for EU co-financed projects, the public transport
        authorities should ensure that the other public transport providers are active participants
        in planning for this initiative. Construction of Intermodal Transport Centers would be
        unlikely to alone generate additional patronage. At the very least, the cities should take a
        lead in ensuring better service integration across modes and encourage the marshals of
        the voivodeships and the railway companies to improve rail services. These initiatives
        would be worthwhile, even in advance of building Intermodal Transport Centers.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 54


       Control growth in GHG emissions from the transport sector. Poland’s car ownership has
        grown rapidly since EU accession in May of 2004. The average age of the car fleet is
        high relative to other EU countries. The cities should monitor and publish energy usage
        and GHG emissions from the transport sector, particularly to assess impact of energy
        efficient or alternative-fuel vehicles, both for the city itself and for the functional urban
        area. Participation in efforts like the Covenant of Mayors could help signal the cities’
        commitment to increasing energy efficiency and use of renewable energy sources on its
        territory.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 55




                         INTER-MUNICIPAL COORDINATION

INTRODUCTION

141.      As populations move to the periphery or to neighboring municipalities, it becomes
critical that the organization of urban public transport services is coordinated within FUAs and
not be limited to city administrative borders. This is of critical importance to Rzeszów, Lublin,
Białystok, and Olsztyn in order to ensure that public transport services meet current and potential
demand, as population shifts to the periphery outside city borders. This chapter briefly describes
the experience of France with inter-communal urban public transport organizing authorities
(autorités organisatrices des transport urbains or AOTU) as an example of how an EU country
with high-quality urban transport services has established a legal and regulatory framework to
encourage inter-communal cooperation consistent with delegation of planning powers to
municipal authorities. This section will then deal with Polish examples of inter-municipal
cooperation in the Gdańsk Bay area and Upper Silesia.

INTER-COMMUNAL TRANSPORT AUTHORITIES: THE CASE OF FRANCE

142.    For many years, and especially since 1999, France has favored the creation of inter-
municipal jurisdictions based on large state grants that contribute to the cost of solving problems
of municipal fragmentation. The Domestic Transport Orientation Law of 1982 delegated to urban
transport organizing authorities (AOTU) the mission of organizing urban public transport
services, and subsequent laws have added a focus on mobility plans. An AOTU can be a
commune or a group of municipalities created to manage one or more areas of responsibility,
including public transport. AOTUs are responsible for defining urban public transport services
(frequency, type of rolling stock, operators, contractual procedures, fare system, etc.), developing
urban mobility plans, procedures for financing and implementing investments and operation of
urban transport networks, managing the infrastructure, regulating transport activities, and
producing information on transport systems.

Until recently, France had over 200 AOTUs, the simplest being at the level of a commune (or
local administrative unit). However, municipalities can join together in inter-communal
cooperation agencies, whose mandate can cover urban transport, but also urban policy and land-
use planning. With over 36,000 municipalities, the approach of using inter-communal cooperation
agencies for urban transport has become the norm. These can take the form of inter-communal
authority boards, inter-communal authorities, urban authorities, greater urban authorities, and
joint management boards. The difference between these types of agencies is on the “rigidity? of
the structure, the attribution of obligatory competencies, and the extent of the power granted to
levy taxes. An urban authority can be created for a population in excess of 50,000—the so-called
Chevenement Law of July 1999—and its mandate includes urban transport as well as three other
responsibilities out of a list of five: economic development, urban transport organization,
development of community land use, habitat, and urban policy. It can also include roads and car
parking. In some cases, urban authorities delegate direct responsibility for urban transport to joint
management boards or inter-local authority boards. A crucial aspect of urban authorities is that
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                               56


their mandate can cover land-use planning and urban transport organization, allowing for the
integration of urban planning
  Box 6: CASCADE                ofurban
                              and
                     Assessment         transport.
                                   Nantes Métropole

  CASCADE is an EU-funded project led by EUROCITIES with the aim of improving the
  implementation of sustainable energy policies in large- and medium-sized European cities. One of the
  formats for mutual learning used within CASCADE is peer reviews, where a team of experts from
  different European cities assesses the current situation of a host city for one of the specific focal areas
  of CASCADE. The primary aim of peer reviews is to provide the host city with an external view on
  their current strategy and efforts by a team of thematic experts from different cities. The assessment
  identifies areas of strength and weaknesses, points out critical issues and can give suggestions for
  actions, networking, and mutual learning actions on local energy leadership among European cities.
  In the case of Nantes, the following recommendations were made:

          Progress towards the set goals should be systematically followed up and the results fed back
           to the political leadership on a regular basis. This is partly done for modal share and traffic
           development, but could be deepened in the fields of energy use and GHG emissions.

          Consider how private investments into sustainable transport could be stimulated and
           involved more. Examples are investments into energy-efficient or alternative-fuel vehicles
           and energy efficiency in transport, but also choice of location to reduce travel demand.

          Explore possibilities to motivate developers to co-finance investments in sustainable
           mobility measures when building new properties, e.g. by conditions in the building permit.

          Develop the links between public health and transportation more prominently. Active travel
           offers the opportunity for significant synergies between transport and public health policies.
           The potential financial benefits of active travel for the health sector should be considered in
           transport decisions. Consider establishing systematic cooperation with representatives for the
           public health sector for the promotion of active travel.

          Develop the link between schools, urban planning, and transport planning both in terms of
           location of schools, but also by developing travel plans for schools and measures to stimulate
           sustainable travel to school for both students and staff.

          Continue with and increase the efforts of actively involving citizens, NGOs, and companies
           in mobility issues.

          Explore possibilities of using financial instruments to influence travel behavior and as a
           funding source for sustainable transport investments to a greater extent. Examples are
           parking fees or levies on parking lots.

  Source: CASCADE

      
143.     The law of January 14, 2014, on modernization of public territorial action (MAPAM)
replaces the AOTU with the organizing authority of mobility (AOM), which now has the
possibility of including in its mandate car-pooling, bike hire services, and organizing service
delivery of goods in town and city logistics to minimize congestion and pollution with the
transport tax funding activities. In the past, AOTUs were responsible for developing Urban
Mobility Plans but did not have a mandate outside of organizing public transportation services.
Policies on bicycles (bike routes, location), management of roads (traffic plans and signaling),
and parking remain the responsibility of municipalities. This still raises issues of consistency and
compatibility between different modes of transport although efforts are underway to address this
problem, including the creation of Park & Ride facilities, for example.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                          57


144.     One example of intercommunal cooperation is the Urban Community of Nantes (Nantes
Métropole), a local administration constituted in 2001 that groups 24 municipalities surrounding
the City of Nantes with a total population of 595,000. Nantes Métropole has various
responsibilities, including for planning, urban policies, management of public services and public
transport, transport facilities, and protection and improvement of environment and living
conditions within its territory. It also has the responsibility for coordination, implementation, and
monitoring of transport, climate change, and energy policies. In 1982, the first inter-communal
structure, which included 19 municipalities, was created with a key role for urban mobility in
structuring agglomeration economic development. It subsequently went through several changes
to its legal status, reflecting, in part, changes in legislation. Its key objective is regional
development and it has a mandate that covers mobility, economic and spatial development,
housing, and urban development, among others. This means that the issue of integrating urban
planning and urban transport happens within one institution.

145.     Nantes Métropole is governed by an assembly of 113 elected officials appointed by the
municipal councils of the 24 individual towns in the area. Nantes Métropole delegates the
organization of public transportation to the Société d'Economie Mixte des Transports de
l'Agglomération Nantaise (SEMITAN), a mixed private and public-sector company. The public
transport network comprises tramway lines, an extensive network of buses, an airport shuttle bus
line, and a night bus network. A single common fare system covers all these modes and extends
to suburban trains within the Métropole boundaries, although SEMITAN does not operate these
trains. A recent review of Nantes Métropole found that it has been strategic and consistent in its
work to reduce energy consumption and climate impact from transport, together with evidence of
political commitment towards sustainable transport, both through past action and current goals
and plans.39

POLISH EXPERIENCE WITH INTERMUNICIPAL COOPERATION

146.     In the existing legal and organizational framework in Poland, the easiest and most
popular way of expanding public transport networks to suburban areas is by entering into bilateral
agreements between the city and its surrounding communes, transferring organizational
competences from the latter to the former in exchange for covering the deficit of the sub-network
that is subject to the agreement. This method, which refers to bus transport only, is popular in
Eastern Poland, but not as widespread as in other metropolitan areas. In order to make this
approach more attractive, cities should offer potential partner municipalities transparent
algorithms of cost and revenue estimation, including individual tendering of lines, clear revenue
allocation, and the possibility to determine service quality level. There is less traffic congestion in
suburbs so these services typically have lower costs per vehicle-kilometer, but may have higher
costs per passenger-kilometer than for urban services. It is likely that suburban municipalities
would accept service using secondhand vehicles with fewer ancillary features than the new air-
conditioned vehicles favored by the cities, but that have higher operating costs. In some cases a
fare union between the city and the association of surrounding municipalities (as in KZK GOP –



39
   CASCADE (2012). Energy Efficient Urban Mobility in Nantes Metropole. Feedback Report from the CASCADE
Peer Review Available at:
http://nws.eurocities.eu/MediaShell/media/CASCADE%20PR%20feedback%20report%20%20for%20Nantes.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                  58


MZKP case described below) may be a good solution to connect one fare system and different
quality needs.

147.     Polish law does not provide much scope for special metropolitan arrangements, as there
is no specific regulation governing metropolitan areas or even a legal document that would clarify
the delimitation of a metropolitan area. Under the present legal framework, metropolitan areas
may either start informal cooperative initiatives or establish formal associations of municipalities
or counties (but not both at the same time).35 The association created may be a separate legal
entity to be financed and managed jointly by several local governments. The current structure of
self-government in Poland, that delegates powers to local authorities, is only 20 years old and
with some exceptions of single-target associations, there is little tradition of metropolitan
cooperation or development of relationships across jurisdictional boundaries. Development of
effective associations would require municipalities to compromise on particular issues and
transfer powers that they received rather recently. This is not easy to achieve. International
experience suggests that the development of cooperation needs to be encouraged through
incentives provided by the central government, which is not the case in Poland.36 In what follows,
the experience with inter-municipal cooperation in the Gdańsk Bay region and Silesia will be
presented, as they provide a template of what can be achieved under the existing legal framework
in Poland.

Tricity (Trojmiasto)

148.    The Tricity metropolis (unofficial name) is constituted of the three largest cities, Gdańsk,
Gdynia, and Sopot, and seven municipalities. The full metropolitan area has 1.2 million
inhabitants. Since 2004, the Metropolitan Council of Gdańsk Bay, established on the initiative of
the marshal, has operated in the region. Regular monthly meetings are attended by mayors of all
the member municipalities and have led to agreements regarding the coordination of public
transport within the metropolitan area. The head of the council is the marshal of the Pomorski
Region. Other members are mayors of member counties and municipalities. The main areas of
focus of the council are (a) public transport; (b) marketing, promotion, and coordination of
common investments; and (c) joint applications for EU funds. Some of the key issues discussed in
the council have been the restructuring of Fast Urban Rail, the delimitation of the Gdańsk
Metropolitan Area, and the Concept of the Spatial Development Plan of the Metropolitan Area.
The activities of the Metropolitan Council were overtaken by the creation of new associations: the
Metropolitan Association for Public Transport in the Gulf of Gdańsk/Gdańsk Bay (organizing
public transport) and by the Gdańsk Metropolitan Area (GOM) association (other activities,
including promotion, spatial planning and managing Integrated Territorial Investments).




35
   Lackowska, Marta, and Karsten Zimmermann (2011), New Forms of Territorial Governance in Metropolitan
Regions? A Polish-German Comparison. European Urban and Regional Studies 2011 18: 156-169. The legal basis for
the establishment of the association is the Local Government Act of March 8, 1990, which provides that the obligation
to the organization of public transport is the responsibility of municipalities. At the same time it also provides the
ability to create (e.g. in urban areas) inter-municipal organizations.
36
   Swianiewicz, Pawel, and Marta Lackowska (2007). From Doing Nothing to Metropolitan Government Institutions?
Governing Metropolitan Areas in Poland. Available at:
www.vrm.ca/documents/Montreal_Swianiewicz_Lackowska.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                               59


Metropolitan Association for Public Transport in the Gulf of Gdańsk

149.     The Metropolitan Association for Public Transport in the Gulf of Gdańsk (MZKZG)
registered as a municipal association on June 5, 2007. It is located in Gdańsk and members
include Gdańsk, Gdynia, Sopot, as well as four other cities and seven municipalities.37 The
association consists of a General Assembly and a board—the chairman of the board is appointed
for one year and each year the new chairman is from a different municipality. Members of the
General Assembly include mayors of municipalities as statutory members of the association and
additional representatives of the municipalities, which are elected by municipal councils, are a
function of the population of each municipality. Urban transport authorities in the association
include the (a) Public Transport Authority of Gdańsk (ZTM Gdańsk); (b) Public Transport
Authority of Gdynia; (c) Public Transport Operator in Wejherowo (MZK Wejherowo); (d) Fast
Urban Railways (SKM); and (e) Regional Railways, Przewozy Regionalne (PR).38 The main task
of the association is to develop transport policy and manage public transport within the
metropolitan area. Key activities have included (a) development and approval of public transport
fares and settlement of metropolitan income generated by fares; (b) market research, planning,
and programming of development of public transport; and (c) the use of an integrated fare system.
Initially, two models of integration were considered: the creation of a separate association and
contractual arrangements without the creation of an association. Politicians selected creation of an
association, even though a team of experts from the University of Gdańsk recommended the
contractual approach. The next stage in inter-municipal cooperation would involve organizational
and functional integration within the Gdańsk Bay and would include the introduction of uniform
fares throughout the area, coordination of various modes of transport, and optimization of
timetables. This stage envisages the association taking on the functions of the individual public
transport authorities within the Gdańsk area, including communication, marketing, and setting
common standards regarding quality of services. This has not been achieved to date, firstly
because municipalities have wanted to keep fare revenues in their budgets in order to improve
their credit ratings, and later, because of different quality standards and cost levels of different
operators (especially railways, that have no active organizing authority). Nevertheless, in the
context of the next EU financial perspective, MZKZG is planning to replace the existing
electronic ticketing system with a newer one allowing better integration. It will include private,
self-financing bus services. The creation of the Regional Transport Authority, planned for 2017,
will facilitate the process.

150.    Integrated ticketing allows a person to make a journey that involves transfers within or
between different transport modes with a single ticket that is valid for the complete journey
across modes. The purpose of integrated ticketing is to encourage people to use public transport
by simplifying transfers between transport modes and by increasing the efficiency of the services.
The association has moved in the direction of fare integration by allowing passengers to purchase
one ticket, which is valid within the Gdańsk area. The association has created a metropolitan
single-fare ticket (excluding trains) as well as 24-hour, 72-hour, and monthly metropolitan tickets

37
   This includes the cities of Gdańsk, Gdynia, Pruszcz Gdański, Reda, Rumia, Sopot, and Wejherowo, as well as seven
municipalities (Kolbudy, Kosakowo, Luzino, Pruszcz Gdański, Szemud, Wejherowo, and Zukowo).
38
   The area of operation of (a) ZTM Gdańsk is Gdańsk, Sopot (together with ZTM Gdynia), Kolbudy, Pruszcz,
Gdański, Zukowo; (b) ZTM Gdynia is Gdynia, Sopot (together with ZTM Gdańsk), Kosakowo, Reda, Rumia, Szemud,
Wejherowo, Zukowo; (c) ZTM Wejherowo is Wejherowo, Reda, Rumia, Luzino; and (d) Urban Railways (SKM)
within the area of Gdańsk operates trains from Luzino to Cieplewo.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                    60


valid on buses, trams, trolleybuses, and SKM trains as well as trains from PR within the Gdańsk
Area.39 Apart from metropolitan tickets, it is possible to use tickets that are valid only with the
public transport operators under the responsibility of ZTM Gdańsk, ZTM Gdynia, MZK
Wejherowo, and SKM. At present, there are six different public fare systems in the area:

         (a)       fares applicable for Gdańsk buses and trams and surrounding municipalities that
                   transferred their public transport organization competences to Gdańsk ( five
                   municipalities);

         (b)       fares applicable for Gdynia buses and trolleybuses and surrounding
                   municipalities, that transferred their public transport organization competences to
                   Gdynia (eight municipalities);

         (c)       fares applicable for Wejherowo buses, and surrounding municipalities, that
                   transferred their PT organization competences to Wejherowo (four
                   municipalities);

         (d)        fares applicable to SKM trains;

         (e)       fares applicable to PR trains; and

         (f)       an integrated MZKZG fare system.

151.     Integrated MZKZG tickets have gained rising ridership. Between 2008 and 2013,
revenues rose from PLN 5 million (Euro 1.2 million) to PLN 20 million (Euro 4.8 million) and
the number of tickets sold from around 100 000 to around 500 000. Currently, sales revenue is
rising about almost 10 percent annually. An estimated 4 percent of passengers using metropolitan
long-term tickets have stated they had not bought season public transport tickets before.

152.     The revenue from integrated ticketing is distributed according to the following rules: (a)
60 percent of the revenues from tickets, including railways are transferred to railway operators
(52 percent to SKM and 8 percent to PR); (b) half of the remaining funds are distributed between
the communal authorities proportional to supply (number of vehicle-kilometer); and (c) the other
half of the remaining funds is distributed according to the results of a survey, conducted at ticket
sales points of mobility on the previous day. MZKZG is financed by its member municipalities,
which refund its costs as well as the difference between regular and metropolitan ticket prices.
Both are distributed between members proportional to the number of inhabitants and amount,
respectively PLN 1.50 (Euro 0.36) and PLN 3 (Euro 0.72) per inhabitant.



Gdańsk Metropolitan Area

153.    Gdańsk Metropolitan Area (GOM) is the association responsible for the metropolitan
development of the area. GOM also acts as secretariat for Integrated Territorial Investment (ITI),
although ITI contract parties also include non-GOM members, especially Gdynia. GOM intends
to prepare a low-emission strategy and metropolitan transport strategy for the area comprising

39
  The standard price for a single-fare ticket is PLN 3.20 (Euro 0.77) and PLN 1.60 (Euro 0.38) for reduced fares. For a
24-hour ticket the price is PLN 20 (Euro 4.81) and PLN 10 (Euro 2.4) for reduced fare. For a 72-hour ticket the price is
PLN 40 (Euro 9.62) and PLN 20 (Euro 4.81) for reduced fare.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                             61


some, but not all, of its member municipalities. It also aims to prepare a metropolitan spatial
development plan. Currently a study gathering all communal development plans has been
prepared. It reveals gaps in the planning process, including areas not covered by any plan and
different underlying assumptions. Detailed guidelines for the municipalities have been prepared.
These are to be used in future spatial development plans.

Public Transport Municipal Association for the Upper Silesia Industrial Area

154.     The Public Transport Municipal Association for the Upper Silesia Industrial Area in the
Katowice metropolitan area (Upper Silesia) is the largest and most densely urbanized region in
Poland, comprising 17 cities and a population of 2.2 million. One long-lasting example of
cooperation is the Public Transport Municipal Association for the Upper Silesia Industrial Area
(KZK GOP) in the Katowice metropolitan area, which consists of around 12 cities of comparable
size. Since 1991, a large part of public transport has been delivered by KZK GOP.40 The Public
Transport Municipal Association of Upper Silesian Industrial District was established in 1991.
The objectives of the association are to (a) organize local public transport; (b) conduct studies for
the development of the public transport system; (c) promote public transport services; and (d)
initiate and coordinate projects for traffic management and parking in cities. Key activities
performed by KZK GOP include the organization of public transport, fare policy, raising finance,
development of ICT, fostering relations with surrounding municipalities, and integration of
transport within the framework of KZK GOP. Two projects are currently under implementation
with co-funding from EU funds: ŚKUP (Box 8) and dynamic passenger information.

155.     The association was created as an answer to problems which occurred in the early 1990s,
just after the former stated-owned company was separated into independent companies, based
around the different depots and co-owned by a small number of municipalities. At first,
integration was based on a rule that companies would accept one another’s tickets, but this led to
an increased focus on distribution at the expense of public transport operations. An association
was created immediately after it was permitted by the legal framework. This initiative had the
support of a number of city mayors, led by the mayor of Sosnowiec. The association consists of a
General Assembly and a board. The nine board members are appointed and dismissed by the
assembly. The assembly members are the municipalities. The assembly, which has oversight of
KZK GOP, is composed of the marshal and mayors of municipalities participating in the
association.

156.    From the beginning, all competences in public transport organizations were transferred
from the municipalities to KZK GOP, with full downstream financing. They were fully financed
by participating municipalities with no state funding as in countries such as France or Germany.
One-third of the financial contribution paid by the municipalities to the association was based on
a fixed percentage of the participating municipalities’ total income, and two-thirds by the number
of vehicle-kilometers driven within the territory of the given municipality. Then, for many years,
the municipalities’ financial contribution was a fixed percentage of their total incomes—this fixed

40
   The name of the association in Polish is Komunikacyjny Związek Komunalny Górnosląskiego Okręgu
Przemysłowego. Currently, the KZK GOP includes Katowice, Bytom, Bobrowniki, Będzin, Chełm Śląski, Chorzów,
Czeladź, Dąbrowa Górnicza, Gierałtowice, Gliwice, Imielin, Knurów, Mysłowice, Piekary Śląskie, Pilchowice, Psary,
Pyskowice, Radzionków, Ruda Śląska, Siemianowice Śląskie, Siewierz, Sławków, Sosnowiec, Sośnicowice,
Świętochłowice, Wojkowice, and Zabrze. See http://kzkgop.com.pl/strony/p-l-geneza.html
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                            62


percentage was kept at a low level to encourage participation—contributing to the overall poor
quality of public transport as there was little possibility for a single commune to obtain better
quality public transport.

Box 7: KZK GOP Strategy 2008-2020

The Strategy of KZK GOP for 2008-2020 states the key objectives for the association during this time
period. It updates an earlier strategy document and was necessary due to the changes to the
Development Strategy of the Province of Silesia for 2000-2020 in 2005, the development in 2004 of the
Integrated Plan for Development of Public Transport in the Upper Silesian Conurbation, and the
creation of the Upper Silesian Metropolitan Association in 2007. In 2007, a study, Diagnosis of the
Conditions of Transport System and Plan for Development of Public Transport in the Area of Activities
of KZK GOP, was prepared by Ernst & Young. The strategy recognizes two basic trends faced by Upper
Silesia: (a) declining population, with an average annual fall in population of 0.6 percent over 2002-
2006; and (b) massive rise in motorization rate, from 290 vehicles per 1,000 inhabitants in 2003, rising
to 346 in 2006. Both negatively impact the number of passengers using public transport.

With regard to public transport services, key directions include: (a) managing public transport service
provision as the main organizer of public transport in the region; (b) coordination of public transport
services within the Upper Silesia; (c) increasing quality requirements stipulated in contracts for service
provision, including use of energy efficient vehicles; and (d) implementation of quality monitoring
system for services provided (GPS-based vehicle tracking, dynamic passenger information displays).

Regarding fare and ticketing policy, key directions include: (a) implementation of electronic ticketing
through the development of the ŚKUP card; (b) increased ticket inspection activity; and (c) gradual
development of passenger service centers and ticket vending machines. The strategy recognized that
cost-recovery is not possible because of national statutory fare discount policy, as well as the need to
provide unprofitable services to meet certain transport objectives. The strategy argues for efforts to
change the existing fare discount policy, including transferring those responsibilities to local
governments or refunding the law-imposed discount rates.

In the area of improved integration within the Upper Silesia Conurbation, key directions include (a)
introduction of electronic ticketing system; (b) promotion of transfer system in journeys within the
conurbation; (c) cooperation with municipalities and non-municipal entities, including solutions
regarding location of parking to meet Park & Ride objectives; and (d) establishing and developing
transfer centers.

Source: KZK GOP. Available at: http://www.kzkgop.com.pl/strony/p-1-strategia.html



157.    As a result, since 2007 gradually and since 2012 in full, the contribution was calculated
based on the individual deficit of a given line, estimated as the difference between the number of
passengers (from representative passenger counting) multiplied by an average income per
passenger (uniform across the network) minus real costs. The deficit is split between the
municipalities, basing on the number of vehicle-kilometers within the territory of a given
commune. This leaves the municipalities much more freedom in setting their own quality
requirements, although in case of longer lines, a compromise between a number of municipalities
is required. There is no distinction between different passengers’ profitability (for example ,
single, regular ticket vs. season, reduced), but this would require much more complex and
expensive research. Further development of the scheme is planned, after the introduction of
ŚKUP e-ticketing.

  Box 8: Silesian Public Services Card (ŚKUP)

  Silesian Public Services Card (ŚKUP) is a system allowing the processing of payments for services
  provided by public institutions. The system will allow the use of different services: transport, culture,
  sports and recreation, library or paid parking. It will also be a platform for the exchange of information
  between the participants and residents. Participants of the project are: KZK GOP, which oversees its
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                63




158.     KZK GOP has cooperated with the regional railway operator Koleje Śląskie by offering
“Silesian Ticket,? a monthly ticket that is a combination of routed railway ticket and chosen
public transport ticket both at discounted prices (by 20 percent) with possibility of additional
statutory discounts, separately for railway and public transport. Currently this is rather a niche
offer. KZK GOP cooperates also with neighboring association MZKP (Intercommunal
Association for Public Transport) in Tarnowskie Góry. The latter remains an independent
association in terms of contracting and scheduling, but does not issue its own tickets, accepting
only KZK GOP tickets. The revenues are distributed using a fixed, contractual formula, based on
passenger number estimation for past periods. Unfortunately, in the cities of Tychy and Jaworzno,
separate public transport ticketing systems exist. Those cites are perceived to have better quality
public transport and are afraid to lose that quality after integrating. They also have separate e-
ticketing systems and their incompatibility increases integration barriers.

159.    Since the entry in force of the 2010 Transport Act KZK GOP can no longer contract
services with non-member municipalities. Integration of urban public transport with railways is
made difficult by the existing regulatory framework as railway discounted tickets are co-financed
by the state budget, while integrated public transport tickets are not. In addition, the net-cost
model used in railways and gross-cost model used in public transport cause some compatibility
challenges.

160.    In mid-1993, a number of fare systems operated in parallel in the Upper Silesia Industrial
Area, with different fare systems for each tram and bus sub-system. However, in that year KZK
GOP took over the system of bus organization in 16 municipalities. In 1999, a common bus-tram
ticket was developed.41

Silesian Metropolis

161.   The Silesian Metropolis (Metropolia Górnośląska), formerly known as the Metropolitan
Association of Upper Silesia, is a territorial entity operating on the principle of metropolitan
municipality composed of 14 adjacent cities in the Polish province of Silesia. It was established in

41
     More details can be found in Polish at http://www.kzkgop.com.pl/strony/p-1-geneza.html.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  64


2007. The seat of the metropolitan council is Katowice, the largest district of the Silesian
Metropolis. The aim of the union is the creation of a strong metropolitan center with pooled
resources, an internationally competitive profile and unified management of common
infrastructure. Its main focus is planning and joint application for EU funds, and not joint
provision of services. The territorial entity lobbies for legal reform that would allow it to have the
status of a metropolitan organization based on obligatory cooperation. According to its statutes,
the entity has a number of tasks, including:

       Establishing a common development strategy for municipalities participating in Silesian
        Metropolis in accordance with the Law on Spatial Planning and Development so that this
        is factored in when preparing municipal spatial development plans;

       Execution of the tasks covered by the common strategy of city development; and

       Raising funds from domestic and foreign funds earmarked for the implementation of the
        tasks of the territorial entity (currently only funding for strategic documents and studies
        has been acquired).

Silesian Metropolis consists of an assembly and a management association (executive
body). Cities appoint two delegates to the assembly (including the mayor), with the exception of
Katowice, which appoints three delegates. Delegates to the assembly are appointed by city
councils while the management association is elected by the assembly.




162.     Reform of local government in Poland that delegated responsibility for planning and
transport to municipalities and other local government authorities left a gap in administration for
activities that cross municipal boundaries. This gap is most obvious when a metropolitan area
straddles a number of independent jurisdictions and where a large proportion of transport trips
cross these boundaries. Public transport needs to be organized to respond to this pattern of trip
making if it is to offer a credible alternative to private cars.

163.     The phenomenon of cities expanding beyond their historic boundaries is common across
Europe and elsewhere. Local governments have found ways of sharing responsibilities and
coordinating transport provision. This necessarily involves authorities agreeing to transfer power
to a wider metropolitan authority and contributing financially to the provision of transport in the
interests of the wider community. National governments often encourage metropolitan-level
coordination through legislative requirements for adjacent authorities to integrate plans and
through financial support for projects that cross boundaries. These structures are compatible with
delegated responsibility for planning and transport.

164.     Some metropolitan areas in Poland have agreed to share responsibility and financing for
transport provision and operations on a voluntary basis. Polish legislation facilitates these
structures and helps to set standards for governance. The Government of Poland has not provided
direct financial support for inter-municipal associations, but it welcomes applications for funding
under EU programs from the associations on behalf of the constituent municipalities. The
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 65


associations are also consistent with the ITI policies promoted by the EU and the Government of
Poland.

165.     The organization of rail transport in Poland and the financial support provided by the
Government of Poland through statutory discounts tend to undermine efforts to coordinate
transport across municipal boundaries. For example, while compensation is available from the
national government for railway tickets for certain categories of passengers, this compensation is
lost if rail tickets are integrated with bus or tram tickets in urban areas. The local authorities
would then need to compensate for this discount from their own budgets. While this is likely to be
an unintended consequence of the statutory discount scheme for rail travel, it is an example of
how national regulations and funding do not give sufficient attention to the need to encourage
metropolitan structures for public transport.

166.      The best examples of inter-municipal coordination of transport provision in Poland are
from metropolitan areas where there are a number of constituent cities of approximately
comparable size. These metropolitan authorities also incorporate small municipalities, but there is
little risk of decision-making and funding being dominated by a single municipality. While there
is undoubted complexity in bringing together a large number of autonomous authorities, and the
governance arrangements have evolved over time, it may be easier to establish structures in areas
with a number of large cities than in Eastern Poland where the regional capital dominates in terms
of size and resources.




167.      The cities of Eastern Poland could develop structures that would promote and support
public transport services for metropolitan areas rather than being based on the needs of city
residents. The following recommendations are made to the Government of Poland and to the
cities to encourage inter-municipal structures for public transport planning and operation:

       Remove existing barriers to inter-municipal cooperation for transport. The statutory
        concession schemes that compensate local transport operators for granting free or
        discounted fares to certain categories of passenger prevent integration of fares and
        ticketing. This is most obviously the case for railway services, but is also relevant for bus
        services outside PSO contracts for the time being. The Government of Poland could
        consider reviewing its compensation schemes for statutory discounts and introduce
        structures and payment mechanisms that support integration across municipal boundaries
        and modes of transport. This could be done at the earliest opportunity to avoid suburban
        and regional bus services being withdrawn in anticipation of further market liberalization
        after 2017. The marshals of the relevant voivodeships could consider tendering for PSO
        contracts for bus services between the major cities and their neighboring municipalities.

       Give explicit preference to applications for funding under EU and other programs that
        are based on inter-municipal structures. Applicants for funding under the 2014-2020
        financial perspective are required to demonstrate a commitment to ITI policies.
        However, there is a high level of cooperation implicit in the ITI memoranda of
        understanding entered into by cities and their neighboring municipalities in Eastern
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 66


        Poland. It would be appropriate for the Government of Poland to consider giving greater
        strength to ITI policies by allocating more funds to initiatives that demonstrate
        improvement in transport that cross municipal boundaries.

       Formal agreements between cities and neighboring municipalities can mitigate the risk
        of weaker parties being dominated by stronger partners. The size and resources of the
        regional capitals in Eastern Poland, relative to their neighboring municipalities, inevitably
        give rise to concerns that the interests of the stronger partners would dominate those of
        the smaller ones in any agreements. For their part, the city administrations may have
        concerns that neighboring municipalities with limited resources would not contribute
        proportionately to improved public transport. The Ministry for Infrastructure and
        Development could consider developing a draft agreement suited to the needs of a
        metropolitan area that is dominated by a city, but with population sprawl to neighboring
        communes. This draft agreement would set out mutual commitments to transparency,
        shared decision-making, and equitable financial contributions to be negotiated at a local
        level. To further support such agreements, the Government of Poland could commit to
        providing additional financial support to initiatives developed by the inter-municipal
        associations that will make measurable contributions to national policies such as the
        National Plan for Regional Development and National Plan for Spatial Development.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                               67




                                       ANNEX 1
                                 LIST OF PERSONS MET


BIA?YSTOK

    1. Adam Poliński
       Deputy Prezydent (Mayor)
       City of Białystok

    2. Piotr Firsowicz
       Director of Urban Development Department
       Białystok City Hall

    3. Tomasz Buczek
       Director of Strategy and Development Department
       Białystok City Hall

    4. Marzenna Dubowska
       Deputy Director of Roads and City Investments Department
       City Hall

    5. Bogusław Prokop
       Director of Białystok Urban Transit Authority
       City Hall

    6. Leszek Maciej Lulewicz
       Director of Infrastructure and Environmental Protection Department
       Marshal’s Office of Podlaskie Voivodeship

    7. Henryk Toczydłowski
       Deputy Director Infrastructure and Environmental Protection Department
       Marshal’s Office of Podlaskie Voivodeship

    8. Elżbieta Załuska
       Director of Przewozy Regionalne Sp. z o.o.
       Podlaskie Branch of Przewozy Regionalne

    9. Anna Cieśluk
       Head of Section
       Marketing and Sales Section
       Przewozy Regionalne Sp. z o.o.
       Podlaskie Branch of Przewozy Regionalne

    10. Dariusz Wojtan
        CEO
        Przedsiębiorstwo Komunikacji Samochodowej w Białymstoku SA
        [Road Transport Enterprise in Białystok]
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                    68


    11. Józef Piotr Klim
        Deputy CEO
        Przedsiębiorstwo Komunikacji Samochodowej w Białymstoku SA
        [Road Transport Enterprise in Białystok]

    12. Daniel Górski
        Director of Regional Development Department
        Marshal’s Office of Podlaskie Voivodeship

    13. Janusz Ostrowski
        Municipal Road and Investments Authority in Białystok

    14. Andrzej Jacek Kierman
        Director
        PKP PLK Branch in Białystok

LUBLIN

    1. Grzegorz Siemiński
       Deputy Mayor of the City of Lublin

    2. Tomasz Fulara
       CEO – General Director
       Urban Transport Enterprise Lublin Sp. z o.o.

    3. Michał Zdun
       Director
       Department for Transport Policy and Roads
       Marshal’s Office of Lubelskie Voivodeship

    4. Marek Musiej
       Branch Manager
       Department for Regional Operating Programme
       Projects Evaluation Section
       Marshal’s Office of Lublin Voivodeship

    5. Andrzej Satke
       Operations Director
       Urban Transit Enterprise Lublin Sp. z o.o.

    6. Jerzy Leziak
       Coordinator for Organization and Ownership Supervision
       Przedsiębiorstwo Komunikacji Samochodowej "Wschód? SA
       [Road Transport Enterprise “East?]

    7. Justyna Mądry
       Director
       Przewozy Regionalne Sp. z o.o.
       Lublin Branch

    8. Grzegorz Malec
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                          69


        Director of Urban Transport Authority in Lublin

    9. Sławomir Podsiadły
       Deputy Director for Transport
       Urban Transit Authority in Lublin

    10. Ryszard Witkowski
        Deputy Director for Economic Issues
        Chief Accountant
        Urban Transit Authority in Lublin

    11. Kazimierz Pidek
        Director
        Municipal Road and Bridges Authority in Lublin
        Lublin City Hall

    12. Mariusz Sagan
        Director
        Strategy and Investor Relation Unit in Presidential Department
        Lublin City Hall

    13. Elżbieta Matuszak
        Director
        Planning Unit in Investment and Development Department
        Lublin City Hall

    14. Bernadeta Krzysztofik
        Director
        EU Funds Unit in Investment and Development Department
        Lublin City Hall

    15. Eugeniusz Janicki
        Deputy President of the Board
        Engineers and Transportation Technicians Association in Lublin (SITK – Stowarzyszenie
        Inżynierów i Techników Komunikacji)

    16. Grzechulski Zygmunt
        Director
        PKP PLK Branch in Lublin

    17. Andrzej Celejewski
        President
        Lubelskie Dworce Company

OLSZTYN

    1. Piotr Grzymowicz
       Prezydent (Mayor)
       City of Olsztyn

    2. Magdalena Onych
       Presidential Plenipotentiary for Urban Transport Project Implementation
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                70


        Olsztyn City Hall

    3. Jerzy Roman
       Director of Roads and Transportation Authority in Olsztyn

    4. Magdalena Rafalska
       Director of City Development Unit
       Olsztyn City Hall

    5. Krzysztof Śmieciński
       Urban Investment Department
       Olsztyn City Hall

    6. Marek Malinowski
       Director
       EU Funds Unit
       Olsztyn City Hall

    7. Stanisław Wojciechowski
       Director
       Olsztyn Branch of Przewozy Regionalne

    8. Ireneusz Merchel
       Director of Railway Lines Branch in Olsztyn
       PKP Polskie Linie Kolejowe SA

    9. Bogusław Żmijewski
       Advisor to the Mayor of Olsztyn
       Coordinator of Advisors and Assistants Team
       Olsztyn City Hall

    10. Mieczysław Królak
        CEO
        MPK Olsztyn (Olsztyn Public Transit Enterprise)

    11. Jacek Semczuk
        CEO
        General Director
        PKS Olsztyn - Przedsiębiorstwo Komunikacji Samochodowej w Olsztynie SA
        (Bus Transport Enterprise in Olsztyn)


RZESZÓW

    1. Tadeusz Ferenc
       Prezydent (Mayor)
       City of Rzeszów

    2. Anna Raińczuk
       Director of City Development Office
       Rzeszów City Hall
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                   71


    3. Stanisława Bęben
       Director
       European Funds Office
       Rzeszów City Hall

    4. Paweł Potyrański
       Deputy Director
       European Funds Office
       Rzeszów City Hall

    5. Daniel Kozdęba
       European Funds Office
       Rzeszów City Hall

    6. Andrzej Sowa
       Deputy Director for Investments
       City Roads Authority in Rzeszów

    7. ?ukasz Mikołaj Dziągwa
       Urban Transit Authority in Rzeszów

    8. Lesław Kornak
       Director Department of Roads and Collective Public Transit
       Marshal’s Office of Podkarpackie Voivodeship

    9. Adam Hamryszczak
       Deputy Director Regional Development Department
       Marshal’s Office of Podkarpackie Voivodeship

    10. Jan Lech
        Deputy Director oInfrastructure and Transport Department
        Marshal’s Office of Podkarpackie Voivodeship

    11. Anna Kowalska
        Urban Transit Authority in Rzeszów

    12. Jerzy Churawski
        Director of Przewozy Regionalne Sp. z o.o.

    13. Marek Filip
        CEO
        Urban Transit Enterprise – Rzeszów Sp. z o.o.

    14. Piotr Klimczak
        President
        MKS - Intercomunnal Urban Transportation Company

    15. Wiesław Szeliga
        CEO
        Przedsiębiorstwo Komunikacji Samochodowej w Rzeszówie SA
        Road Transport Enterprise in Rzeszów
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                         72



    16. Piotr Klimczak
        Deputy Mayor of Boguchwała
        Boguchwała City Hall

    17. Marian Sulencki
        Chairman
        SITK RP branch in Rzeszów
        Association of Engineers and Technicians of RP branch in Rzeszów

MINISTRIES/GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES

    1. Monika Pałasz
       Director
       Supra-Regional Programs Department
       Ministry of Infrastructure and Development

    2. Stanisław J. Sudak
       Deputy Director of Department for Coordination of Development Strategies and Policies
       Ministry of Infrastructure and Development

    3. Jan Niemczyk
       Department for Zoning Policy
       Urban Development Section
       Ministry of Infrastructure and Development

    4. Anna Rudowska
       Department for Supra-regional Programs
       Management Section 1
       Ministry of Infrastructure and Development

    5. Maciej Berliński
       Director
       Infrastructure Projects Department
       Polish Agency for Enterprise Development

    6. Monika ?yk
       Head of Section for Transport Projects and Large Size Projects
       Infrastructural Projects Department
       Polish Agency for Enterprise Development

    7. Sebastian Głąbicki
       Senior Specialist
       Section for Transport Projects and Large-Size Projects
       Infrastructural Projects Department
       Polish Agency for Enterprise Development


RAILWAY SECTOR – NATIONAL LEVEL

    1. Dariusz Liszewski
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                     73


        Member of the Board
        Director for Technical and Operations Issues
        Przewozy Regionalne Sp. z o.o.

    2. Marcin Mochocki
       Board Plenipotentiary for Strategy and Planning
       PKP Polskie Linie Kolejowe

    3. Krzysztof Mrozicki
       Head of Division
       Office for Strategy


GDAŃSK

    1. Dr. Hubert Kołodziejski
       Chairman of the Board
       Metropolitan Association for Public Transport in the Gulf of Gdańsk Bay

    2. Michał Glaser
       Executive Director
       Gdańsk Metropolitan Area

    3. Sławina Klawiter
       Project Manager
       Gdańsk Metropolitan Area

KATOWICE

    1. Prof. Grzegorz Dydkowski
       Vice-Chairman of the Board for Development
       Public Transport Municipal Association for the Upper Silesia Industrial Area

    2. Krzysztof Sobański
       Vice-Director for Operation
       Public Transport Municipal Association for the Upper Silesia Industrial Area

    3. Wojciech Gorgoń
       Head of Unit for Research & Development
       Public Transport Municipal Association for the Upper Silesia Industrial Area

    4. Anna Urbanek
       Specialist
       Public Transport Municipal Association for the Upper Silesia Industrial Area
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                   74




                                                    ANNEX 2


INTRODUCTION

Cities are home to over 70 percent of the EU population and account for some 85 percent of the
EU’s GDP—the proportion of the population residing in urban areas is projected to rise to 82
percent by 2050.42 Most trips begin and end in cities. Increasing demand for urban mobility in
many cities has resulted in congestion, poor air quality, high noise emissions, and high levels of
CO2 emissions. The Europe 2020 Strategy and the legislative package from the European
Commission provide EU member states a framework and means for moving towards a greener
and more competitive low-carbon economy that makes efficient use of resources and is resilient
to climate risk. As a member state of the EU, the Government of Poland is committed to fighting
climate change and pursuing low carbon development. The integration of mitigation actions into
Poland’s national policies, programs, and strategies will be a critical step in shifting its
development path towards a climate-resilient, low-carbon, and green economy.

Transport is responsible for around a quarter of EU greenhouse gas emissions making it the
second-biggest GHG emitting sector after energy. Road transport alone contributes about one-
fifth of the EU’s total emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), the main GHG. While emissions from
other sectors are generally falling, those from transport have increased 36 percent since 1990. The
EU has policies in place to reduce emissions from a range of modes of transport, such as
including aviation in the EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) and CO2 emissions targets for
cars. GHG emissions generated from transport are among the fastest growing in Europe, posing a
challenge in creating a low-carbon future as economic development has been paralleled with a
modal share increasingly dominated by cars.43 This modal shift has been driven by a number of
factors, including growing affluence, suburbanization, and falling land-use densities in urban
areas, which have translated into more widespread vehicle ownership, increasing trip numbers
and lengths, while reducing the financial viability of public transport and non-motorized
transport. Thus, Eastern European countries are moving towards EU motorization rates for
passenger transport—with much higher GHG emissions growth than in the EU-15, although
overall levels remain lower. Without any changes to transport policy, these trends in Eastern
Europe, and in Poland, are likely to continue unabated in the next decades.

Decoupling GHG emissions from the transport sector and economic growth, or at least lowering
the emissions intensity of future transport growth, represents a key challenge and will require
departure from the “business as usual? policies in the transport sector.44 As noted in the EU’s

42
   European Commission (2013), Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee, and the Committee of the Regions: Together Towards Competitive and
Resource-Efficient Urban Mobility, Brussels, 17.12.2013, COM(2013) 913 final. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/urban/doc/ump/com(2013)913_en.pdf
43
   In the case of the EU-27 in 2007 CO2 emissions from the transport sector accounted for 25.1 percent of the total, up
from 18.1 percent in 1990. Projections from the European Environment Agency estimate that the sector’s emissi ons
will increase by 25 percent over 1990-2020, whereas they are expected to decline from industrial and energy sectors.
44
    OECD/International Transport Forum (2008), Greenhouse Gas Reduction Strategies in the Transport Sector.
Preliminary Report. Paris: OECD /International Transport Forum.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                               75


2011 White Paper on transport, the main issue facing the transport sector is how to reduce the
system’s dependence on oil without sacrificing efficiency and compromising mobility. Curbing
mobility is not an option. Concerns about climate change are not likely to be the key driver of
transport policies or investment decisions. Instead, local co-benefits—such as reduced traffic
congestion and noise, improved air quality and road safety, or enhanced energy security—are
much more likely to drive the development of transport policies.45 Looking at congestion levels
and trends towards increased motorization in Polish cities, it becomes apparent that the issue is as
much a classic problem of transport and urban planning as it is a GHG emission problem. Co-
benefits can motivate discussions on improved transport policies that are also GHG-friendly
policies.

This Annex presents a brief overview of the EU’s transport strategy and policies, before
presenting the funding framework for 2014-2020 Operational Programmes (OPs) and the
European Commission’s Position Paper for Poland, outlining its vision of the key urban transport
priorities to be financed under the 2014-2020 programming period. This provides the broad
context in which the OPs for urban transport are prepared, which is important as this is the key
source of financing for new urban transport infrastructure projects for the cities of Białystok,
Lublin, Rzeszów, and Olsztyn.


EU TRANSPORT STRATEGY AND POLICIES


There are several formal documents adopted by the EU that are relevant for Poland’s urban
transport sector. Key among them is the European Commission White Paper Roadmap to a Single
European Transport Area: Towards a Competitive and Resource Efficient Transport System
adopted in March 2011.46 The White Paper is a key document setting the targets and directions
for transport sector development. EU transport policy is focused on assuring sustainable mobility
for people and goods with a strong emphasis on contributing to very ambitious GHG emissions
targets set for the EU as a whole. More specifically, the policy and related activities are expected
to significantly reduce Europe’s dependence on imported fuels (mostly oil) and cut carbon
emissions in transport by 60 percent by 2050 compared to 2005. A key goal for urban transport is
to halve the use of “conventionally-fuelled? cars in urban transport by 2030; phase them out in
cities by 2050; and achieve essentially CO2-free city logistics by 2030.

The European Commission adopted the Green Paper Towards a New Culture for Urban Mobility
on September 25, 2007. With the Green Paper, the commission set a new European agenda for
urban mobility. The Green Paper does not propose concrete policy measures, but rather launches
a further debate on possible options for action. It structures the main challenges related to urban
mobility around five themes: (a) free-flowing towns and cities, (b) greener towns and cities, (c)
smarter urban transport, (d) accessible urban transport, and (e) safe and secure urban transport.
This new consultation helped identify actions that were included in an Action Plan on Urban
Mobility. The European Commission adopted the Action Plan on Urban Mobility on September

45
   James Leather and the Clean Air Initiative for Asian Cities Center Team (2009), Rethinking Transport and Climate
Change, Asian Development Bank Development Working Paper Series No.10, December 2009.
46
    European Commission (2011), White Paper: Roadmap to a Single European Transport Area – Towards a
Competitive and Resource Efficient Transport System. Brussels, March 28, 2011, COM (2011) 144 final.
    Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                      76


    20, 2009.47 The Action Plan recognizes that developing efficient transport systems in urban areas
    is an increasingly complex task with both congested cities and greater urban sprawl. Public
    authorities have an essential role in providing the planning, funding, and regulatory framework.
    The Action Plan proposes 20 measures to encourage and help local, regional, and national
    authorities achieve their goals for sustainable urban mobility. These measures are structured
    around six themes: (a) promoting integrated policies, (b) focusing on citizens, (c) greening urban
    transport, (d) strengthening funding, (e) sharing experience and knowledge, and (f) optimizing
    urban mobility. With the Action Plan, the European Commission presented for the first time a
    comprehensive support package in the field of urban mobility.

         Box 9: EU Initiatives Supporting Sustainable Multimodal Urban Mobility

         There are a number of initiatives from the EU to improve urban mobility, including CIVITAS,
         ENDURANCE, and CH4LLENGE. CIVITAS was launched in 2002 to redefine transport measures
         and policies in order to create cleaner, better transport in cities. More specifically, CIVITAS has helped
         introduce numerous innovations and measures that have already made transport more eco-friendly in
         over 60 European metropolitan areas dubbed “demonstration cities.? Thanks to an EU-funded
         investment of well over EUR 200 million, the project has guided cities to introduce improvements in
         four phases of the project, each building on previous successes. Examples include a public transport
         ticketing system in Tallinn, Estonia; a 100 percent clean bus fleet in Toulouse, France; waterborne
         goods transport in Bremen, Germany; and a new traffic control system in Bologna, Italy.

         ENDURANCE is an EU-wide establishment of enduring national and European support networks for
         sustainable urban mobility, co-funded through the Intelligent Energy Europe Program of the EU.
         ENDURANCE aims to assist cities and regions with developing Sustainable Urban Mobility Plans
         (SUMPs) by facilitating networking, mutual learning, and sharing of experience and best practice
         across countries. Objectives include:

              Establish engendering national SUMP networks in all EU countries and Norway;
              Establish an enduring and integrated European SUMPs audit, training, and policy transfer
               network;
              Activate 250 cities in Europe to engage in SUMPs and their implementation; and
              Raise awareness about SUMPs and its benefits at national and European-level institutions.

         Strategic objectives for the long term (2020) include establishing SUMPs as major urban policy
         supported on a local, national, and European level and reducing modal share of the car by on average 5
         percent in 400 of the 483 cities with above 100,000 inhabitants in Europe.

        CH4LLENGE’s focus is addressing four challenges to sustainable urban mobility p lanning. Achieving sustainable,
         energy-efficient and environmentally friendly transport systems is one of the key aims in Europe. Cities frequently
         face major barriers while creating their own SUMPs. In CH4LLENGE (2013-2016), nine European cities and
         eight supporting organizations have teamed up to overcome the four most pressing challenges in sustainable urban
         mobility planning: stakeholder participation and citizen involvement, institutional cooperation between sectors and
         disciplines, identification of the most effective policy measures, and monitoring and evaluation of progress in
         SUMP development. Polish cities have been active in these initiatives—Gostyń, Gdynia, Kraków, and
         Warsaw in the case of CH4LLENGE.

         Source: CIVITAS, ENDURANCE, and CH4LLENGE


    47
       European Commission (2009), Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
    European Economic and Social Committee, and the Committee of the Regions, Action Plan on Urban Mobility,
    Brussels, COM(2009) 490/5. Available at:
    http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/urban/urban_mobility/doc/com_2009_490_5_action_plan_on_urban_mobility.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                           77


The European Commission adopted a new Urban Mobility Package on December 17, 2013. The
commission will reinforce the exchange of best practice, provide targeted financial support, and
invest in research and development. In addition, it is encouraging the development of “sustainable
urban mobility plans? to stimulate a shift towards cleaner and more sustainable transport in urban
areas. The central element of the Urban Mobility Package is the Communication Together
Towards Competitive and Resource Efficient Urban Mobility.48 It is complemented by an annex
that sets out the concept of SUMPs, as well as four Staff Working Documents on urban logistics,
urban access regulations, deployment of ITS solutions in urban areas, and urban road safety. With
the 2013 Urban Mobility Package, the commission reinforces its supporting measures in the area
of urban transport by: (a) sharing experiences, showcasing best practices, and fostering
cooperation; (b) providing targeted financial support; and (c) focusing research and innovation on
delivering solutions for urban mobility challenges. The SUMP concept considers the functional
urban area and proposes that action on urban mobility be embedded into a wider urban and
territorial strategy. These plans should be developed in cooperation across different policy areas
and sectors (e.g. transport, land use and spatial planning, environment, economic development,
social policy, health, road safety, etc.); across different levels of government and administration;
as well as with authorities in neighboring areas. It highlights citizen and stakeholder, and fosters
changes in mobility behavior.

 Box 10: EU Guidance on Sustainable Multimodal Urban Mobility
 In the context of the EU 2014-2020 financing perspective, the EU has issued a draft thematic guidance
 fiche on Sustainable Multimodal Urban Mobility, which provides an overview of key elements the
 European Commission expects to see in urban transport projects. These include: (a) urban mobility as a
 component of an urban integrated approach, which takes into account access to services and of
 mobility from home to work; (b) intelligent urban transport to cover functional urban areas; (c)
 sustainability mobility, including not only public transport, but cycling and walking.

 Member states need to demonstrate how their investments will contribute to climate change objectives,
 as urban mobility has been moved to thematic Objective 4, which supports the shift towards a low-
 carbon economy across all sectors. The European Commission would like to see in the Operational
 Programmes an integrated approach based on a comprehensive mobility concept for a city or functional
 urban area, address all passenger and freight modes, moving and parked. Investments should be
 accompanied by additional measures to ensure take up of supported new transport systems. The
 strategic focus should be on making non-car mobility more attractive than cars, supporting greener,
 fuel-efficient vehicle technology and alternative fuels.

 Indicators to monitor progress in achieving specific objectives set in Operational Programmes should
 be realistic. These could include for urban public transport, door-to-door travelling time in minutes on
 representative routes, GHG emissions from transport in kT of C02 equivalents, average speed per km
 as compared to free-flow speed to measure reductions in congestion.

 The European Commission has commissioned guidelines for the development and implementation of
 sustainable urban mobility plans, which are available at:
 http://www.eltis.org/sites/eltis/files/guidelines-developing-and-implementing-a-
 sump_final_web_jan2014b.pdf
 Source: European Commission


48
  European Commission (2013), Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee, and the Committee of the Regions, Together Towards Competitive and
Resource-Efficient Urban Mobility. Brussels, 17.12.2013, COM(2013) 913 final. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/urban/doc/ump/com(2013)913_en.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  78


In order to ensure complementarity, the country-specific strategic and policy directions should be
coherent with the EU-level transport strategy, as well as countrywide specific programs and
policy measures. In practice this means that national-level strategy, programs or master plan(s)
should complement and “transpose? the guidelines from the European Commission White Paper
and other important components of EU urban transport sector policy framework into Poland’s
transport sector. In addition, any regional, local or municipal transport strategies or programs
should complement and be fully coherent with national-level policies and EU policies. Therefore,
Poland’s transport strategy and policies should be internally coherent and complement the EU
transport strategy and policies by translating EU-level documents into Polish reality. While all
EU member states have to follow the general directions of the EU transport policy, they also have
significant flexibility in designing their own transport strategies, programs, and implementation
arrangements reflecting country-specific needs in infrastructure development programs and
policy measures. At the same time, country-level strategies should be aligned with and contribute
to EU transport policy goals.

               Figure 18: Share of Renewable Energy in the Transport Sector in 201054




Source: European Commission


The European Commission undertook a recent assessment of progress towards achieving the
Europe 2020 targets, which were to create 20 percent of energy consumption from renewables
and increasing energy efficiency by 20 percent by 2020. Poland’s national targets include GHG
emissions 14 percent higher compared to 1990 levels, 15.48 percent share of renewable energy in
gross final energy consumption, and 10 percent use of renewables in transport. Poland needs to
make a continued effort to increase the share of renewable energy used in transportation, which
has an EU-wide target of 10 percent (Figure 18). The 2010 rate is 5.9 percent. There is a need for
further efforts aimed at reducing the energy intensity of the transport sector, as well as raising the
use of renewable energy powering the transport system. As this report will emphasize, there is a
need to make investments in the urban transport sector that can contribute to an increase in the
modal share of cleaner transport modes, public transport, not only because of GHG
considerations, but because it makes sense when confronting issues such as congestion and

54
     http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/g-gas/progress/docs/13_energy_and_ghg_en.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                           79


overall efficiency of the cities’ urban transport system. The European Commission is taking stock
of the Europe 2020 strategy and EU level target—the analysis finds that the EU is on course to
meet or come to meeting the energy targets. New proposals concerning the Europe 2020 strategy
are expected in early 2015.49


                                       Table 1: Europe 2020 Targets

      Europe 2020 Headline Target           Poland’s Current Situation          Poland's National Target

                                            -4.5% (2020 projections                       14%
 20% reduction in GHG emissions             compared to 2005)
 compared to 1990
                                            +12 % (2020 emissions          (national binding target for non-
                                            compared to 2005)              ETS sectors compared to 2005)
 20% of energy from renewables                      9.5% (2010)                           15%
 including
 10% use of renewables in transport                 5.9% (2010)                           10%
                                                                           96 Mtoe (reduction by 13.6 Mtoe
 20% increase in energy efficiency               96.9 Mtoe (2010)          compared to business as usual
                                                                           scenario)
Source: European Commission



EU FUNDING IN 2014-2020 PROGRAMMING PERIOD


It is important to understand and briefly discuss the three most relevant EU funding mechanisms
available to Poland for supporting urban transport programs and investments during the period
2014-2020. Cohesion Policy will remain an important element of the upcoming 2014-2020
programming period and annual EU budgets. An innovation under the current programming
period is the focus on integrated territorial strategies.

As integrated territorial strategies are vital for the achievement of the smart, sustainable, and
inclusive Europe envisaged by the Europe 2020 strategy, the Common Provisions Regulation
governing use of EU funds50 introduces the Integrated Territorial Investment (ITI) initiative as a
key instrument to implement such strategies, which is of particular relevance for urban transport
activities financed through EU funds. This provides a flexible mechanism for formulating
integrated responses to diverse territorial needs, without losing the thematic focus through which
cohesion policy is linked to the Europe 2020 Strategy. The ITI is a tool to implement territorial
strategies in an integrated way. It is not an operation, nor a sub-priority of an OP. Instead, ITI
allows member states to implement OPs in a cross-cutting way and to draw on funding from

49
   European Commission (2014), Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee, and the Committee of the Regions, Taking Stock of the Europe 2020
Strategy for Smart, Sustainable and Inclusive Growth, Brussels, 5.3.2014, COM(2014) 130 final, Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/index_en.htm
50
   Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of December 17, 2013, laying down
common provisions on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund, the Cohesion Fund, the
European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development, and the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund, and laying down
general provisions on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund, the Cohesion Fund and
the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 1083/2006. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/news/eu-regulation-common-provision-regulation-cpr
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                        80


several priority axes of one or more OPs to ensure the implementation of an integrated strategy
for a specific territory. As such, the existence of ITI would provide flexibility regarding the
design of OPs and enable the efficient implementation of integrated actions through simplified
financing.

The actions to be implemented through ITI shall contribute to the thematic objectives of the
relevant priority axes of the participating OP(s), as well as the development objectives of the
territorial strategy. They can be financed by the European Regional Development Fund, European
Social Fund, and Cohesion Fund, but it is not compulsory to combine all funds in each ITI.
Nevertheless, it is encouraged that ITI combine with other funds as the integrated approach
requires that soft investments be linked to investments in physical infrastructure. This is
particularly relevant in the case of sustainable urban development. It is important to underline that
ITIs can only be effectively used if the specific geographical area concerned has an integrated,
cross-sectoral territorial strategy. Compared to the 2007-2013 period, the financial framework in
2014-2020 focuses on a reinforced integrated approach to urban challenges, while the
introduction of the ITI allows for the implementation of Operational Programmes in a
crosscutting way within integrated urban strategies that encompass functional areas and therefore
go beyond the borders of city jurisdictions. This is an important change in focus, which forces
cities to develop plans and strategies beyond city border jurisdictions, helping to address an
important lacunae in city planning in Poland.

The Common Provisions Regulation set out the means to achieve consistency with the economic
policies of the EU and its member states, coordination mechanisms among the European
Structural and Investment Funds (ESIF) and with other EU policies and instruments, horizontal
principles and crosscutting policy objectives.51 It lays down arrangements to address territorial
challenges, suggests action with high value-add, and sets out the principles and the priorities for
action. Based on a proposal put forward by the European Commission, the European Council
concluded on February 7-8, 2013, that “Climate action objectives will represent at least 20
percent of EU spending in the period 2014-2020 and therefore be reflected in the appropriate
instruments to ensure that they contribute to strengthen energy security building a low-carbon,
resource-efficient, and climate-resilient economy that will enhance Europe’s competitiveness and
create more and greener jobs.?52




51
   European Commission (2013), Draft Assessment of Climate Action: How to Assess the Mainstreaming of Climate
Action in Operational Programmemes. ERDF and CF. European Regional Development Fund and Cohesion Fund
2014-2020.
52
   The EC has prepared a draft methodology for tracking climate change-related expenditure. The commission
recommends managing authorities use multiple codes for major projects. The approach involves two phases; (a)
attaching weights to the codes under the intervention category; (b) in the case of intervention fields with a zero
weighting, the information could be filtered through Thematic Objective N.4 “suppo rting the shift to the low carbon
economy in all sectors? and Thematic Objective N.5 “promoting climate change adaptation, risk prevention, and
management.? The financial data reported (in connection with codes which generally have a weighting of 0 percent)
under these two climate-related thematic objectives would be counted as contributing to the climate objective with a 40
percent weight. The draft nomenclature of categories of intervention for transport has a 40 percent coefficient for urban
transport infrastructure projects. The decision on how the 20 percent of climate change expenditure for all Operational
Programmes will be applied is a decision left to each member state. It remains to be defined how this target will be
applied, and whether transport will need to make a contribution larger than 20 percent. It will potentially affect the final
modal composition of the proposed infrastructure investments.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                  81


The Common Provisions Regulation defines 11 Thematic Objectives, which will contribute to the
implementation of the EU’s strategy for smart, sustainable, and inclusive growth. Of particular
relevance are Thematic Objective 4, supporting the shift toward a low-carbon economy in all
sectors and Thematic Objective 5, promoting climate change adaptation, risk prevention, and
management, representing mitigation and adaptation climate action, respectively. The fund-
specific regulations define particular investment priorities for each Thematic Objective. In this
manner, ESIF can significantly contribute to the achievement of the climate objectives and the
transition to a low-carbon and climate-resilient economy.

The mainstreaming of climate action across the Operational Programmemes will be assessed,
with a focus on those investment priorities that have the greatest potential for climate action. For
each of the priority axes, the climate assessment will cover the relevant investment priorities, the
types of actions, and selection of operations. The assessment will verify consistency between, on
the one hand, the strategic approach and the anticipated contribution to the Europe 2020 strategy
and, on the other, the specific objectives, anticipated actions, and principles for selection of
operations. The assessment will furthermore investigate how the principle of sustainable
development has been addressed. A key indicator for climate action at member state level is the
share of ESIF support that will be used for climate-change objectives. This relates to the target
that climate-related expenditure will correspond to at least 20 percent of the EU budget in the
period 2014-2020. The indicative share envisaged for the program will be assessed against this
objective and against the program’s scope.

In line with EU transport policy, the Polish Partnership Agreement53 and drafts of two national
OPs foresee explicitly the use of EU financial support for sustainable and energy efficient (green)
urban transport and encourage local authorities to develop specific projects. The draft Operational
Programmeme Infrastructure and Environment (OPIE), the largest program, has about Euro 20
billion allocated to transport—out of Euro 27.5 billion—from the European Regional
Development Fund (ERDF) and Cohesion Fund and Operational Programmeme for Eastern
Poland (OPEP) providing around Euro 1.1 billion (of the total Euro 2.1 billion) of additional
financial assistance for transport from ERDF to five least-developed Eastern Poland regions. The
regional capitals of four of these regions (Rzeszów, Lublin, Białystok, and Olsztyn) are the
subjects of the World Bank’s technical assistance project, hence they will be eligible for EU
support through these two OPs. In addition, they can benefit from support from ERDF via the
respective Regional Operational Programmes managed by their regional self-government partners
(Podkarpackie, Lublin, Podlaskie, and Warmian-Masurian voivodeships).

The allocations for urban and functional area transport systems available through different OPs to
the four Eastern Poland regional capital cities covered by this technical assistance may reach in
total Euro 1.0 billion—on average Euro 250 million per city. The draft OPs for Poland contain
specific allocations for sustainable and energy-efficient (green) urban transport. As part of the
OPIE there are two explicit investment priorities mentioned, which could provide funding for
urban transport: (a) Priority 4.5, development of low-emission urban transport in providing

53
  The Partnership Agreement for EU financial assistance to Poland for 2014-2020 was accepted by the EC on May 23,
2014. Partnership Agreement is a general high-level, strategic-level document governing the EU assistance to Poland in
2014-2020. It refers to the EU and Polish strategic context and development priorities, defines priority areas for EU
support, formulated general results expected, and sets the framework for more detailed arrangements to be provided
through a set of Operational Programmemes.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                         82


services to residents within the functional areas of the towns, for which over Euro 2 billion is
allocated; and (b) Priority 7.4, improvement of the status of national railway connections and the
railway system in the urban functional areas and development of low-emission urban transport in
providing services to residents within the functional areas. In addition to these two areas, the
OPEP also foresees support under Priority 7.2, improvement in accessibility of urban areas not
connected to the backbone road network. Although the precise amount of EU funding for urban
transport in 2014-2020 is hard to estimate precisely at this stage, based on draft OPs and cautious
assumptions, the total allocation for urban transport project for all Polish cities may reach Euro 4
billion. Given that the draft OPEP alone contains almost Euro 0.85 billion for the five Eastern
Poland capital cities, Euro 250 million as the average allocation per city seems quite feasible.

Given the prominent role of sustainable urban mobility in the EU strategy and significant funds
earmarked for the Polish cities under EU financial support package many cities are advancing
identification and preparation of candidate projects for 2014-2020. Most of the projects proposed
are likely to continue and expand activities initiated under ongoing EU financial perspective. The
period 2014-2020 offers significantly larger funds for urban and metropolitan transport, since
these may reach Euro 4 billion.


On Dec 22, 2014 the EC approved five of six national Operational Programmes for Poland,
including Infrastructure and Environment and seven of 16 of the Regional Operational
Programmes for Polish voivodeships. The remaining ones are expected to be approved in early
2015. As any expenditures related to eligible projects incurred after January 1, 2014, will most
likely qualify for retroactive financing from EU funds, many cities interested in EU support are
advancing preparation of the necessary local strategic framework documents and project-level
documentation for their investment projects.


EUROPEAN COMMISSION POSITION PAPER ON POLAND

As the bulk of financing for new urban transport projects in Białystok, Lublin, Rzeszów, and
Olsztyn will be through the European Structural and Investment Funds in 2014-2020, these
investments need to be in line with EU policies and strategies on climate change in order that EU
funding allocations can be agreed. The European Commission has prepared a Position Paper that
sets out its views on the main challenges faced in Poland and on funding priorities.54 The main
points of that paper that relate to the urban transport sector are discussed below.

Under the thematic objective of promoting sustainable transport and removing bottlenecks in key
network infrastructure, one of the key objectives is the development of environmentally friendly
transport systems and the promotion of urban mobility. In this regard, the Position Paper lists as
priorities:

        Develop intelligent urban transport systems, urban sustainable mobility plans,
         environmentally friendly and low-carbon transport systems, promote clean vehicles and
         implementation of schemes for in-city user, charging and access restrictions. Intelligent

54
  European Commission (2012), Position of the Commission Services on the Development of Partnership Agreement
and Programs in Poland for the Period 2014-2020, Ref. Ares (2012)1138133 - 28/09/2012.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                           83


         urban transport should cover the FUAs in order to improve urban-rural linkages and
         provide access to jobs and services from rural areas, too. Harmonize different modes of
         transport and service providers;

        Develop well-functioning intermodal transport system by investing in construction of
         multi-modal and interoperable nodes;

        Facilitate the shift of road freight transport to other transport modes; and

        Support the development of the necessary infrastructure for promotion of alternative low-
         carbon fuels in road and non-road transport.

The paper emphasizes the need to ensure the financial sustainability of investments through the
preparation and implementation of an appropriate maintenance strategy by applying the “polluter
pays? and “user pays? principles. Revenues from pricing systems need to be used to finance
maintenance costs. This is an important point as many of the public transport projects financed
under the EU will require costly maintenance in order to ensure that they continue to meet the
expectations of passengers in terms of quality of service. The paper also highlights that in order to
meet the National 2020 target for GHG emissions and renewables, there is a need to “step up
efforts to improve incentives for investment in energy generation and efficiency? and for the
transport sector, an increase in the share of renewable energy, including use of biofuels.


CONCLUSION

This Annex has presented an overview of the EU strategy and policies for urban transport, as well
as an overview of the financing framework for the 2014-2020 programming period. Both are
crucial for the cities of Białystok, Lublin, Rzeszów, and Olsztyn, as the EU framework sets
objectives and targets, while the European Structural and Investment Funds provides large-scale
funding for important urban transport projects. The new focus on functional areas addresses the
issue of how to make urban transport plans that go beyond city borders in order to encompass
surrounding areas is an important change in the new financial perspective. It will be critical to
ensure that future infrastructure projects in public transport in these four Polish cities translate
into an increase in passenger numbers and either increases or prevents a decline in the modal
share of public transport. In this regard, a recent report published by the European Court of
Auditors (ECA) is timely and instructive.

This report reveals that two-thirds of urban transport projects co-financed by EU structural funds
are underutilized.55 The court audited the performance of 26 public transport projects in 11 cities
in five member states, including projects in Kraków and Warsaw, during 2000-2006 and 2007-
2013. One of the findings was the underutilization of public transport when compared with
forecasted passenger projections. The report found that overestimation of users and the lack of
coordination between modes of transport, parking policy, and the absence of urban mobility plans
contributed to underutilization. In the European Commission’s response to the ECA, the

55
  European Court of Auditors (2014), Special Report: Effectiveness of EU-Supported Public Urban Transport
Projects. Available at: http://www.eca.europa.eu/Lists/ECADocuments/SR14_01/QJAB14001ENC.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                 84


commission argued that because public transport demand is a derived demand, and due to the
nature and strength of the international financial crisis that erupted in 2007, the demand for public
transport was likely to be less than originally projected. It also impacted on the financial
situations of cities and possibly their ability to maintain and subsidize public services to the
extent originally envisaged, with negative impacts on utilization. This means that the pollution
and congestion benefits, among others, were less than originally forecast. The underutilization
also increases the financial burden to the public transport authorities, which must compensate the
lower revenue from lower ticket sales.

One of the key recommendations of the report is the need to monitor the quality of services and
the level of user satisfaction once the project is operational. The commission, in its response to
the report, also proposes, where appropriate, to recommend that major projects have a minimum
set of indicators and performance-based remuneration for the operator of the public transport
service. Ensuring that infrastructure investments translate into increased ridership and user
satisfaction, while ensuring that cities can afford to finance the operation and maintenance of
enhanced and more expensive public transport services, is an important objective going forward.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                             85


                                               ANNEX 3
                                       PUBLIC TRANSPORT PRICES


                          Table 2: Selection of Public Transport Tickets in Lublin
                                                                                            Full Price           Reduced
                                                                                       PLN         Euro        PLN        Euro
 Single-journey ticket purchased from driver, vending machine or mobile
                                                                                        3.2         0.77        1.6       0.38
 phone
 Single-journey night ticket                                                            5.8         1.40        2.9       0.70
 Carnet of five single-journey tickets                                                  14          3.37         7        1.68
 30-minute ticket, between origin and destination stops                                 2.8         0.67        1.4       0.34
 90-minute ticket, between origin and destination stops                                 8.2         1.97        4.1       0.99
 24-hour ticket, valid for 24 hours from first validation, including night
                                                                                        13          3.13        6.5       1.56
 services
 30-day ticket for single route, valid from the first to last day of the month          62         14.92        31        7.46
 30-day personal ticket for two routes                                                  73         17.56       36.5       8.78
 30-day personal ticket for all routes                                                  84         20.21        42        10.10
 30-day bearer ticket for all routes                                                   130         31.27        130       31.27
Source: ZTM Lublin

                         Table 3: Selection of Public Transport Tickets in Białystok
                                                                                            Full Price           Reduced
                                                                                       PLN         Euro        PLN        Euro
 Single journey, city zone                                                              2.8         0.67        1.4       0.34
 Single-journey, city zone, electronic ticket                                           2.7         0.65       1.35       0.32
 Period pass, 60 minutes, city zone                                                     3.5         0.84       1.75       0.42
 Period pass, 24 hours, city zone                                                      10.0         2.41        5.0       1.20
 Single journey, city plus 3 suburban zones                                            10.0         2.41        5.0       1.20
 Monthly, one line                                                                     70.0        16.84       35.0       8.42
 Monthly, all lines                                                                    80.0        19.25       40.0       9.62
Source: BKM

                          Table 4: Selected Public Transport Ticket Prices in Rzeszów
                                                                                 Standard                  Concessional
                                                                             PLN       Euro             PLN           Euro
 Single-journey ticket                                                   2.8          0.67         1.4           0.34
 4 journey carnet of tickets                                             10.6         2.55         5.3           1.28
 60-minute travel                                                        4            0.96         2             0.48
 24-hour travel                                                          12           2.89         6             1.44
 Monthly travel on single route                                          70           16.84        35            8.42
 Monthly travel on network: Personalized ticket                               98       23.58             49           11.79
                                                                             250       60.14             125          30.01
 Monthly travel on network: Bearer ticket
 Six-month travel: Personalized ticket                                       199       47.87            N.A.          N.A.
Source: ZTM Rzeszów
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                   86


                             Table 5: Selected Public Transport Tickets in Olsztyn

                                                              Standard             Concessional
                                                                                                    Number
                       Ticket Type
                                                                                                    of Trips
                                                       PLN               Euro    PLN        Euro
   Journey within Olsztyn or any one of 3
                                                       2.90              0.70    1.45        0.35        1
   communes

   Journey within agglomeration, within 60 minutes     4.00              0.96    2.00        0.48        1

   Ticket purchased on vehicle, journey within city
                                                       8.40              2.02    4.20        1.01        3
   or any one commune
   Ticket purchased on vehicle, journey across
                                                       11.40             2.74    5.70        1.37        3
   boundaries

   Daily travel within Olsztyn                         10.00             2.41    5.00        1.20   Unlimited

   Travel for 5 consecutive days within Olsztyn        42.00             10.10   21.00       5.05   Unlimited

   Weekend travel within Olsztyn                       16.00             3.85    8.00        1.92   Unlimited

   Monthly travel, all lines within Olsztyn           110.00             26.46   55.00      13.23   Unlimited

   Monthly travel, all lines within agglomeration     140.00             33.68   70.00      16.84   Unlimited
Source: ZDZiT
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                   87


                                ANNEX 4
            PUBLIC TRANSPORT PERFORMANCE, MEASUREMENT, AND
                              EVALUATION

       Introduction

       Performance measurements are required in every kind of operation or service. In public
       transport, stakeholders have an interest in measuring a variety of indicators, for example
       operational performance or comfort level provided. In addition, it is often required for a
       number of reasons, such as external requirements to obtain funding, and internally to (a)
       identify major and potential problems in agencies for further analysis; (b) generate inputs for
       policy formulation and decision-making; (c) measure goal attainment for priority initiatives
       and/or investments; and (d) provide improvement incentives for managers and employees.
       Performance measurements may be viewed from four perspectives:56

          Customer. Studies have identified two areas of greatest concern to passengers: service
           reliability and the comfort and convenience of service. Firstly, public transport is an
           option for a trip only when it is spatially and temporally available, meaning that services
           are available at or near the locations and at times when a customer wants to travel, and
           can get to and from the public transport stops. In addition, customers need to know how
           to use the service and there should be sufficient capacity available at the desired time,
           namely, information and capacity availability. Secondly, customers may choose public
           transport if its comfort and conveniences are competitive with other available travel
           modes. Urban transport authorities have full or partial control over the following aspects
           to improve the comfort and convenience of public transport services: a) service delivery,
           b) travel time, c) safety and security, and d) maintenance.

          Community. Community residents might be concerned with costs and negative aspects of
           public transport service, such as the amount of taxes directly or indirectly paid for public
           transport service, empty buses, noise or diesel fumes from buses, the perception of waste
           and inefficiency of bus services, among others. While public transport services in general
           are regarded as bringing benefits to improve people’s mobility and accessibility, reducing
           air pollution, reducing traffic and parking congestion etc., urban transport authorities can
           experience greater success in obtaining community support if they document its success
           and identify and address some of the negative concerns associated with service
           performance.

          Urban transport authorities. Authorities / agencies will mostly be concerned with
           organizational performance and results of performance measures will give the agency
           some guidance as to actions needed. Authorities / agencies should also be aware of
           customer and community concerns and apply performance measures as a means to
           address those concerns and develop support from community and customers. Measures
           can be used to evaluate the overall organizational performance, departmental

56
     http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/tcrp/tcrp_report_88/Guidebook.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                88


         performance, individual operator or customer service agents’ performance, and the past
         performance in order to understand the trends and assess the impact of certain policy or
         other organization changes in order to identify the organizational needs, passenger needs
         and community needs. Measures can also be used to compare the service performance
         with similar public transport systems, and last, but not least, to predict future
         performance.

        Driver/vehicle traffic engineering measures. The interaction of cars with buses plays a
         vital role in determining how well bus services can be provided. Increasing traffic
         congestion can result in longer travel times, less reliable service, and potentially
         increased costs to public transport agencies. Similarly, actions to make public transport
         services faster and more reliable may also impact the car drivers and passengers.
         Therefore, it is necessary to quantify the impacts of cars and buses on each other and bear
         in mind that while a single-occupancy vehicle and a bus carrying 45 passengers may
         experience the same amount of delay due to traffic congestions, the passenger delay
         experienced by the bus is 45 times as great as the single-occupancy vehicle.

In general, the rule of thumb for performance measurement is to define objectives first, and then
select measures.


Primary Performance Measure Categories57


Public transport performance measures can be divided into a number of categories based on their
focus and likely audiences. Eight primary categories are listed here. Public transport agencies
may develop associated measures based on the goals for each of these categories.

        Availability: This refers to where and when service is provided and having sufficient
         capacity available for passengers to take trips at their desired time (customer point of
         view). It is vital for attracting potential passengers. Most aspects of this category are
         under control of public transport agencies, within the agencies’ constraints of finance,
         staff, and capital resources.

        Service delivery: This includes reliability, customer service, passenger loading, and
         agency goal accomplishment (customer point of view). Many measures within this
         category assess performance directly under the control of public transport agencies, such
         as evaluation of service reliability, passenger comfort, and overall customer satisfaction.
         Service delivery measures require quite large amounts of data and these data need to be
         collected on a regular basis. The following two tables illustrate the measurement from
         Transport for London58.




57
  http://www.tcrponline.org/PDFDocuments/TCRP_RRD_56.pdf
58
  http://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/documents/Board-20130925-Part-1-Item06-Q1-OFR-IP-
Reports.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                               89




                  Table 6: Transport for London – Scheduled Services Operated




  Source: TfL

Taking London buses as an example, scheduled services operated were better targeted mostly due
to a reduction in mileage losses caused by traffic delays, despite serious disruption caused by the
closure of Notting Hill Gate for repairs during this measured period.


                  Table 7: Transport for London: Scheduled Services Operated




Source: TfL


In this period, London Underground lost customer hours are 4.6 million, 21 percent lower than
target in Quarter 1, and 30 percent improvement from the same quarter last year. London
Underground excess journey time averaged 4.84 minutes, which is 30 seconds better than target.
Excess wait time on buses was on target despite the serious disruption caused by the closure of
Notting Hill Gate. On-time performance on the Docklands Light Railway (DLR) in Quarter 1 was
above target for all routes and resulted in record performance of 99.5 percent, which is 2.5
percent better than the target and exceeds the same quarter the previous year by 1.4 percent.
Performance during the London Marathon was a great success, with 340,000 passengers carried
and on-time departures reached 99.7 percent.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                               90


        Safety and security: This reflects the likelihood that one will be involved in an accident
         (safety) or become the victim of a crime (security) while using transit (customer point of
         view). In many instances, customer perceptions of safety and security are as important as
         the actual conditions and a customer satisfaction survey can assist in uncovering these
         perceptions. The following Tables 8 and 9 reflect two aspects of this measurement, from
         Transport for London and New York City Transit, respectively. In addition to using
         customer satisfaction surveys to understand customers’ perception of safety and security
         in public transport system, Transport for London also records and publishes the number
         of crimes reported in its public transport network. Annex 5 provides a sample of a
         customer satisfaction survey questionnaire.


                       Table 8: Transport of London: Safety and Security Measures
                                      from Crime and Injury Data




 Source: TfL.


The rate of crime per million passenger journeys on London buses, London Underground (LU),
and DLR networks in this measured period was better than target and an improvement on the
same period from the previous year. The British Transport Police (BTP), which has responsibility
for policing the LU and DLR networks, has put additional measures in place to deal with the
increase in theft experienced in 2012/13. These measures, which are now starting to take effect,
include Operation Magnum — the redeployment of officers to theft hot spots, a new crime-
reduction and awareness campaign, and targeted police enforcement activity against organized
thieves operating on the network.

On New York City Transit, customers’ perception of safety and security in using the city’s public
transport system was captured through a customer-satisfaction survey. As shown in Table 9, in
2012, 84 percent of the 1,829 customers surveyed were satisfied with the overall safety and
security on the New York City Transit buses, and among them 32 percent were very satisfied.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                   91



                 Table 9: New York City Transit Safety and Security Measures from Customer
                                           Satisfaction Survey59




Source: New York City Transit




          Maintenance and construction: Evaluating the effectiveness of an agency’s maintenance
           program, and the impacts of construction projects on customers (customer and agency
           point of view) will reflect the quality of an agency’s maintenance program, the quality of
           vehicles, and the impact on the overall quality of service as perceived by passengers.

          Economic: Measures in this category assess public transport service performance from a
           business perspective, such as how well agency’s resources are being utilized, how
           efficiently services are provided within constraints, how effectively the demand is met,
           and how well the agency is administrated (agency and community point of view).

          Community: Measures of transit’s impact on individuals and on the community as a
           whole (community, agency, and driver/vehicle point of view), such as mobility,
           accessibility, affordability, and pollution. Measures in this category can also be used to
           identify areas that may be productive to increase ridership and to evaluate the distribution
           of public transport services.

59
     http://web.mta.info/mta/news/books/docs/2012LocalBus_CSS.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                         92




         Capacity: The ability of transit facilities to move both vehicles and people (community
          and driver/vehicle point of view). If passenger demand approaches or exceeds the
          system’s capacity, it is likely to impact the quality of service that the system provid es, as
          dwell time tends to increase and reliability tends to suffer.

         Travel time: How long it takes to make a trip by transit (a) by itself, (b) in comparison
          with another mode, or (c) in comparison with an ideal value (driver/vehicle and customer
          point of view). Such measures are useful for demonstrating effects of traffic congestion
          on scheduled run times and when additional buses might be needed to maintain
          headways, and identifying the need for more direct services between two locations as
          when trips take too long, particularly compared with automobiles, they will become less
          attractive to potential riders.


 Box 11: London Underground Performance Reports

 Transport for London (TFL)’s key London Underground performance measures are: (a) total operated
 kilometers, (b) total number of lost customer hours (all causes), (c) average excess journey time, and (d)
 percentage of schedule operated. Also available from TFL are a list of Tube stations containing
 passenger entry and exit statistics. London Underground conducts surveys each year. Information
 collected includes counting the number of people using the service, where they travel to and from, and
 how long their journeys last. TFL also monitors performance and assets, how far trains have traveled,
 and how many trains, lifts, and escalators are in service. TFL is committed to providing passengers with
 details of how well the network is working and regularly publishes performance updates. This is
 updated every four weeks—defined as a period—and gives figures for a range of service and network-
 related matters. A snapshot of a recent published performance report (March 2014) is provided here to
 demonstrate such practice in TFL.

 A snapshot of Period 13 Performance Report
      Customer Satisfaction Survey – The score improved by one point to 83, exceeding the target of
         82. Improvements were reported in excess journey time, percentage of schedule kilometers
         operated, and lost customer hours (excluding industrial action).
      Passenger Journeys – 107 million passenger journeys were made in this period, which is 0.6
         million below target.
      Journey Time – Network excess journey time at 5.14 minutes, 0.53 minutes better than target.
      Train Service – Network percentage of scheduled kilometers operated improved by 5.7 percent
         to 98.2 percent. The peak and off-peak network services operated 98.1 percent, and 98.2
         percent, respectively, of the scheduled.
      Station Service – 270 stations were served during this period. 41 stations closures reported and
         the total duration of these closures was under 37 hours, presenting an availability of 99.9% of
         the scheduled opening hours.
      Service Disruption – Lost Customer Hours (LCH) at 1.48 million. Five incidents with the
         highest lost customer hours values on each underground line are Bakerloo Line, Central Line,
         Victoria Line, District Line, Met, Circle & H&C Line. The specific reasons that caused
         significant LCH are provided in the detailed report.

 Source: http://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/documents/lu-performance-report-period-13-2013-14.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                               93


Steps to Develop a Performance Measurement Program

This section provides an overview of how public transport authorities can develop performance-
measurement programs or improve existing ones. The information presented here is based upon a
comprehensive literature review, a survey of more than 20 public transport systems, and the
research team’s experience working with various public transport systems throughout the United
States.60 There are eight main steps involved in establishing or refining performance measurement
programs as illustrated in Figure 19: . It is important to keep in mind that none of these steps in
this process should be isolated from the others as implementing and updating a performance-
measurement program is an iterative process.

            Figure 19: General Approach for Developing a Performance-Measurement Program




       Source: TRB

There are great variations of resources and techniques for data collection. Though manual data
collection is very labor intensive and often has limited sample size because of the costs involved,

60
     http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/tcrp/tcrp_report_88/Guidebook.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                               94


as well as likely measurement errors when data are collected or transcribed, it continues to be the
way that many urban transport authorities collect ridership, passenger load, and reliability data.

In recently years, the ever-increasing use of Automated Data Collection System (ADCS), such as
Automatic Fare Collection (AFC), smart card, Automatic Vehicle Location (AVL), generates new
transport data that can be used by service providers for a range of applications. For example,
smart cards record every transaction the cardholder makes while traveling on the public
transportation system. AVL equipment can track the real-time location of AVL-equipped buses,
therefore, the data can be used for track dispatching, real-time bus arrival information, and
facilitate quicker response to emergencies. Meanwhile, it can also be used to collect and store
data about bus arrival and departure times at specified stops. Data obtained from AVL systems
can be used to analyze dwell time patterns along bus stops, travel time variability between days,
times of day and different operators, on-time performance, and headway adherence among others.
Although ADCS is usually designed to support specific agency functions, the resulting data can
be applied to areas far beyond their design purposes. Recent research has examined the potential
benefits of using ADCS for public transport planning, specifically using archived ADCS data to
infer origin—destination matrices to assess service performance for service planning. An example
of applying smart card and AVL data for bus network planning is provided in Annex 6.

Data Management: The data collected through a performance-measurement program needs to be
organized for analysis, reporting, and archiving. The sophistication of the system that is required
will depend on the amount of data collected, which in turn depends on the agency size and the
number and kinds of measures collected. For example, a simple spreadsheet may be adequate for
rural and small urban systems, while a more sophisticated database will likely be needed for a
medium-sized system. Larger systems may require an information management system to
integrate data collected and maintained by various agency departments.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                  95


                            ANNEX 5
     SAMPLE OF CUSTOMER SATISFACTION SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRES

Screening

1.      Do you or does a member of your family work for the transit (bus/metro) company? (If
yes, terminate with thank you; if no, continue).

2.      On average, how many times would you ride the transit in a week, including weekend?
Please count a one-way trip as one ride and a round trip as two rides. (If the number of rides is
more than 1, then go to customer satisfaction questionnaire; if 0, terminate with thank you).

Trip-Maker Basic Information

1.      Are you: 1) a resident of this area; 2) from other cities, but temporarily study or work
        here; 3) from other cities for business tourism

2.      For how many years have you been a regular bus/metro user: # of years.

3.      What age group are you in: 1) 15-19 yrs; 2) 20-24 yrs; 3) 25-34 yrs; 4) 35-44 yrs; 5) 45-
        54 yrs; 6) 55-64 yrs; 7) 65 or over

4.      Name of community you live in? Postal code?

5.      Gender: 1) female; 2) male

6.      Number of cars or motorcycles owned by family: 1) 0, 2) 1, 3) 2 or more

Transit Trip Basic Information

1.      Travel Purpose: 1) work; 2) school; 3) homebound; 4) business; 5) shopping; 6)
        entertainment; 7) visit friends; 8) hospital; 9) tourist; 10) other (please specify)

2.      Transfers: For a typical trip you take on transit, how many times do you have to transfer?:
        1) None; 2) One; 3) Two; 4) Three; 5) Four; 6) Five or more; 7) Unsure

Time of Travel during Day

3.      During what time period do you use transit most often: 1) no specific time period; 2) rush
        hour only; 3) rush hour and other time periods; 4) non-rush hour only

4.      When do you usually take transit during non-rush periods (weekday midday/evening, or
        weekend): 1) weekday midday; 2) weekday evening; 3) weekend; 4) unsure)

Payment

5.      How do you usually pay for your trips: 1) smart card; 2) monthly pass; 3) cash; 4) other
        (please specify)
 Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                96


 6.        Is it convenient to purchase tickets or passes or add value to smart cards? If not, why? 1)
           Too inconvenient (too few places to pay); 2) Vending machines often broken: 3) Pre-paid
           fares require too much money.

 Transit System

 1. Quality of Drivers
                                                            Strongly   Somewhat   Somewhat   Strongly   Refused        Not
                                                            agree      agree      disagree   disagree                  applicable
1) Drivers are knowledgeable of the services they           1          2          3          4          5              6
provide
2) Drivers usually wait for passengers when they see        1          2          3          4          5              6
them running for the bus
3) Drivers usually wait until passengers are seated         1          2          3          4          5              6
before leaving the stop
4) Drivers drive their vehicles safely                      1          2          3          4          5              6

 2. Vehicles
                                                            Strongly   Somewhat   Somewhat   Strongly   Refused        Not
                                                            agree      agree      disagree   disagree                  applicable
1) The bus is never too crowded                             1          2          3          4          5              6
2) The seats are comfortable                                1          2          3          4          5              6
3) The temperature is usually agreeable, even in            1          2          3          4          5              6
summer
4) The exterior is attractive, well-maintained and clean    1          2          3          4          5              6
5) The interior is attractive, well-maintained and clean    1          2          3          4          5              6
6) Buses are easy to board or alight                        1          2          3          4          5              6

 3. Stops/Stations
                                                            Strongly   Somewhat   Somewhat   Strongly   Refused        Not
                                                            agree      agree      disagree   disagree                  applicable
1) Stops/stations are clearly marked                        1          2          3          4          5              6
2) Stops/stations are clean and well-maintained             1          2          3          4          5              6
3) Stops/stations usually have an attractive, well-         1          2          3          4          5              6
maintained shelter with weather protection
4) There is usually a bus stop/station within an            1          2          3          4          5              6
acceptable walking distance of my origin and
destination
5) The bus stopped too much (too many stops)                1          2          3          4          5              6
6) I feel secure and safe (free from crime, accidents)      1          2          3          4          5              6
walking to/from bus stops
7) I feel safe crossing the street to get to bus stops      1          2          3          4          5              6
8) I feel safe waiting at stations before 6 p.m.            1          2          3          4          5              6
9) I feel safe waiting at stations after 6 p.m.             1          2          3          4          5              6
10) There is information available at stops that make it    1          2          3          4          5              6
easy to use bus system
11) It is convenient to transfer between bus routes/metro   1          2          3          4          5              6

 4. Service Quality
                                                            Strongly   Somewhat   Somewhat   Strongly   Refused        Not
                                                            agree      agree      disagree   disagree                  applicable
1) The bus/metro is usually on time                         1          2          3          4          5              6
2) The bus/metro is not overcrowded                         1          2          3          4          5              6
3) Waiting times are acceptable                             1          2          3          4          5              6
4) The route alignment (layout) is direct and efficient     1          2          3          4          5              6
5) The services are worth the fare                          1          2          3          4          5              6
6) The times during the week and weekend when               1          2          3          4          5              6
services are available are acceptable
7) Travel time between trip origins and destinations are    1          2          3          4          5              6
acceptable
 Source: World Bank
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                             97




                              ANNEX 6
     BUS PASSENGER ORIGIN-DESTINATION ESTIMATION AND RELATED
                             ANALYSES

Introduction

London has one of the largest bus networks in the world, with more than 6 million passengers
transported on its 700 routes daily. Every five to seven years, a Bus passenger Origin and
Destination Survey (BODS) is conducted by Transport for London (TfL) for each bus route. This
survey provides detailed information about passenger travel patterns, including the number of
people boarding and alighting at each stop, the purpose of travel, the boarding and alighting
locations for each journey, and how passengers get to the boarding stop and from the alighting
stop to their final destination.

TfL launched the Oyster smart-card system in London in December 2003 as a new ticketing
medium. It is now accepted on the Underground, buses, the Docklands Light Railway (DLR),
Tramlink, and National Rail stations in London (excluding regional buses accessing London).61
Oyster smart cards are very popular among travelers, and till today its market penetration has
reached more than 85 percent. Oyster data are readily available, provide large sample sizes, and
potentially offer a full network perspective rather than strictly a mode-level view. In addition,
using Oyster smart-card data enables one to link trip segments and to determine origin and
destination flows across the network. This process can be repeated on a daily basis to assess
variability in trips and get more accurate estimates of ridership for specific days of the week and
times of the year. It provides an easier and more reliable way to get more detailed passenger
behavior information than manual survey data, which potentially can help transit agencies
improve efficiency and reduce cost.

iBus is a £117m Automatic Vehicle Location (AVL) and radio system that aims to help London
Bus Services Limited run more reliable and consistent bus service.62 The first installations took
place in March 2007, with system-wide deployment completed in April 2009. iBus data contain
information about the route and trip number as well as the direction for each bus trip, and most
important, they provide a unique bus stop identifier and record the departure time from each stop.

Methodology

The basic premise is that it should be possible to determine the boarding stop for every passenger
who uses an Oyster card to board an iBus-equipped bus. For a given route and trip, the fare
collection timestamp (including the date) from the Oyster card is used to search through the iBus
dataset to determine the boarding stop and vehicle ID. The boarding location of the next trip
taken by the passenger is then used to infer the alighting stop, where possible. The first step in

61
   The Oyster card is not accepted on regional bus services accessing London despite TFL’s wish to do so and the
universal popularity of the card.
62
   Hardy, N. (2009), iBus benefits realization workstream: Method & progress to date. 16th ITS World Congress and
Exhibition, Stockholm, Sweden.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                98


this process is to infer the origins for bus passengers by matching the smart-card boarding
transaction times with the AVL data. It then implements the trip-chaining methodology to infer
each bus passenger’s alighting location.

The destination inferences are based on the trip-chaining method and use the same assumptions
proposed by Zhao et al. (2007), Cui (2006), Trepanier et al. (2007), and Barry et al. (2008).63 The
process starts by checking whether the bus fare transaction under examination is the only Oyster
transaction for that card on that day. If it is, then the trip-chaining method cannot be applied and
thus the trip destination cannot be inferred. Otherwise, check whether this bus fare transaction is
the last of the day for this card. If it is not, the trip-chaining method is applied by 1) determining
whether the next fare transaction for this card is on bus or rail; 2) if the next transaction is also on
bus, the algorithm moves onto the “next trip? rule with a bus lookup table sub-procedure; 3) if the
next transaction is on rail, the algorithm moves onto the “next trip? rule with a rail lookup table
sub-procedure. If the fare transaction currently under examination is the last of the day for that
card, then the first transaction of the day is treated as the transaction immediately following this
last trip segment so that the “next trip? rule can be applied here to infer the destination of this last
trip segment.

The lookup table mentioned here defines the stops on the bus route under examination that are
closest to the boarding stop of the next transaction. While the two sub-procedures for bus and rail
are similar, the London rail and bus networks are in two different GIS files, and the lookup tables
are generated separately. The “next trip? rule is actually the same as assumption 2) listed in the
literature review, meaning that travelers start their next trip segment at another station in close
proximity (within walking distance, for example at most 1 km) to the destination of their initial
trip segment.

Application to Bus Network Planning

         Daily Load/Flow Profile Variation: Load/flow profiles are standard graphics showing
          passenger activity (boardings, alightings) and passenger load (or flow past a stop or
          segment in the case of multiple trips) along a route by direction. They allow planners to
          identify locations and values of the peak load, as well as underutilized route segments.
          Route W4 in London during the a.m. peak (7:00 to 9:30 a.m.) is chosen here as an
          example of how the daily load/flow profile varies over five successive weekdays. Figure
          20 shows that there are large variations in the load/flow profile and specifically in the
          peak loads, even within the same week.




63
   Barry, J., R. Freimer, and H. Slavin (2008), Using Entry-Only Automatic Fare Collection Data to Estimate Linked
Transit Trips in New York City. Transportation Research Board 2008 Annual Meeting CD-ROM, Washington, D.C.;
Cui, A. (2006), Bus Passenger Origin-Destination Matrix Estimation Using Automated Data Collection Systems. MS
Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge; Trepanier, M., N. Tranchant, and R. Chapleau (2007),
Individual Trip Destination Estimation in a Transit Smart Card Automated Fare Collection System . Journal of
Intelligent Transportation Systems: Technology, Planning and Operations 11(1): 1-14; and Zhao, J., A. Rahbee, and N.
H. M. Wilson (2007), Estimating a Rail Passenger Trip Origin-Destination Matrix Using Automatic Data Collection
Systems, Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering 22(5): 376-387.
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                                      99


                                       Figure 20: Daily Load/Flow Variation along Route W4 During A.M. Peak


                                     500
         AM Peak Period Loads/Flow   450
                                     400
                                     350                                                            BODS
                                     300
                                                                                                    Oyster-Thursday-
                                     250                                                            Surveyday
                                     200                                                            Oyster-Monday
                                     150                                                            Oyster-Tuesday
                                     100
                                      50
                                       0
                                           0   2000    4000      6000      8000     10000   12000
                                                      Distance along route (meters)
                                                      Northbound

     Source: Wei Wang et al 64




          Interchange/Transfer Time Analysis: Interchanges affect the attractiveness of public
           transport. Making interchanges less burdensome is a critical consideration in public
           transport planning. Improving the level of service at interchange locations would
           enhance the overall quality of public transport services. Both practitioners and
           researchers tend to pay most attention to the initial waiting experience and to in-vehicle
           travel for their obvious effects on ridership, but less work has been done on interchanges
           between segments of a linked journey (Guo and Wilson, 2010). However, reducing the
           out-of-vehicle times can help make public transit more attractive resulting in ridership
           increases. In this research, bus passenger alighting locations are inferred from the ADCS
           archived data. Also, since iBus AVL data provide information about the observed
           departure time for each bus trip at each stop, by matching the inferred alighting locations
           with the iBus AVL data, the alighting time for each individual passenger trip can be
           estimated. Hence, the interchange time can be calculated more accurately as the
           difference between the subsequent trip’s boarding time and the previous trip’s alighting
           time.

           In Figure 21: the size of each dot indicates the number of interchange passengers and the
           color indicates the scheduled headway of the connecting route. By comparing the median
           interchange time with the headway of the connecting routes (the legend on the right side
           provides the bus route number of the connecting routes), the passenger experience
           provided by those bus-to-bus connections can be evaluated further. For example, the dots
           under the red diagonal line suggest that these bus routes provide good (or at least better

64
   Wei Wang, John P. Attanucci, Nigel H.M. Wilson. (2011), Bus Passenger Origin-Destination Estimation and
Related Analyses Using Automated Data Collection Systems. Journal of Public Transportation, Volume 14, No. 4,
2011. Available at: http://www.nctr.usf.edu/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/JPT14.4.pdf
Urban Mobility in Eastern Poland: The Way Forward                                                       100


          than random) connecting services, while the dots above the red diagonal line suggest that
          those bus routes (Routes P13 and 356) provide poorer connecting services. Thus targeted
          improvements could be made to coordinate the timetable.

       Figure 21: Relationship between Connecting Routes’ Headway and Interchange Time




Source: Wang, Attanucci and Wilson, Journal of Public Transport, Volume 14, No. 4, 2011. Available at
http://www.nctr.usf.edu/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/JPT14.4.pdf
