                     SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM
                          Enhancing Teacher Education Program




                 Fiduciary Systems Assessment
                             (FSA)


                                             June 3, 2016




                                            PREPARED BY
                                         THE WORLD BANK




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)           Page 1
Contents
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................... 4
A. Program Description ................................................................................................................ 8
B. Institutional Framework and Fiduciary Arrangements under the Program ................... 10
      Planning and Budgeting ......................................................................................................... 11
      Procurement ........................................................................................................................... 14
      Fund Flow .............................................................................................................................. 23
      Internal Control ...................................................................................................................... 24
      Accounting and Financial Reporting ..................................................................................... 25
      Auditing ................................................................................................................................. 26
      Internal Audit and Related Activities .................................................................................... 26
      External Audit........................................................................................................................ 27
C. Governance and Accountability............................................................................................ 28
      Legal Framework ................................................................................................................... 28
      Complaints Handling System ................................................................................................ 29
      Sanction and Debarment Process ........................................................................................... 31
D. The Program Expenditure Framework ............................................................................... 31
E. Summary of Fiduciary Risks................................................................................................. 33
F. Monitoring Fiduciary Performance over Program Period ................................................ 35
G. Fiduciary Elements of the Implementation Support Plan .................................................. 36




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                                                                Page 2
List of Acronyms and Abbreviations Used
AC                   Anticorruption
BER                  Bid Evaluation Report
CPD                  Continuous Professional Development
DC                   Direct Contracting
DLI                  Disbursement-linked Indicator
DOET                 Department of Education and Training
DPI                  Department of Planning and Investment
ETEP                 Enhancing Teacher Education Program
FSA                  Fiduciary Systems Assessment
GI                   Government Inspectorate
IA                   Internal Audit
ICT                  Information and Communication Technology
IER                  Internal Expenditure Regulation
IFB                  Invitation for Bid
INT                  Integrity Vice Presidency
IO                   Investment Owner
IVA                  Independent Verification Agency
MBD                  Model Bidding Document
MOET                 Ministry of Education and Training
MOF                  Ministry of Finance
MPI                  Ministry of Planning and Investment
NA                   National Assembly
NTEP                 National Teacher Education Program
OCB                  Open Competitive Bidding
OPRC                 Operational Procurement Review Committee
PA                   Performance Agreement
PAP                  Program Action Plan
PforR                Program-for-Results
PMB                  Program Management Board
POM                  Program Operations Manual
PP                   Procurement Plan
SAV                  State Audit of Vietnam
SSS                  Single Source Selection
ST                   State Treasury
TABMIS               Treasury and Budget Management Information System
LTTU                 Teacher Training University
VPPN                 Vietnam Public Procurement Newspaper




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                    Page 3
Executive Summary
1. A Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA) has been carried out to evaluate the arrangements
relevant to the Enhancing Teacher Education Program (ETEP) to determine whether it provides
reasonable assurances that the financing proceeds will be used for intended purposes, with due
attention to the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and
accountability. This assessment follows the principles governing fiduciary assessment for
Program-for-Results Financing as set out in OPCS5.04-POL.01.

2. The FSA has been prepared based on interviews and analysis of procurement, financial, and
governance reports and other relevant documents at the national level—the Ministry of
Education and Training (MOET), the MOET Inspectorate, the MOET Department of Finance
and Planning, and the eight participating Lead Teacher Training Universities (LTTUs). Based on
the assessment and agreement on actions required to strengthen the systems, which are reflected
in the Program Action Plan (PAP), the overall fiduciary framework for the program is considered
adequate to support program management and to reach the desired results.

Procurement

3. The procurement under the program is carried out in accordance with the national
procurement laws and regulations. A review of the national procurement legal framework found
that it (a) requires procurement planning to be prepared and approved in a timely manner with
proper linkage to budget availability; (b) mandates open competitive bidding (OCB) as the
default procurement method and provides detailed procedures for OCB; (c) provides a
reasonably clear allocation of responsibilities and accountabilities to the procuring entities,
employers, and program owners; and (d) provides sanctions against unacceptable practices
including fraud and corruption.

4. Procurement complaints are handled in accordance with the procedures stated in the 2013
Procurement Law and Decree No. 63/2014/ND-CP. These procedures require the complaints to
be signed and stamped by a legitimate representative of the complaining bidder. Anonymous
complaints are not normally considered which may discourage people to provide information
concerning fraud and corruption in the program. For complaints related to contract awards, the
complainant has to deposit a fee which would be cashed (that is, not returned) if the complaint is
not substantiated. Complaints are handled by procuring entities or the Investment Owners
(MOET and LTTUs) and appeals reviewed by a competent agency, which is normally the MOET
under this program. This procedure seems to be rather rigid and discourages complaints.

5. Procurement under the proposed program will mainly include civil works of small- and
medium-size lecture halls (approximately US$200,000–US$1.5 million); small upgrading
construction; goods (including furniture, information and communication technology [ICT]
equipment, and so on) packages of small- and medium-size laboratories, libraries, or classrooms;
and consulting services including detailed designs, construction supervision, and auditing
services for subprograms under the program. There are no large contracts valued at or above the
Operational Procurement Review Committee (OPRC) thresholds (US$75 million for works,
US$50 million for goods, US$40 million for non-consulting services, and US$20 million for



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                   Page 4
consultant services) under the program. Therefore, obviously the program will not finance any
high-value contract equal to or above the OPRC thresholds and/or estimated monetary value
equal to or more than 25 percent of the estimated total program expenditures.

6. The program will be subject to Vietnam’s national debarment procedures. Exclusion from
participation in future tenders is governed by the Law on Procurement that provides a defined set
of prohibited acts which, if committed, may lead to debarment. For procurement, initial
sanctioning decisions are made by the investment owners (IOs). It is recommended that the
MOET and LTTUs refer to the debarment lists issued by the Ministry of Planning and
Investment (MPI) and the Department of Planning and Investment (DPI) in determining bidder
eligibility. Under this Program, it is recommended that the World Bank debarment list will also
be applicable.

7. The assessment found the following specific procurement-related issues that could, directly
or indirectly, compromise the efficient achievement of the program objectives: (a) excessive use
of direct contracting (DC) results in lack of transparency and competition; (b) incorrectly
rejecting bid(s), such as a bid rejected due to the offered price being higher than the cost
estimate, or due to minor deviations and non-compliances; (c) lack of experienced procurement
personnel within the MOET and LTTUs to cope with large procurement workload under the
program (construction of lecture halls and consulting services) and; (d) unavailability of budget
resulting in delays in the procurement process or contract implementation. In the context of the
program, these issues will be addressed by a series of actions being included in the PAP and
through the Operations Manual (OM). The overall procurement risk after mitigation measures is
assessed as Moderate.

Financial Management

8. The principal law governing budget management is the revised State Budget Law approved
by the National Assembly (NA) in 2015 which will come into force for the 2017 budget year.
This revised law strengthens the legal platform for budget management. It clarifies the powers
and responsibilities of stakeholders participating in the budget process. The budget process takes
place between July and around December when budget allocation is entered into the Treasury
and Budget Management Information System (TABMIS)1 by the MOET Department of Planning
and Finance.

9. The identified risk relating to budgeting and planning process is that the current budget
allocation process does not ensure that sufficient funds are allocated for the program activities
and the performing LTTUs. To mitigate this risk, for the program, a performance-based
budgeting process will be introduced in which the MOET will sign a Performance Agreement
(PA) with each participating LTTU. The budget allocation to the LTTUs will be based on the
actual performance of the LTTUs which is measured by the indicators, equivalent to the
disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs), set out in the PA. A program deposit account will be
created in the ST at the LTTU level to manage proper budget allocation, execution, and reporting
of the LTTUs.


1
    TABMIS is a computerized system used by State Treasury (ST) to record public expenditures.



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                            Page 5
10. With regard to accounting and financial reporting, the capacity of the ST and each
implementing agency (the LTTUs and the MOET concerned departments) is assessed as
adequate, given TABMIS (at the ST) and the accounting systems (at the LTTU) are fully
operational and the accounting staff are capable of handling accounting and reporting tasks. For
the program, it is proposed that each LTTU will prepare financial reports which will be sent to
the MOET for consolidation. The frequency, timing, and template of the financial reports will
follow the guidance from the MOET and be indicated in the PAs signed between the MOET and
the LTTUs. An independent verification agency (IVA) will also be selected to provide
independent confirmation of the results reported by the participating LTTUs.

11. Internal controls exist in the MOET and LTTUs with the formally documented Internal
Expenditure Regulation (IER). While the framework of internal controls for expenditure and
specific internal controls at the LTTUs are adequate, the comprehensiveness and quality of
internal controls procedures documented in the IER varies from university to university. Under
the program, the IER of the LTTUs will be reviewed and a standard IER with suggested content
will be developed for the use of the LTTUs and for the MOET’s reference when reviewing the
endorsement of those IERs.

12. The absence of an internal audit (IA) function and inefficiency of the existing inspection
function which may not provide adequate assurance for internal controls of the program is a
Substantial financial management risk. Under the program, technical assistance will be provided
to build capacity of an IA function in all the LTTUs involved within two years of the Credit
effectiveness. The financial audit will be conducted in accordance with the audit terms of
reference provided in the Operations Manual (OM) by an independent auditing firm acceptable
to the Bank. A third-party independent results verification agency as well as procedures will be
put in place to track DLIs and Program outputs and outcomes.

13. Government systems for financial management in the program need to be strengthened,
particularly to enable the implementing agencies to record, control, and manage all program
resources and produce timely, understandable, relevant, and reliable financial information. These
measures include (a) specific guidance on the performance-based budget allocation system and
fund flow arrangements for the program, issued by the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and the
MOET and (b) the establishment and operation of an effective IA function for the LTTUs. The
overall financial management risk after mitigation measures is assessed as Substantial.

Governance

14. The Anticorruption (AC) Law and the Law on Higher Education stipulate the obligation of
education institutions to disclose information to the public on the operations of the institutions.
The program implementing agencies have done a good job of disclosing information on their
general operations such as commitment to education quality, results, fees, and other related
charges through their website. Financial information of the institutions, including investments for
education and financial statements, however, were not yet adequately disclosed to the public.

15. The Laws on Complaints and on Denunciation as well as the Law on Anticorruption
stipulate that a complaints handling system will receive, record, and provide necessary
investigative actions where it is deemed legitimate. The Program implementing agencies have



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                    Page 6
already issued detailed procedures and established internal People Inspection Committees for
handling grievances. Under the program, complaints of all kinds, which could include allegations
of fraud or corruption, should mainly be submitted in writing to the key implementing agencies,
which are the MOET and the LTTUs. Where crimes are alleged, allegations will be passed to the
police and prosecutors for handling. Although Government agencies are not required to handle
anonymous complaints, all the key implementing agencies maintain the practice of accepting,
recording, and giving these complaints some consideration when they contain credible evidence
of fraud and corruption.

16. The Government, through the MOET, the MOET Inspectorate, and other implementing
agencies, will improve reporting systems and establish a database to strengthen the Framework
for Complaints Handling and combat fraud and corruption under the program. The Government
has confirmed its commitment to the implementation of the Guidelines on Preventing and
Combating Fraud and Corruption in Program-for-Results Financing and will require the
application of Bank suspension and debarment lists that will be made readily available to
participating cities. These actions will be reviewed during program supervision. In addition, the
Government will oblige all program participants to cooperate with Bank investigations.

17. No complaints have been recorded by the Bank complaint database in the education sector
during 2014–2015. Of the complaints registered concerning the education sector, which is about
10 percent of the total complaints of the portfolio during the ten-year period from 2005 to 2015,
two complaints were substantiated and forwarded to the Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) for
further action in 2006 and 2011. No evidence of fraud and corruption has been disclosed by the
INT on the two cases. Most of the complaints registered in the sector so far concern goods
contracts; hence, the need for more due diligence actions with regard to contract management of
the program implementing agencies.

18. The program implementing agencies have committed to actions, which are stipulated in the
PAP to help enhance transparency and minimize risks of fraud and corruption. These actions
include that (a) the program implementing agencies disclose financial information properly and
(b) maintain databases on public consultation, corruption, fiduciary, procurement; program
implementation complaints and responses to those complaints; and beneficiary feedback to
implementing agencies and responses to such feedback. The information would be aggregated at
the national level by the MOET Inspectorate and will be reported to the Bank periodically.

Key Performance Indicators

19. Key indicators of fiduciary performance have been identified and compiled to form a
reference framework to be monitored over the life of the program. These specific indicators, for
both financial management and procurement, will be measured periodically and compared to an
initial baseline to assess the extent of improvement in Program fiduciary performance.

20. In assessing the performance of the fiduciary systems under which the program operates, the
Bank identified a number of weaknesses which, once addressed either before effectiveness or
during implementation of the program, will result in program fiduciary systems that provide
reasonable assurance that the program expenditures will be used appropriately to achieve their
intended purpose. The FSA identifies risks and proposed mitigation measures. Before the



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                  Page 7
mitigation measures are taken, Program fiduciary risk is assessed Substantial. During
preparation, the Bank assessed all available options—dated covenants, capacity building, DLIs,
and program design revisions—to help mitigate these risks. The results of the assessment and
recommendations are reflected in the Program action plan.

A.      Program Description
Enhancing Teacher Education Program

21. The proposed ETEP PforR will support the Government of Vietnam in developing the
implementation framework for its National Teacher Education Program (NTEP). It will
specifically support plans to improve teacher continuous professional development (CPD)
system, which is a key part of the NTEP. It will do this by piloting a performance-based grant
system that will provide the participating LTTUs with a combination of much needed resources
along with a clarification of implementation responsibilities, a results-based orientation,
improved planning, and a strengthening of oversight and accountability through audits and
verification activities. The program development objective is to develop teacher education
institutions to enhance teacher effectiveness through improved professional development.

National Teacher Education Program
22. The National Teacher Education Program (NTEP) establishes a new framework for the
provision of training, retraining and continuous professional development to school teachers and
principals so that they may build and maintain the professional profile necessary to meet the
requirements of the FCER. The Program will be implemented from 2016 to 2021. The NTEP
aims to achieve the following objectives by that date:

    For general education and continuing education teachers and management staff:

        -   100 percent of teachers and principals meet qualification requirements pursuant to
            Amended Law on Education in 2009 and Higher Education Law 2012,
        -   100 percent of teachers and principals are trained and capable of implementing the
            new curriculum and using the new textbooks;
        -   Over 70percent teachers and principals achieve higher levels of the professional
            standards;
        -   Over 80 percent principals are trained and awarded certificates in education
            management;
    For teacher training institutions:

        -   100 percent teacher training institutions update their training programs and curricula,
            build the capacity of their human resources, improve physical conditions, and
            restructure to provide high quality training and CPD services;
        -   100 percent teacher training institutions work closely together and with other actors in
            teacher education, and contribute to shared resources to meet the need for teacher
            education of all provinces.

    For education management at all levels:



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                     Page 8
        -   100 percent education management authorities at all levels have enhanced planning
            and management capacity to implement, monitor and evaluate the implementation of
            teacher education policies; and
        -   100 percent policy and legal documents in teacher training are amended and updated
            to response to the new context of general education.
   For schools:

        -   100 percent schools have enhanced capacity to effectively implement and manage
            CPD at the school level.

23. NTEP is structured around six “solutions areas?. Each presents a set of strategies grouped by
functional category or by type of teacher education.

     Strengthen teacher education management and planning by i) updating and further
    developing the regulatory framework and related policies in support of teacher education; ii)
    enhancing the capacity of national and local teacher education departments; and iii)
    establishing a ICT based teacher education information management system;
     Renovate pre-service teacher education by (i) helping teacher training institutions prepare
    new curricula, training content, delivery mechanisms, support systems for student teachers;
    (ii) establishing outcome standards for all training programs, (iii) developing assessment tool
    kits for student-teachers, and (iv) implementing relevant research projects;
     Establish and deliver Continuous Professional Development programs for teachers and
    school managers by: (i) developing new types of e-learning programs for the delivery of
    CPD, (ii) training national general education experts who can support efforts to improve
    CPD, (iii) establishing a cadre of Core Teachers and Principal Advisors at local levels, (iv)
    providing support programs for Core Teachers and Principal Advisors once deployed to
    schools; (v) developing materials and support tools for Core Teachers and Principal Advisors
    to implement CPD at the school level; and (vi) developing more systematic mechanisms to
    assess the quality and impact of CPD programs;
     Build capacity of key lecturers and managerial staff of teacher training institutions by: (i)
    providing relevant training programs and courses, (ii) holding national and international
    conferences and/or workshops; (iii) engaging in scholar and academic exchanges, and (iv)
    reviewing and renovating regulations on recruitment, work position and other human
    resource related procedures;
     Enhance physical environment and facilities/equipment of teacher training institutions:
    (i) upgrading and conducting minor rehabilitation of classrooms, IT centers, teaching practice
    centers, laboratories, and IT facilities for distance and e-learning at the eight LTTUs, (ii)
    supporting the development of e-libraries for the eight LTTUs and (ii) enhancing the physical
    conditions of other teacher training institutions;
     Promote socialization and international cooperation in teacher education by means of
    workshops, conferences, exchanges and fora.




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                    Page 9
24. Of the above solution areas, ETEP will focus primarily on efforts to improve Continuous
Professional Development provided school-based to teachers and principals. In essence, the
enhanced CPD system will provide more training and support that is of high quality, relevant,
and timely -- directly to teachers and principals at the school level. Internationally, this is
considered best practice for teacher training and support.2

25. The National Teacher Education Program aims to reinforce the provision of CPD through
two main vehicles: (i) Core Teachers and Principal Advisors, who will be assigned to schools
and school clusters to provide face-to-face training and support and (ii) an online platform that
can provide needs-based, interactive training and support directly to teachers and principals. A
rigorous training and support needs assessment system, based on professional standards and
context-specific needs defined by teachers and principals, will inform the development of
tailored training programs and applications. To ensure the dynamism and quality of the enhanced
CPD system, eight Lead Teacher Training Universities (LTTUs) in respective catchment areas
(corresponding approximately to regions) will train and provide support to Core Teachers and
Principal Advisors; develop the online services and applications; and help develop the needs
assessment systems. These LTTUs will provide technical leadership and guidance for this
school-based CPD system.

B.   Institutional Framework and Fiduciary Arrangements under the
Program
26. The governance arrangements for the Program are described and evaluated in both the
Program detailed description. Program iimplementation involves the following stakeholders: the
MOET—the line Ministry, the MOF, eight LTTUs, and an agency, which will be responsible for
verification of results. Although the Departments of Education and Training (DOETs) are not
directly involved in the implementation of the ETEP, they play an important role in the NTEP in
monitoring and implementing relevant policy actions at the provincial and district levels. Of
these institutions, the MOET and the eight LTTUs will be the main implementing agencies to
produce results. The LTTUs are principally responsible for most of the technical aspects,
procurement, financial management, and disbursements. Even though the LTTUs are the main
implementing agencies for the program, plans, budgets, and investment plans of the LTTUs are
subject to approval of the MOET, which assigns technical departments, including the
Department of Teachers and Education Managers to conduct appropriate reviews and
recommend decisions. The MOET will also be in charge of the technical aspects, procurement,
financial management, and disbursements in relation to its scope of work.

27. The assignment of roles of participating agencies has important implications for fiduciary
arrangements under the Program, particularly in relation to cross-cutting issues of financial
management, procurement, and governance. Major interfaces between levels of implementing
agencies occur in procurement, where the national Government establishes rules and procedures;
provinces set cost norms; and the MOET approved procurement plans (PPs) the LTTU and
MOET management units and oversees compliance with regulations and procedures. A similar

2
 Francesca Caena, 2011. Quality in Teachers’ Continuing Professional Developm ent. Education and Training 2020:
Thematic Working Group ‘Professional Development of Teachers’, European Commission, Directorate -General for
Education and culture.



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                              Page 10
division of powers is apparent in financial management, where the MOET establishes budget
norms and guidelines in accordance with the MOF regulations and allocates budget to the
LTTUs. Disbursements to the LTTUs are made via the ST systems who play the verification
function on payment requests while the Department of Finance and Planning (of the MOET)
oversees the compliance with financial management regulations. An additional and often
overlapping system of Government inspections works alongside a multi-tiered complaints
handling system that also involves multiple levels of Government, as described in more detail
below.

28. The interface between concerned agencies occurs through and within the annual (and
repeated) public expenditure management cycle. This cycle is summarized diagrammatically in
Figure 1.

                        Figure 1. Public Expenditure Management Cycle

                                              Fund Transfer

                           Procurement                        Execution




                     Budgeting                                       Reporting




                            Consultative
                                                              Oversight
                             Planning
                                                Grievance
                                                 Redress

Planning and Budgeting

Current Arrangements

29. The principal law governing budget management is the revised State Budget Law approved
by the NA in 2015, which will come into force in the 2017 budget year. This revised law
strengthens the legal platform for budget management. It clarifies the powers and responsibilities
of stakeholders participating in the budget process. The Public Investment Law 2014 (effective
from 2015) provided the principles of public investment management. The two important
provisions from the planning and budgeting perspectives are that (a) the Medium-term Public
Investment Plan must be prepared upon which budget allocation will be made for the medium



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                  Page 11
term and every year and (b) all agencies are not allowed to incur budget arrears of capital
expenditure (that is, the delivered works and services shall not exceed the allocated budget).

30. The eight LTTUs are divided into two groups: the stand-alone LTTUs (Hanoi, Hanoi 2,
Vinh, Ho Chi Minh City, and the National Institute of Education Management) who report
directly to the MOET and the member LTTUs who are the members of a parent university (Hue,
Danang, and Thai Nguyen). Vinh is exceptional as the teaching departments do not constitute a
university as the others. The key difference in the planning and budgeting process of these two
groups is the presence of an additional layer of the parent university, which means additional
steps of authorization are required. In the stand-alone LTTU, the annual proposal of budget will
be submitted to the MOET in July. The MOET will consolidate the budget of these LTTUs (in
August) and MOET PMU and submit it to the Government (in September), who then sends the
national budget to the NA for approval (in October). The Government will then allocate the
approved budget to the ministries and provinces (in November) and the MOET will have to
complete allocating budget to the LTTUs in December. The process is completed when budget
allocation is entered into the TABMIS. The allocation for the LTTUs will be entered into the
TABMIS by the Department of Finance and Planning of the MOET (in December/January). For
the member LTTU process, two additional steps are required, where (a) the budget proposal of
the member university must be submitted to the parent university for consolidation and
submission to the MOET and (b) the allocated budget to the parent university (by the MOET)
will be reallocated to the member university by the parent university. TABMIS information of
the member university will also be entered by the MOET. The process of Vinh University is
similar to the stand-alone ones, except that no further formal allocation is made to teacher
training departments. The allocation of teacher training departments is merely an internal matter
of the Vinh TTU.

31. Treatment of the off-budget revenue. All the LTTUs generate revenue from tuition fees
and certain activities provided to the public such as training, research, consulting services, and so
on (self-generated revenue). While the tuition fees are the revenue of the Government budget, the
revenue from services provided to public is not accounted for as the revenue of the state budget
(so it is called off-budget revenue). The self-generated revenue accounts for about a third to a
half of the total revenue of a LTTU. The following aspects are to be noted in the treatment of the
off-budget revenue:

            a. The LTTU has to include the self-generating revenue into the budget proposal
               submitted to the MOET. The contents of the budget proposal therefore consist of
               (i) total expenditure, (ii) total self-generated revenue, and (iii) Government budget
               to cover the gaps between total expenditure and total self-generated revenue.

            b. According to the majority of the LTTUs, the Government budget is not sufficient
               to cover the recurrent expenditure, so all the major capital expenditure is financed
               by the self-generated revenue.

            c. The Government budget granted/allocated to the LTTUs is determined on an
               incremental basis (that is, taking or giving certain increase/decrease from the
               budget of the previous year—recently the rate is 10 percent). Budget for the base
               year is determined based on the number of students and norm per student.



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                     Page 12
            d. The off-budget revenue depends considerably on the actual level of activities
               performed which sometimes is quite different from the forecast and which in turn
               has impact on the total expenditure incurred by the LTTUs.

            e. While the Government budget granted/allocated to the LTTUs must be fully used
               during the fiscal year, the self-generated revenue financed activities can be carried
               forward.

Performance and Identified Risks

32. Overall, the process follows the concept of incremental budgeting, which also takes into
account to a certain extent, the medium-term demand for development. The budget is developed
generally based on the norms per student/ teacher. The allocated budget depends on the
availability of the central budget (the Government granted budget). Nevertheless, the LTTUs will
have more autonomy if the share of their self-generated revenue increases in the total annual
budget. The following issues are identified:

            a. Less-effective budget allocation mechanism. The allocation mechanism, which
               follows an incremental approach based on the norms per student/teacher, does not
               adequately take into account (i) the priorities for development and (ii) the actual
               performance of the universities.

            b. Insufficient allocation for capital expenditure. Almost all capital expenditure is
               financed by the self-generated revenue. For the last the years, the Government
               budget granted for capital expenditure has been very limited.

            c. Delayed entering information into the TABMIS. Although the budget allocation
               information is available by the end of the previous fiscal year, the allocation could
               only be entered into the TABMIS in February of the spending year until when the
               payments are not allowed to be made (except for salary payments, which is
               considered as budget advance).

            d. Capability to reliably forecast the off-budget revenue. The capability of off-
               budget revenue forecast varies from university to university, which critically
               affects the level of payments that could be made for development.

33. Several risks to the Program have been identified. They include the following:

            a. There may be lack of clarity on roles and responsibilities of the parent
               universities toward budget allocation for the Program activities. Because the
               budget proposal of the member LTTU is consolidated in the budget of the parent
               university and the budget allocation is also determined by the parent university,
               the lack of clarified roles and responsibilities may cause (i) omission or wrong
               budget proposal and allocation and (ii) delayed allocation for the Program
               activities.

            b. The less-effective budget allocation does not ensure that sufficient funds are
               allocated for the Program priorities and for the performing universities. As


ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                    Page 13
                discussed above, the budget allocation based on the norms of student/teacher does
                not encourage the performance of the universities or the implementation of the
                priorities of the Program.

            c. The budget allocation may not be sufficient for implementation of the Program.
               Due to the constraints of the budget, the universities may not have sufficient
               additional budget allocated to carry out the activities of the Program, which are
               newly added to their current mandates.

Proposed Arrangements and Actions

34. Two actions are recommended to address the above risks and will be included in the PAP.

            a. Performance-based budgeting. This budgeting will be put in place in which the
               MOET will sign PAs with all the participating LTTUs. The budget allocation to
               the LTTUs will be based on the actual performance of the LTTUs as detailed in
               the PAs. The actual performance of the LTTUs is measured by indicators that are
               identical with the DLIs of the Program.

            b. Target allocation of budget. The budget for the Program will be allocated to the
               LTTUs by the MOET as targeted allocation. This will mean that the amount
               allocated to the LTTUs will be specifically made on time and sufficient for the
               Program activities.

Procurement

Scope of Procurement Required for the Program

35. Procurement under the proposed Program will mainly include civil works for small and
medium-size (approximately US$200,000–US$1.5 million) lecture halls; small upgrading
construction; goods (including furniture, testing equipment, and so on) packages of small and
medium sizes for laboratory, library, or classroom equipment/facilities; and consulting services,
including innovation in teacher education detailed designs, construction supervision, and
auditing services for subprograms under the Program.

36. There are no large contracts valued at or above the OPRC thresholds (US$75 million for
works, US$50 million for goods, US$40 million for non-consulting services, and US$20 million
for consultant services) under the Program. Therefore, the program will obviously not finance
any high-value contract equal or above the OPRC thresholds and/or for contracts with estimated
monetary value equal to or more than 25 percent of the estimated total Program expenditures.
Program procurement will be carried out in accordance with Vietnam’s procurement laws and
regulations. Specific procurement methods that may be applicable to the Program include OCB,
limited competitive bidding, DC, and shopping. It is envisaged that most of the civil works and
goods contracts will be procured using OCB that is found by the Bank to have an acceptable
level of transparency, economy, and efficiency.

Legal Frameworks




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                  Page 14
37. Procurement under the Program is carried out in accordance with the national procurement
laws and regulations. The procurement activities under the proposed Program will be governed
by the Public Procurement Law No. 43/2013/QH13 approved by the Vietnam NA on November
26, 2013, and effective from July 1, 2014; Decree No. 63/2014/ND-CP dated June 26, 2014,
issued by the Vietnam GovernmentGovernment for detailing the implementation of selective
articles of the Law on Public Procurement regarding contractor selection; and relevant circulars.

38. A review of the Public Procurement Law No. 43/2013/QH13 and the Decree No.
63/2014/ND-CP found that they (a) require procurement planning to be prepared and approved
on time with proper linkage to budget availability; (b) mandate OCB as the default procurement
method and provide detailed procedures for the same; (c) provide a reasonably clear allocation of
responsibilities and accountabilities to the procuring entities, employers, and subprogram
owners; and (d) provide sanctions against unacceptable practices, including fraud and corruption.
In addition, the Government has issued various model bidding documents (MBDs)3 for goods,
works, and consulting services (including forms and templates of contract) and bid evaluation
templates for use by procurement practitioners, in which the National Competitive Bidding
harmonized bidding documents have been issued together with the Asian Development Bank and
the Bank in July 2015.

39. The Procurement Law requires that PPs shall be approved by competent agencies after the
approval of investment decisions or they can be approved at the same time of the approval of
investment decisions where conditions allow. The law also requires that PPs shall be prepared
for the entire Program except where conditions (for example, investment decision, availability of
Program funding sources, financing agreement for Official Development Assistance projects,
and so on) do not suffice. PPs must be prepared based on the availability of Program funding
sources. The law further stipulates that procurement packaging shall be done based on the
technical nature and implementation sequence to ensure no restriction of prospective bidder
participation and to ensure the consistency of contract implementation with overall Program
implementation. It also prohibits any practices to willfully divide procurements into small
contracts to enable the use of DC methods.4 Procurement Law No. 43 and Decree No. 63 still
allow use of DC and single sourcing for small contracts below certain monetary thresholds.5

40. The OCB procedures described in the procurement laws and regulations generally
accommodate transparency, economy, and efficiency of the procurement process. An OCB for
civil works typically includes the following steps and requirements:

             a. Preparation of bidding documents. Bidding documents should be prepared using
                the MBDs issued by the MPI. Bidding documents should clearly state bid
                evaluation and qualification criteria and contain no restrictions. Bidding
                documents must be approved by a competent agency before issuance.

3
  Please refer to Circulars No. 05/2015/TT-BKHDT dated June 16, 2015; No. 03/2015/TT-BKHDT dated May 6,
2015; and No. 01/2015/TT-BKHDT dated February 14, 2015.
4
  Further details can be found in Circular No. 10/2015/TT-BKHDT dated October 26, 2015.
5
  Decree No. 63 proposes a threshold of VND 1 billion (US$48,000) and VND 0.5 billion (US$24,000) under which
goods, works, and non-consulting and consulting services may be procured through DC, respectively. Compared to
the thresholds in the previous laws and regulations, this threshold is substantially lower, meaning more mandatory
use of competitive bidding for the program.



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                                 Page 15
            b. Advertising of invitation for bids. Invitation for bids (IFBs) must be advertised in
               the Vietnam Public Procurement Newspaper (VPPN), which is nationally
               available, for one issue and published on the MPI public procurement website
               (muasamcong.mpi.gov.vn). Bidding documents can be sold (at a maximum of
               approximately VND 2,000,000 or US$90 for one set) or released free of charge to
               interested bidders three days after the advertising date. The laws prohibit any
               practices to restrict bidders from access to the bidding documents.

            c. Preparation, submission, and receipt of bids. Bidders will be allowed at least 20
               days for preparation of their bids, counting from the date of bidding document
               issuance (after 3 days from the first day of advertisement). Upon the deadline for
               bid submission, the procuring entity shall immediately open all bids received in
               the presence of bidder representatives. The procuring entity shall read aloud
               bidder names, bid prices, discount offers, and other important information and
               prepare the minutes of bid opening and send a copy to each participating bidder.

            d. Evaluation of bids. The laws require that bid evaluation must be completed within
               45 days after the date of bid opening. Extension of bid validity is permissible, but
               should not exceed 20 days. Evaluation of bids includes three main steps: (i)
               preliminary examination, which includes the checking on eligibility, bid security,
               bidder experience, and qualifications; (ii) detailed evaluation, which includes
               evaluation of technical responsiveness and calculation of evaluated bid prices
               through error corrections, adjustments, and discount application; and (iii) ranking
               of responsive bids to determine the top ranked bid for contract award
               consideration. The laws permit (i) the use of a merit point (scoring) system for
               technical evaluation of bids in addition to a pass and fail methodology and (ii)
               one-stage two envelopes for contracts above US$1 million. This technical scoring
               methodology is subjective and may be abused because the bid price is already
               known, and therefore, the technical scores can be manipulated.

            e. Contract award, negotiations, and signing. The laws require that to be selected
               for contract award, the bidder must (i) have submitted an eligible, qualified, and
               technically responsive bid; (ii) have the lowest corrected price or the lowest
               evaluated bid price; and (iii) have the proposed contract price not exceeding the
               approved pre-bid cost estimate. The procuring entity will negotiate and sign the
               contract with the selected bidder based on the contract form included in the
               bidding documents and the selected bidder bids.

            f. Publication of contract award. After the contract is awarded, the procuring entity
               shall publish the contract award information in the VPPN. Information to be
               published includes name and descriptions of the contract, name of the successful
               bidder, and contract price.

            g. In case of OCB for consulting services, the procuring entity shall advertise in the
               VPPN to seek consultant interests; establish a short list of at least three qualified
               firms, prepare bidding documents using the MPI templates, issue the bidding
               documents to short-listed consultants, and give them at least 10 days for



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                    Page 16
                preparation of proposals; receive proposals and immediately open the technical
                proposals; score technical proposals against prescribed evaluation criteria;
                publicly open the financial proposals of those consultants who secure the
                minimum technical score and conduct financial and final evaluation to determine
                the highest ranked consultant; and negotiate and sign the contract with the
                selected firm and publish the contract award in the VPPN.

Procurement Assessment

41. The assessment found the following specific, procurement-related issues that could, directly
or indirectly, compromise the efficient achievement of Program objectives:

            a. Excessive use of DC results in lack of transparency and competition. Therefore,
               excessive use of this method may decrease the economy and efficiency of the
               expected results.

            b. Incorrectly rejecting bid(s). For example, if a bid is rejected due to the offered
               price being higher than the cost estimate or due to minor deviations and non-
               compliances, it may lead to the exclusion of a competitive bid and may therefore,
               adversely affect the economy and efficiency of the Program procurement.

            c. Lack of experienced procurement personnel within the LTTUs to cope with the
               large procurement workload and complex civil works packages under
               subprograms (construction of lecturer halls).

            d. Unavailability of budget may delay the procurement process or contract
               implementation and, as a consequence, may negatively affect the achievement of
               the results.

42. In the context of the Program, these issues will be addressed by a series of actions being
included in the PAP and through the OM. To strengthen Program procurement implementation
capacity, several crucial measures should be adopted, including additional experienced
procurement staffing, intensive capacity development for Program implementing agencies and
other stakeholders, and preparation and enforcement of a clear and hands-on OM.

43. The MOET is responsible for organizing such training courses as part of their capacity-
building responsibilities. The MOET PMU and LTTUs should also hire qualified consultants to
assist them in handling the procurement process for large civil works packages. In addition, the
GovernmentGovernment has established an e-Government Procurement System (e-GP, available
at muasamcong.mpi.gov.vn) which allows procuring entities to electronically handle bidding
process (e-tendering) in a more transparent and fair manner with lower administrative costs. The
MOET PMU and LTTUs should be encouraged to gradually adopt this electronic procurement
system for the Program, particularly for simple goods packages procured through shopping.

Procurement Systems and Approach

44. The accountability for procurement decision is in accordance with the Procurement Law and
Decree. The implementation of procurement activities for goods, works, and consulting services


ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                  Page 17
for a particular university is decentralized to the university level and the MOET normally has the
role of the investment decider. It has, therefore, the authority to approve the subprograms and the
PPs that are prepared by the MOET PMU and LTTUs, which have the role of the IOs. The IOs
have responsibility to implement the approved PP accordingly, including making any needful
decisions along the procurement process such as approving bidding documents and contract
awards.

45. Procurement administration. In the role of IOs, each MOET PMU and LTTU (refer as IO)
establishes a Program Management Unit (PMU) or a specific task team, which acts as a
procuring entity, to assist the LTTU in preparing the subprograms and in handling all steps of the
procurement process including (a) preparing bidding documents; (b) issuing the bidding
documents; (c) receiving bids; (d) evaluating bids; and (e) making the final recommendation for
the contract award for an IO approval. Bid evaluation is normally carried out by a committee
(usually comprising 5–6 experts) established by the IO, including technical (specialized
lecturers) staff and financial staff drawn from functional divisions under the IO. The committee
carries out bid evaluation, prepares the bid evaluation report (BER), and makes recommendation
of contract award to the rector of the IO for approval. Under each IO, a division such as Life
Management or Technology and Science Division will assist the IO to handle the procurement
process. The PMU also has the responsibility to sign and administer the contracts.

46. Procurement planning. The PP is prepared by the respective IO and submitted to the MOET
for approval. There is not a comprehensive PP for all procurable items under the IO for a certain
period but it is prepared for each subprogram based on the relevant program documents being
approved, including design and detailed cost estimate. A PP for a subprogram could only be
prepared after a certain amount of budget (at least 35 percent of the total cost) has been allocated
for it.

47. Under each PP, packages are formed by considering various factors, including availability of
budget, time constraint, technical aspects, and market conditions. After the PP is approved by the
MOET, the IO implements the PP accordingly. The IOs/procuring entities are allowed to update
a PP if there are substantial changes or modifications during the implementation. However, in
practice they have always tried to avoid updating the PP as it takes time for the investment
deciders to approve and that may cause implementation delay.

48. Procurement practices. As stated in the Procurement Law and Decree, the IOs and their
procuring entities have the responsibility to manage the whole procurement process and to make
needed procurement decisions along the process. Major aspects of the procurement practices
including procurement methods, bidding documents, administering the bidding process, bid
evaluation, and contract award are discussed in the following paragraphs.

49. Procurement methods. The IOs reported that OCB is commonly used for equipment supply
and new building construction. The OCB procedures described in detail by the Law and Decrees
are considered to have an acceptable level of transparency, economy, and efficiency. Contracts
for small repairs or maintenance of current building are normally awarded on DC basis. The
reason was that under the previous Law (Law No. 61) and Decree (Decree No. 85), the
thresholds for using DC or Single-Source Selection (SSS) were high. For example, the thresholds
are VND 5 billion (approximately US$250,000) and VND 3 billion (approximately



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                    Page 18
US$150,000), respectively, for works and consulting contracts. As most of the contracts for
small repairs or maintenance of current building including works and consulting contracts were
very small (varies from US$20,000 to US$200,000), they were usually awarded on the basis of
DC/SSS.

50. As the thresholds for using DC/SSS have been reduced substantially under the new
procurement Decree No. 63 (to approximately US$48,000 for works and US$24,000 for
consulting services), it is foreseen that the opportunities for the IOs under the Program to apply
DC/SSS will be relatively limited and OCB or limited competitive bidding will become the
mandatory method to be used for most of the packages under the Program.

51. Bidding documents. These documents are prepared using the MBDs issued by the MPI. The
MBDs include detailed bid evaluation criteria using pass/fail and/or merit point methods as
permitted by the law. Bidding documents are prepared by the procuring entities such as Program
Management Units under the IOs and approved by the IOs before being issued to potential
bidders. Only for some large and complex packages, the procuring entities may hire a consultant
to assist them in preparing the bidding documents. The MPI has recently issued the new MBDs
that are harmonized with the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank that will be used for
civil works contracts under the Program. Given the size of the works under the Program, the
LTTUs confirmed that they would prepare the bidding documents.

52. Advertisement. Under the OCB procedure, the IFBs are advertised in the VPPN for one issue
and also published on the MPI public procurement website (muasamcong.mpi.gov.vn), which is
compliant with the Law and Decree. Bidding documents are issued to the potential bidders three
days after the advertisement of the IFB, with a fee of about US$90. It is a common practice that
the procuring entities only sell the bidding documents to persons who have an introduction letter
from the bidders, which should be properly signed and stamped by the bidders.

53. Preparation, submission, and receipt of bids and bid opening. Bidders are allowed 15 to 20
days for preparation of their bids counting from the date of issuance of bidding documents. Upon
the deadline for bid submission, the procuring entities immediately open all bids received in the
presence of bidder representatives at the time and place stipulated in bidding documents, which
are issued to the bidders. The procuring entities read out important information, including bidder
names, information related to bid security, bid prices, discount offers, and status of the bids
received (sealed or not sealed). The procuring entities prepare the minutes of bid opening that are
properly signed by all participants including members of Bid Opening Committee and all bidder
representatives attending the opening. A copy of the bid opening minutes are distributed to all
bidders who submitted bids. It is noted that the common number of bids received for each
package was around 3–4 bids, accounting for 30–50 percent of the number of the sold bidding
documents. This shows that the level of bidder participation is not very high.

54. After the bid opening, all received bids are classified as confidential documents and retained
in a place that only authorized persons are able to access. Original bids are kept in a locked
cabinet in the procuring entities’ offices, and only copies of bids are used for evaluation. The
procuring entities have been informed that if they receive less than three bids, they have to seek
the opinion from the investment decider whether they can open the bids received or extend the




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                   Page 19
bid submission deadline to receive more bids. However, it is seldom that they receive less than
three bids.

55. Bid evaluation. The procuring entities conduct bid evaluation and contract award in
compliance with the Law and Decree. As a common practice, bid evaluation is carried out by a
committee established by the procuring entities including five to ten persons who were normally
the staff drawn from relevant units such as related faculty, technical, and financial units of the
respective IOs. The procuring entities might also invite persons from other relevant departments
to join the Evaluation Committee for a number of cases. An Evaluation Committee has the
responsibility to (a) carry out the bid evaluation, (b) prepare the BER using an appropriate
sample BER issued by the MPI, and (c) make the recommendation for contract award to the head
of the IOs for approval. All the members of an Evaluation Committee possessed the MPI
procurement certificate. For complex and large works packages, several procuring entities hired
a consultant to assist them in carrying out the bid evaluation—the consultant is normally the one
who prepares the bidding documents for the packages. In such cases, the role of the consultant is
similar to members of the Evaluation Committee.

56. The bid evaluation and recommendation for contract award is carried out strictly based on
the criteria provided in the bidding documents. Technical evaluation follows the merit point
system or pass/fail criteria. However, the merit point system is used more often, especially with
the relatively large and complex packages, while pass/fail criteria are normally used for the
simple packages. Bids offering prices higher than the approved cost estimate could be rejected. It
is a common practice that many bidders were rejected at the preliminary examination stage
solely on the grounds related to their qualifications.

57. While the Law and Decree allows time for bid evaluation within 45 days from the date of
bid opening, the time for bid evaluation under the Program is often from two to four weeks,
depending on the complexity of the package, which is considered a reasonable period for bid
evaluation. The completed BER for each contract was submitted to the IOs for approval before
the procuring entities invited the winning bidders for contract negotiation. The IOs reported that
the approval time is also relatively short, within one week after the BER has been submitted.

58. Contract awards. Contracts are generally awarded to the lowest evaluated responsive
bidders. After the BER is approved by the IOs, contract negotiation is often conducted between
the procuring entities and the winning bidders before contract signing. Signed contracts contain
adequate major conditions and clauses. It was reported that most of contracts procured using
OCB were awarded to local private enterprises or state-owned joint stock companies. The IOs
stated that the saving through the OCB is commonly around 1 to 2 percent of the cost estimate,
which is not considered to be a significant saving.

59. Publication of contract award. After the contract award has been approved by the IOs, the
procuring entity publishes the contract award information in the VPPN as required by the law
and regulations. Information to be published includes name and description of the contract, name
of the winning bidder, and the contract price. As publication of the contract award is mandatory
under the law and regulations, all the procuring entities under the Program are compliant with
this.




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                  Page 20
60. Control and oversight. The implementation of the Program under the IOs, including
procurement implementation, is subject to audit or inspection by various Government authorities
such as the SAV and the Government Inspectorate (GI). The IOs informed the mission that the
SAV usually carries out the audit annually or every two years. No major procurement issues
have been reportedly identified by the audit done by the abovementioned Government agencies
under the Program.

61. Complaints handling mechanism. Procurement complaints are handled in accordance with
the procedures stated in the Procurement Law and Decree No. 63/2014/ND-CP. These
procedures require the complaints to be signed and stamped by a legitimate representative of the
complaining bidder. Anonymous complaints are not normally considered, which may discourage
people to provide information concerning fraud and corruption in the Program. For complaints
related to contract award, the complainant has to deposit a fee, which would be cashed (that is,
not returned) if the complaint is not substantiated. Complaints are handled by procuring entities
or subprogram owners (IOs) and appeals are reviewed by a competent agency, which is normally
the MOET under this Program. This procedure seems to be rather rigid and discouraging of
complaints.

62. The Bank’s experiences in Vietnam shows that procurement complaints were frequently
received under Bank-financed programs and most of them were anonymous. Bank policy
requires anonymous complaints to be seriously considered and reviews of such complaints have
helped to identify and address many procurement problems and unacceptable practices. The lack
of a clear, consistent, and affirmative policy and procedure for these complaints is a clear
weakness in the Program complaints handling system. Under the Program, the IOs should
therefore be encouraged to accept and review anonymous complaints.

63. Debarment. The Program will be subject to Vietnam’s national debarment procedures.
Exclusion from participation in future tenders is governed by the Law on Procurement which
provides a defined set of prohibited acts which, if committed, may lead to debarment. For
procurement, initial sanctioning decisions are made by the IOs. Lists of debarred firms or
individuals within a given province are prepared by the provincial DPI and are submitted to the
Provincial People’s Committee and the MPI on an annual basis. Under the law, bidders
prohibited from tendering are listed in the tendering newsletter and on the tendering website
controlled by the MPI. Provincial officials provided the assessment team inconsistent
information regarding whether IOs consistently refer to the MPI sources and the DPI lists to
determine bidder eligibility. Under this Program, it is recommended that the Bank’s debarment
list will also be applicable.

64. Record keeping system. Government regulations require Program documents and records to
be maintained for at least five years after the completion of each subprogram. The IOs complied
strictly with this requirement. Hard copies of all procurement-related documents were archived
and can be easily retrieved.

65. Staffing. The IOs have adequate numbers of procurement staff who have attended the
necessary training, possess procurement certificates issued by the MPI, and have gained good
procurement experience for small works and goods packages. Most of the IO procurement staff
have attended a training course on the new Law and Decree organized by the MOET and



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                 Page 21
delivered by the Public Procurement Agency under the MPI. They were able to self-prepare
bidding documents and carry out bid evaluation. The IOs also have capable technical staff (or
specialized lecturers) who usually provided assistance in the bidding process and subsequently
assume the responsibility for contract administration of goods packages. The MBDs and
contracts that are issued by the MPI are used. Under LTTUs, recently, no large complex civil
works package has been procured; therefore, the procurement staff seem to lack experience in
implementing procurement as well as contract administration of large and complex civil works
packages. Obviously, it was observed that in some cases, preparation of the design and technical
specifications for those packages was contracted out to consultants. No specific written code of
ethics exists; nevertheless, procurement staff are required to observe relevant ethical
requirements stated in the Government laws and regulations.

66. Contract management and administration. The LTTUs hired consultants to provide
supervision and construction management services. It is reported that the contract execution was
normally completed on schedule. There were also a number of cases of delay mainly due to
shortage of funds, severe weather conditions, and weak capacity of the contractors. Particularly,
one civil works contract for construction of a student hostel in the Hanoi National University of
Education was commenced three years ago with a contract amount of VND 95.4 billion but has
still not been completed due to a shortage of VND 30 billion.

67. Cost overruns also did not appear as an issue under the Program as the agencies generally
manage to complete works within the agreed budget. It is noted that no serious disputes requiring
resolution by a court were reported under the Program.

68. In Vietnam, the construction of civil works, especially larger works, is often delayed due to
shortage of funds for contract. It is envisaged that implementation of civil works contracts under
the Program may face similar challenges. In particular, civil works under the Program would
require regular cash flow (including 20–30 percent of contract prices as advance payments,
monthly payments, and so on). Due to the nature of the PforR instrument, a major portion (75
percent or more) of disbursements can only be made once the works have been completed and
certified. A cash flow shortage is assessed to be one of the biggest challenges to good contract
management and timely delivery of works and services under the Program. To effectively
address this challenge, the MOET would have to ensure proper management of the advance
disbursement and other partial disbursements as well as to find temporary funding sources.

Bank Experience on Comparable Programs in the Sector

69. The Bank has prepared and has been supervising the implementation of several PforR
programs including the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation under the National Target Program—
RWSS NTP and the PforR National Urban Development Program in the Northern Mountains
Region—RBNUDP-NM in Vietnam. Even though this Program will be the first PforR in the
education sector, the Bank has prepared a result-based Investment Project Financing, the School
Readiness Promotion Program (SRPP-P117393- IDA 5207) which already has some similarities
with the performance-based aspects of the ETEP. Lessons learned in the implementation of these
programs were examined and adopted in this assessment. A particular lesson has been that delays
in implementation can result from limited understanding of the operational modalities associated
with the PforR mechanisms, particularly in relation to existing systems and the arrangements for



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                  Page 22
funding advances. The Bank’s experience in other education programs has shown that one of the
common procurement issues that caused implementation delays in those programs was the
unfamiliarity and inexperience of program implementing agencies with Bank procurement rules
and procedures and the de facto application of both Bank and Government rules and procedures.
By allowing the use of only Government rules and procedures in this Program, this bottleneck
will be removed. However, other issues that have arisen under those programs that may continue
to occur during the implementation of this Program include the following:

            a. Procurement capacity weaknesses

            b. Inappropriate bidding practices (such as excessive rejection of bids for minor
               deviations or omissions)

            c. Procurement complaints

            d. Potential collusion during the bidding process

5. Lessons learned in other programs suggest that, under this Program, such issues could be effectively
mitigated through intensive training and capacity building, full reporting and serious handling of
procurement complaints, and strengthened procurement oversight.

Fund Flow

Current Arrangements

70. There are two different arrangements for the two sources of funds of the LTTUs: (a) funds
from the Government budget and (b) funds from off-budget revenue. For the first fund source,
funds flow from the Government budget to the ultimate beneficiaries through the ST system, in
parallel to the budget allocation. After expenditures are incurred and work completed,
contractors/suppliers send supporting documents and request for payment to the LTTUs. The
LTTUs review and transfer to the ST to verify and make payments to contractors/suppliers. The
verification of the ST will be on whether (a) the expenditure (activity) has been
planned/allocated for, (b) the payments are made in compliance with the contractual terms, and
(c) the contract contents comply with laws and regulations.

71. For funds from off-budget revenue, all the proceeds will be deposited into a bank account
maintained at a commercial bank. The payment to the contractors/suppliers will be made from
this bank account after the verification and authorization of the management of the LTTUs. The
ST is not involved in this verification and payment.

Performance and Identified Risks

72. In general, the fund flows arrangement adequately functions, except for the two following
issues: (a) there is a 1–2 month delay in entering the budget allocation into the TABMIS by the
finance agencies as mentioned above and (b) the controls over the payments made out of the off-
budget revenue may not be effective.

Proposed Arrangements and Actions



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                       Page 23
73. The MOF recognizes the need to secure the Program fund in a special deposit account in the
ST at the provincial level to manage proper budget allocation, execution, and reporting of the
LTTUs. Funds transferred from the MOF to the LTTUs are performance based, resulting from
the amount the LTTUs are entitled to request for advance and the amount reimbursed for DLIs
achieved and verified. For the risk relating to the effectiveness of internal controls over the
payment made out of the off-budget revenue, an IA-related mitigation measure will be proposed.
Refer to the audit section for more details.


                              Figure 2. Proposed Fund Flow Diagram

                      World Bank



                                                             State Bank of Vietnam
                         MOF
                                                                     (SBV)



                                                                 Central ST




                     MOET/LTTUs                             Provincial Treasuries




                     Beneficiaries



Documentation Flow
Fund Flow

Internal Control

Current Arrangements

74. The Framework of Internal Controls requires that expenditures of the state budget must be
controlled before, during, and after payment. To be paid, expenditures must be listed in the
approved budget estimates, in line with standards and norms of the state, approved by the
authorized officer of the spending unit, and must have adequate supporting files and documents.




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                Page 24
75. Budget spending units are required to open an account at the ST and the financial agencies
and the ST will control compliance with budget execution. The ST has the power and
responsibility to determine which payments can be legitimately made from the state budget. The
Treasury system is the main source of control over expenditures, with ST records being
reconciled and the SAV providing assurance of the accuracy of ST financial data.

76. According to the State Budget Law, budget expenditures should be directly paid by the ST
to suppliers and beneficiaries. An exception to this principle is made for petty expenditures with
a value less than VND 5 million (US$250 equivalent) and other special expenditures. For
transactions of this size, cash payments remain common in Vietnam. For these small
expenditures, advances of funds are made to the spending units, which then make payments to
the suppliers or beneficiaries and subsequently, submit supporting documentation to the ST. The
ST then verifies and records the actual expenditures against the relevant advances.
Reconciliation between the ST and the LTTU of the expenditure is done periodically (quarterly
and annually).

77. Each LTTU develops an IER, which covers the regulations and procedures for the
expenditure relating to the key activities which are based on the relevant Government
regulations. The typical contents cover critical areas such as segregation of duties, work
acceptance and payments, asset count, cash reconciliation, and advance management. The IER
shall be reviewed and updated annually at the annual staff meeting and issued by the head of the
LTTU after getting endorsement from the parent university or the MOET. In some universities
such as Da Nang, the ISO 9001 standards have been applied for management processes.

Performance and Proposed Arrangements

78. While the Framework of Internal Controls for expenditure and specific internal controls at
the LTTUs are adequate, the comprehensiveness and quality of internal controls procedures
documented in the IER varies from university to university. Under the Program, the IER of the
LTTUs will be reviewed and a standard IER with suggested contents will be developed for the
use of the universities and for the MOET, as reference sources when reviewing for endorsement
of those IERs.

Accounting and Financial Reporting

Current Arrangement

79. The Accounting Law, which was approved by the NA in 2003 and became effective as of
January 1, 2004 and revised in November 2015, governs the financial accounting and reporting
for Government and its entities at all levels. The law (a) defines applicable principles and
requirements and the scope of accounting; (b) prescribes the types of accounts, chart of accounts,
financial statements, their disclosure and publication, their audit and inspection; and (c) assigns
to the MOF the responsibility for formulating accounting standards in conformity with
international financial reporting standards. An important provision of this law is the requirement
for all spending units to publish their annual financial statements within 30 days of the date of
approval by relevant authorities.




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                   Page 25
80. Accounting for the funds and use of funds granted from the state budget is duly done at both
ST (with the roles of the Accountant General) and the universities (as the spending units). At the
ST, accounting is fully integrated in the TABMIS which has been installed and properly
functions at all ST units.

81. The accounting and reporting system applied in the LTTUs follows the accounting systems
for the administrative agencies issued under the Decision 19 issued by the MOF in March 2006
which (a) follows the full double-entry system; (b) uses the modified accrual basis where
accruals of some key expenditure are allowed and assets have been depreciated; and (c) sets out
the (i) chart of accounts, (ii) detailed forms of accounting books, and (iii) detailed forms of
financial reports. All the LTTUs have computerized accounting systems, which, however, are not
integrated with the other modules/software of management such as the student management
software.

82. Financial Reports are prepared and sent to the parent university (by the member university)
or to the MOET on an annual basis. The parent university/the MOET will send a mission to the
member/stand-alone university to verify the quality of the Financial Statements submitted. The
Interim Financial Reports are sent on ad hoc basis, when requested by those agencies.

Performance, Identified Risks, and Proposed Arrangements

83. With regard to accounting and financial reporting, the capacity of the provincial ST and the
LTTUs is expected to be adequate as the TABMIS is fully implemented and the accounting
systems of the universities properly function. The accountants of the LTTUs are also capable of
handling the accounting and reporting works.

84. According to the MOET, while the quality of the Financial Reports submitted by the LTTUs
were acceptable, three out of eight LTTUs (namely Hanoi, Hanoi 2, and Ho Chi Minh City)
consistently failed to submit the Financial Reports on time.

85. For the Program, it is proposed that each university will prepare a Financial Report which
will be sent to the MOET for consolidation. The frequency, timing, and template of the Financial
Reports will follow the guidance from the MOET and be indicated in the PAs signed between the
MOET and the LTTUs, to ensure that receipts and uses of funds are properly recorded and
reported.

Auditing

Internal Audit and Related Activities

Current Arrangement, Performance, and Identified Risk

86. The revised Accounting Law which was passed by the NA in November 2015, for the first
time stipulates that the accounting units must establish an Internal Control System. The
Government will provide details of IA in public agencies, to ensure, among others, the adequacy,
effectiveness, and efficiency of the internal controls. Other than the Accounting Law, there is no
further guidance on the Internal Control Framework and IA. The development of the IA in the




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                  Page 26
public sector is in a very early stage. The State Bank of Vietnam is the only public sector entity
to have formally established an IA function.

87. On the other hand, the inspectorate functions exist in all large spending units and the
activities these functions perform are governed by very formal and comprehensive laws and
regulations. The inspectorates conduct regular inspection activities which are designed to ensure
public sector entity compliance with Government laws and regulations. However, the inspection
activities taken together do not constitute an integrated IA function as they lack some critical
elements of IA. In addition, there are potential overlaps of inspections, which lead to inefficiency
and hinder the operations of the entities inspected.

Proposed Arrangement and Actions

88. Under the , a TA will be provided to (a) assess the current arrangement of IA at the LTTUs
and (b) build capacity of IA for the LTTUs so that the IA will be established and operational in
accordance with the Government guidance on IA. It is anticipated that the IA capacity will be in
place within two months of the effectiveness of the Credit. The established IA will (a) function
in accordance with the Charter and Procedures, which are developed based on international best
practices and standards and (b) closely coordinate with the existing inspectorate functions in
each LTTU.

External Audit

Current Arrangement and Performance

89. The SAV is the auditor for the MOET. The external audit of the MOET is performed
annually. In the context of that audit, the LTTUs, as dependent agencies under the MOET, will
be selected on a sampling basis for the site visits. Thus, normally, each parent university will be
visited every two years and visits to the member university are less frequent.

90. The following were noted: (a) the external audits of the universities are not performed
annually by the SAV; (b) it takes 18 months from the end of the fiscal year to complete and
publish auditor reports; (c) there are no separate audit report issued for each university (instead, a
consolidated audit report was issued for the MOET); and (d) the audit report for the MOET is not
made publicly available.

Proposed Arrangement and Action

91. The financial audit will be conducted in accordance with the audit terms of reference
provided in the OM by an independent auditing firm acceptable to the Bank. The cost of the
audit will be included in the Technical Assistance financing.

92. An IVA will be selected to provide independent confirmation of the results reported by the
LTTUs through the MOET. Third-party independent results verification procedures will also be
put in place to track DLIs and operation outputs and outcomes. The IVA will be selected within
six months of credit effectiveness as indicated in the PAP.




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                      Page 27
C.      Governance and Accountability
93. The system of Government in Vietnam is well established. The system contains the basic
elements of good governance, including a separation of policy-making, execution, and oversight
functions, both between and within levels of Government, and a system of regular reporting to
high levels of Government. The Government structure remains strongly hierarchical, though with
a number of parallel systems that may duplicate functions. A devolution process has notably
taken place during the recent decades, including in the education sector. As such, budget units
under the MOET, such as the LTTUs are increasingly being given more autonomy. The system
of accountability, however, has not kept pace with the devolution process.

Legal Framework

94. All civil servants are required to conform to the Law on Cadres and Public Officials and the
Law on Public Employees (2008). These laws provide certain ethics and code of conduct
standards, including requirements for civil servants to perform their duties with integrity and in
an impartial manner and prohibition of fraud and corruption. Bidding documents, required by the
Procurement Law, must include a provision clearly stating various prohibited acts in the
procurement process, including fraud and corruption. After bids are received and opened, they
shall be required to be preserved at a safe place; information on such bids and bid evaluation
processes shall be treated as confidential. Procurement decisions by the LTTUs are reviewed and
approved by the MOET.

95. Activities to prevent and combat fraud and corruption in Vietnam are governed by the 2005
AC Law, which introduced new approaches to AC such as asset declarations for civil servants,
job rotation, and a stronger focus on transparency. The law includes ambitious and all-embracing
provisions on the prevention, detection, and handling of corruption, as well as the organization
and mechanisms for concerned agencies (including media, social organizations, international
organizations, and so on). The guideline for implementing the 2005 AC Law was issued through
the Prime Minister Decision 30/2006/QD-TTg (February 6, 2006) and Resolution No. 4-NQ/TW
(August 21, 2006) of the Party Central Committee (Session X). The AC Law was most recently
amended in 2012, which introduced stricter transparency guidelines for public sector
governance. Most notably, the amended AC Law is enhanced by Decrees No. 78 and 90, which
clarify the implementation of provisions under the AC Law with regard to the assets and
accountability of public officials.

96. With regard to transparency, the AC Law and the 2012 Law on Higher Education stipulate
the obligation of education institutions to disclose information to the public on the management
and use of public budget, state property and assets, staff and financial resources for education,
the support provision and other investment for education, and other revenues. In particular,
Circular 09/2009 of the MOET details that a public education institution must disclose and make
publicly available the commitment to education quality; education accreditation results;
condition to ensure quality of education; and the collection, management and use of tuition fees,
recruitment charges, other revenues from consultancy, transfer of technology, investment for
education, and other financial revenues and expenditure items.




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                  Page 28
97. The 2005 AC Law is also complemented and strengthened by the 2011 Laws on Complaints
and Denunciations (Decrees 75/ND-CP and 76/ND-CP) which regulate the process and
procedures for the handling and settlement of complaints. While the process is described and
analyzed in more detail in the following paragraphs, it is important to note the clarification of
roles of different Government bodies in charge of handling fraud and corruption complaints, as
specified in Section 2 of this Law.

98. This is also in line with the 2010 Law on Inspection, which governs the extensive GI system
of Vietnam. The key roles of the GIs are to (a) carry out socioeconomic inspections; (b) examine
and inspect the settlement of citizen complaints and denunciations; and (c) detect corruption
cases and recommend how to handle them. This effectively establishes a multi-tiered system of
nonfinancial oversight, with inspectorate bodies existing at the central, provincial, and district
administrative levels of Government, together with specialized sector inspectorates at the central
ministries and their line agencies (illustrated in Figure 3 ). This operates in parallel to the IA
system established under the 2015 State Audit Law (discussed already). Because of the
establishment of numerous inspectorates, their authority to process and settle complaints and
denunciations are tightly defined in relation to each other. If the denunciation does not fall under
their jurisdiction, they must refer it to another authority.

                            Figure 3. Government Inspection Systems




Complaints Handling System

99. According to the Laws on Complaints and Denunciations and the AC Law, citizens can
provide fraud and corruption complaints to several channels. In the ETEP, complaints related to




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                    Page 29
Program activities, which could include allegations of fraud or corruption, will most likely be
submitted to the LTTUs as the owner of investment subprograms, or to the GI under the MOET.

        (i) Through the LTTUs. A complaint is often submitted in written format with full details
            of the complainant to the Administrative Unit of the LTTU or to the LTTU People
            Inspection Board, which will also transfer it to the People Inspection Board to log and
            forward the complaint to the LTTU leader. In addition to the written complaints
            channel, a complainant may also request a meeting with the LTTU management or
            attend the annual staff meeting, to raise the issue. Upon receiving the complaint, the
            LTTU leader will review and demand an explanation and/or clarification from the
            respective unit or individual. For the ETEP, this will most likely be the PMUs.
            During interviews, the LTTU leaders noted that they receive very few complaints,
            including through text messages, and most of them relate to personnel management.
            None recalled any credible complaint relating to fraud and corruption in their LTTU.
            Upon receiving the explanation from the concerned unit or individual, if the LTTU
            leadership considers the allegation credible, the People Inspection Board, in
            coordination with the MOET or the DOET Inspectorate, will be asked to take the lead
            in the inspection. Under the LTTU, the Inspection Board is very small with only one
            or two part-time staff without adequate inspection expertise. If the initial inspection
            reveals that crimes are alleged, the file will be turned over to the police. If warranted,
            corruption charges can be brought by local prosecutors in the Vietnam court system.
            Once the case is concluded, a formal response will be sent to the complainant to
            inform them of the key results and decisions taken. The formal response is required to
            be shared with the complainant within 45 days from the date of receipt. If not
            satisfied with the decision, the complainant reserves the right to appeal through a
            similar process to the higher authority (in this case, the MOET Inspectorate).

        (ii) Through the GIs. In addition to the LTTU system for handling complaints, citizens
             can also submit fraud and corruption allegation to the MOET Inspectorate, to be
             handled and inspected by some 40 inspectors at the national MOET GI or six to eight
             inspectors at each provincial-level MOET GI. These inspectors reserve the right to
             stop construction for investigation if they see any sign of fraud and corruption. The
             inspectorate passes on the case to the police and prosecutor once crimes are alleged.
             Both of these parallel complaints handling systems contain a reporting mechanism
             that can capture information on the number, type, and handling of fraud and
             corruption allegations, which they periodically report up to the national level.

100.The new Public Procurement Law No. 43 (approved in November 2013) and Decree No. 63
have a separate procedure for handling allegations of fraud and corruption in procurement,6
although they include provisions on prohibiting fraudulent and collusive practices. Procurement
complaints are handled in accordance with the procedures stated in Decree No. 63/2014/N?-CP
that require complaints to be duly signed and stamped by a legitimate representative of the
complaining bidder (anonymous complaints are not considered). For complaints related to
contract award, the complainant must deposit a fee equivalent to 0.02 percent of the contract

6
  This is to distinguish fraud and corruption complaints with procurement petitions, for which the handling process
is described under Integrity Aspects in the Procurement Section of this Assessment.



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                                  Page 30
offered bid price (minimum VND 1 million and maximum VND 50 million) that will be
forfeited if the complaint is not substantiated.

101.Complaints are handled by procuring entities or program owners and appeals are reviewed
by a competent agency—the MOET under the ETEP. Complaints are handled as follows. First,
they are reviewed by the procuring entity (equivalent to the PMU under the Program), which is
responsible for responding to the complaining bidder within seven working days. If the procuring
entity is incapable of resolving the complaint, or if the bidder is dissatisfied, the bidder may
submit their complaint to the employer (equivalent to LTTUs under the Program) and the
employer is responsible for replying to the bidder within seven working days. If the bidder is still
dissatisfied, they may escalate to the competent agency (equivalent to the MOET under the
Program). The competent agency is responsible for responding to the bidder within five working
days. In case of complaints about bidding results, the complaints will be resolved based on the
review and recommendation of a Consultative Committee, established on a case-by-case basis
and headed by an authorized representative nominated by the minister. If the bidder remains
unhappy, they may approach a court for redress.

Anonymous Complaints

102.According to the Laws on Complaints and Denunciations, the LTTUs and MOET are not
required to handle anonymous complaints. The inability to submit anonymous complaints may
be a disincentive for citizens to provide information about fraud and corruption in the Program.
However, all participating LTTUs/GIs reportedly maintain the practice of accepting and logging
anonymous complaints for their records. The officials noted that if anonymous complaints
contained credible or serious allegations the inspectors would investigate them fully. The lack of
a clear, consistent, and affirmative policy and procedure for handling these complaints is a clear
weakness in the current complaints handling system.

Complaints Consolidation under the ETEP

103.Building upon the existing system of handling complaints at the MOET level, the GI under
the MOET, will aggregate and inform the Bank of the number of fraud and corruption
allegations, as well as on how they are handled (investigated, mitigated, and sanctioned). The
information will be collected from each LTTU, the MOET PMU as well as from the concerned
GIs under the MOET and will be done at least annually.

Sanction and Debarment Process

104.The abovementioned Laws on AC, on Complaints, and on Denunciation also regulate
sanctions in line with the outcomes of the investigation carried out in the complaints handling
process described already. Contractors can also be sanctioned for multiple warnings of poor
performance according to the Procurement Law (Article 75(1) (c)). This provides significant
discretion to the tendering authority to determine poor performance and if misused, could lead to
sanctions and debarments for reasons beyond the violation of procurement rules and procedures
or for fraud and corruption. Counterparts met during field visits were often unable to tell the
team whether there had been any poor performance debarments in previous infrastructure
programs.



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                    Page 31
105.Once the case is concluded, the LTTU and the MOET PMU will issue administrative
sanctions on the responsible individual and firms. The outcomes are also reported vertically to
the MOET Inspectorate and directly to the MPI, which maintains a national list of debarred firms
and individuals (if related to procurement). This is consistent with Article 122 of Decree
63/2014/N?-CP issued by the Government on June 26, 2014, which regulates that any
procurement sanctions issued will be applied nationally. It is recommended that the LTTUs
check the national debarred list when taking procurement decisions.

D.      The Program Expenditure Framework
106.The assessment of the Expenditure Framework focuses ‘on those Government budget and
expenditure management issues that may put at risk the capacity of the Program to reach its
expected results.’ It draws extensively on experience with similar national programs financed
through results-based lending, in clarifying both policy and practice in program implementation.
It also draws extensively on the design of the Program, specifically the introduction of a new,
performance-based fiscal transfer to support LTTUs to plan, execute, and sustain investments
alongside complementary measures to enhance LTTU capacities; improve oversight by the
MOET and the SAV; and support the ongoing development of national Policy Frameworks on
teacher development.

107.The Technical Assessment concluded that the Government has put in place budget and
expenditure management systems and practices that, with some well-recognized difficulties,
support the Program in reaching its expected results. Two sources of difficulty stand out, both of
which are addressed by the structure of the proposed operation. The first is a budget cycle
(common to all of Vietnam’s Government budgeting) with timing inconsistencies that result in
very late budget decisions and fund transfers that are disruptive to investment programs. The
second is that the medium-term plans and annual plans are made against notional resource
availability, an important part of which is outside of central Government control. Thus, the key
issue is to address delays in budget approval and better linking of annual budgeting and planning
process to multiyear plans.

108.The IDA Credit will finance 37 percent of the expected expenditures of the NTEP.7 This
will help ensure the financing sustainability and funding predictability of the Government
Program. The proposed IDA allocation will be transferred annually as a grant. The Government
will provide the LTTUs with a predictable annual allocation within a multiyear program
envelope, including sufficient advances to commence with Program implementation. Funding to
the LTTUs will also be disbursed in a single, predictable release, subject only to individual
LTTUs achieving pre-specified performance targets that match the Bank’s DLIs.

109.The Expenditure Framework for the Program provides adequate resources to participating
LTTUs to execute a set of high-priority activities. The teacher-student weighted distribution of
resources and the counterpart financing requirement provide suitable proxies to match resources
to actual needs and priorities of the LTTUs. These resources will provide a significant but
manageable addition to resources available in each LTTU, and thus provide a real incentive for

7
  About 25 percent of the program’s expected expenditures is covered by the recurrent budget for in -service teacher
training and an additional 10 percent is supported by the Reform of General Education Project.



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                                  Page 32
LTTUs to comply with performance requirements to actually receive disbursements. This
compliance with performance requirements will, in turn, strengthen the overall sustainability of
the Program capacity and support activities in the Program that are designed to assist LTTUs to
improve management practices.

Bidding and Contracting

110.The procurement risk before mitigation is rated as Substantial and would be reduced to
Moderate after the PAP has been successfully applied.

111.There are risks that existing procurement procedures and processes will result in a low level
of competition in competitive bidding that will have an impact on cost-effectiveness and
competitiveness. First, existing procedures may lead to an unjustified rejection of bids due to
minor deviations and omissions and because of bid prices exceeding cost estimates. Second, DC
procedures may be abused in ways that impact on cost-effectiveness and competitiveness. To
mitigate these risks, it is recommended that procurement actions are included in the PAP that is
agreed with the Government and effectively implemented during Program execution.
Additionally, the LTTUs should be encouraged to use the e-GP system for managing
procurement. The MOET should provide detailed guidance on procurement matters in the OM.

112.The primary risk to contracting is that a shortage of cash flows causes delays to contract
payments which result in slow construction and late delivery of works and services. To mitigate
this risk, LTTUs should appropriately use Program advances, all DLI disbursements, and
mobilize other temporary funding sources for contract payments. Effective, timely budgeting,
procurement planning and execution, and reporting procedures are important elements that
should be in place to mitigate this risk.

Program Execution

113.There is a risk that a fragmented approach to procurement planning will affect the timeliness
of Program implementation and service delivery; and that, unrealistic or late procurement
planning for critical large works and consulting services contracts will result in completion
delays; and willful packaging of works and services into small contracts for the use of DC will
occur. These practices, should they occur, will affect cost-effectiveness and competitiveness. To
mitigate these risks, it is recommended that LTTUs plan procurement for entire subprograms and
phases with priority given to critical large works and consulting services. The LTTUs should
also be encouraged to bundle small contracts into larger ones for the use of competitive bidding
to the extent possible. The MOET should provide detailed guidance on these matters in the OM.

114.There is a risk that weak procurement capacity in the LTTUs will result in delays, low-
quality procurement, or noncompliance affecting timeliness, cost-effectiveness, and
competitiveness. To mitigate this risk it is recommended that

            a. the LTTUs be required to appoint or assign qualified procurement, contract
               management, and technical experts for the PMBs and

            b. the MOET provides procurement training and contract management for the PMBs
               under LTTUs.


ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                 Page 33
E.       Summary of Fiduciary Risks
115.The FSA identified the following key areas that need to be addressed to ensure that the
Program is able to reach its stated goals.

                                   Table 1. Summary of Fiduciary Risks
Ref.                             Risk(s)                                    Proposed Mitigation Measure(s)
       There may be lack of clarification on roles and
       responsibilities of the parent universities toward the
       budget allocation for the Program activities. Because
       the budget proposal of the member LTTU is
                                                                   Performance-based budgeting: For the Program,
       consolidated in the budget of the parent university and
 1.                                                                the performance-based budgeting will be
       the budget allocation is also determined by the parent
                                                                   introduced according to which the MOET will sign
       one, the lack of clarified roles and responsibilities may
                                                                   a memorandum with all participating LTTUs,
       cause (a) omission or wrong budget proposal and
                                                                   according to which the budget allocation to the
       allocation and (b) delayed allocation for the Program
                                                                   LTTUs will be based on the actual performance of
       activities.
                                                                   the LTTUs. The actual performance of the LTTUs
       The less effective budget allocation does not ensure
                                                                   is measured by indicators which are identical with
       that sufficient funds are allocated for the Program
                                                                   the DLIs of the Program.
       priorities and for the performing universities. As
 2.    discussed above, the budget allocation based on the
       norms of student/teacher does not encourage the
       performance of the universities or the implementation
       of the priorities of the Program.
       The budget allocation may not be sufficient for
                                                                   Target allocation of budget: The budget for the
       implementation of the Program. Due to the constraints
                                                                   Program will be allocated to the LTTUs by the
       of the budget, the universities may not be allocated
 3.                                                                MOET as targeted allocation. This would mean that
       with sufficient additional budget to carry out the
                                                                   the amount allocated to the LTTUs will be
       activities of the Program, which are newly added to
                                                                   specifically made for the Program’s activities.
       their current mandates.
                                                                   Establishment of an IA function: Under the
       (a) The controls over the payments made out of the
                                                                   Program, a Technical Assistance will be provided
       off-budget revenue may not be effective and (b) lack
                                                                   to (a) assess the current arrangement of the IA at
       of an integrated IA function and potential overlaps of
                                                                   the LTTUs, (b) build capacity of IA for the LTTUs
 4.    the existing inspections may not provide adequate
                                                                   so that the IA will be established and operational in
       assurance concerning the proper use of public funds
                                                                   accordance with the Government’s guidance on IA
       and may also lead to inefficiency and hinder the
                                                                   within 2 years of the signing of the Financing
       operations of the entities inspected.
                                                                   Agreement.
       Insufficient experienced procurement resources:
       Although these agencies are experienced and capable
                                                                   IOs may hire consultant(s) to help them with some
       of carrying out procurement activities in accordance
                                                                   procurement activities such as preparation of
 5.    with the national public procurement law and
                                                                   bidding documents, bid evaluation, and contract
       regulations, they may not have sufficient human
                                                                   administration.
       resources to cope with such large and complex civil
       works packages.
                                                                    Encouraging limited or OCB for contracts even
       Excessive use of DC results in lack of transparency and       below DC thresholds.
       competition. Therefore, excessive use of this method         Effectively controlling procurement planning to
 6
       may decrease the economy and efficiency of the                avoid unjustifiable contract splitting and
       expected results.                                             combining to do bulk procurement wherever
                                                                     possible.
       Unavailability of budget. The procurement process           An appropriate Annual Plan should be prepared
 7     may be delayed if budget is not available and such          taking into account realistic availability of the
       delay may negatively affect the achievement of the          budget.



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                                       Page 34
      results.
      Incorrectly rejecting bid(s). For example, a bid may be
      rejected due to the offered price being higher than the    All bids received before the deadline for bid
      cost estimate, or due to minor errors/discrepancies.        submission will be evaluated
 8
      This may lead to loss of a good bid and reduce             Bids will not be rejected on the grounds of minor
      competitiveness. It may therefore adversely affect the      deviation
      economy and efficiency of the Program procurement.

Governance and Anticorruption Risks

116.There is a risk that a lack of clarity in the relative authority of various inspectorates may lead
to a lack of follow-up of complaints. Due to the establishment of numerous inspectorates, their
authority to process and settle complaints and denunciations is tightly defined with relation to
each other. For example, according to the Law on Education, inspectors of the MOET or local
education and training departments are only authorized to process complaints and denunciations
relating to the violation of the Law on Education. If the denunciation does not fall under their
jurisdiction, such as a denunciation in relation to a construction, they must refer it to another
authority. The multiple agencies dealing with complaints and the interlocking ‘referral system’
that connects them can create a confusing and difficult situation for citizens trying to file
complaints with the right authority. The fact that anonymous complaints are not required to be
dealt with also can limit the ability of the LTTUs to detect fraud and corruption. The overall
reform of the complaints handling system is beyond the scope of the Program due to its extensive
nature. However, to mitigate these risks, is it recommended that improved and consolidated
reporting on complaints, including anonymous ones, is required on a regular basis. The lack of
any relevant prior complaints on fraud and corruption has meant that the team is unable to
identify other gaps or weaknesses that may appear during implementation of the ETEP.
Improved reporting would assist in monitoring this situation and would allow adjustments to be
made during implementation if proven to be necessary.

117.There is a risk that inadequate staffing of inspection units may constrain the ability of the
Program to collect, manage, and investigate allegations. While the central Government GIs have
numerous staff to carry out the required inspections, the LTTU Inspectorate units are either
under-staffed or lack expertise for undertaking inspection. It is recommended that the adequacy
of staffing is reviewed at Program midterm, alongside a review of reports on complaints
handling, to assess whether additional capacity support or other interventions are required.

118.There is also a risk that the formal denial of the submission of any anonymous complaints
will prevent the discovery of procurement problems and compromise the quality of procurement
work. It is recommended that all complaints, including anonymous ones, be duly considered and
addressed. There is also a risk that the non-application of Bank debarment/suspension lists
results in contract awards to debarred firms and/or individuals. It is recommended that
agreements with the Government are reached to share Bank debarment lists with the
participating LTTUs and that their compliance is supervised and audited during Program
implementation.




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                                   Page 35
F.       Monitoring Fiduciary Performance over Program Period
119.While key fiduciary areas requiring           specific actions for strengthening Government systems
have been listed in the PAP, it will               also be important to monitor the overall fiduciary
performance throughout the duration of            the Program. Table 2 identifies the specific indicators
which should be monitored (together               with the relevant baseline position) to provide the
framework to measure improvements                  in the performance of financial management and
procurement processes.

                               Table 2. Fiduciary Performance Indicators
     Indicator                           Measure                                Baseline/Description
                                             PROCUREMENT
                                                                      A typical PP for a works included one civil
Contract packaging                                                    works or goods contract, one consultant
and distribution of    Numbers and percentages of contracts           contract for detailed design, and one
procurement            procured under OCB and DC                      consultant contract for construction
methods used                                                          supervision. This has resulted in many
                                                                      small contracts procured through DC.
Bidders’
                       Number of bidders submitting bids in each
participation in                                                      3 to 4
                       bidding process
OCB
                        Number of bids rejected due to offered bid
                         price being higher than the cost estimate     Almost 100 percent
                         and/or minor deviations or omissions          Occasional checking of the
Quality of bid
                        Results of checking against the                Government’s debarment lists; no
evaluation practices
                         Government’s and Bank’s                        checking for Bank’s
                         debarment/suspension lists shown in the        debarment/suspension lists
                         BERs
                                                                       Several civil works contracts delayed
                        Percentage of contracts completed within
Contract                                                               Payments for civil works are often made
                         the original planned completion period
administration                                                          on time. However, this is largely
                        Percentage of payments delayed
                                                                        dependent on budget availability.
                        Number of complaints received (including
                         anonymous ones) and the number of        No complaints received. Anonymous
Complaint handling
                         complaints actually considered and       complaints not officially accepted.
                         handled
                        Number of inspections and audits (that
                         include procurement performance review)  Inspections conducted annually. Audits
Frequency and
                         conducted per year                         conducted every two years and at least
quality of
                        Number of inspection and audit reports     one time for each IO.
procurement
                         that include detailed procurement         Past inspection and audit reports
performance
                         performance assessment against agreed      provided little information on
inspection and audit
                         indicators and procurement problems or     procurement compliance
                         noncompliance
                                         FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Budget allocated by
                       Annual variance between annual budget
the MOET versus
                       proposed by the IOs and budget allocated by    n.a.
budget proposed by
                       the MOET (%)
the IOs
Effectiveness of IA    Coverage, quality, and management
function in the        response to quarterly IA reports, frequency,   Nil. No IA function exists.
MOET and LTTUs         and distribution of audit reports




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                                  Page 36
      Indicator                         Measure                                  Baseline/Description
Quality and
                                                                       LTTU financial statements are produced
timeliness of annual   Completeness and timeliness of annual
                                                                       on time but do not yet follow generally
financial statements   reports
                                                                       accepted accounting principles.
for the Program
                       Scope, nature, and adherence to auditing
                       standards acceptable to the Bank; audit
Quality and
                       opinion on consolidated financial
timeliness of audit                                                    Lack of audit opinion
                       statements; report received by the Bank
report
                       within the period agreed in the legal
                       agreement.
                       Evidence of timely and adequate follow-up
Follow-up on audit                                                     Seriously followed up by the MOET and
                       by Program management on audit
recommendations                                                        the LTTUs
                       recommendations

G.          Fiduciary Elements of the Implementation Support Plan
Main Focus of Implementation Support

120.The Program Implementation Support Plan is listed in Table 3:

                                Table 3. Program Implementation Support
     Time                       Focus                         Skills Needed             Resource Estimate
              Development of roles, work plan, and         Legal, governance,
                                                                                 2 Implementation Support
              incentives for core teachers;                financial
                                                                                 Mission plus 2 Technical
              development of PAs between the LTTUs         management,
                                                                                 Missions:
              and the MOET; establishment of               technical (teacher
 First 12                                                                        2 x 12 people x 2 weeks = 48
              arrangements for independent                 education),
 months                                                                          weeks, in addition to 2 x 5 people
              verification; development of capacity        procurement, social
                                                                                 x 1 week = 10 weeks.
              building plan for the MOET and lead          and environmental
                                                                                 Total: 58 person weeks over 12
              LTTUs; and strengthening of M&E              safeguard
                                                                                 months
              system                                       specialists
                                                           Legal, governance,
                                                           financial             2 implementation support mission
              Reviewing implementation progress,
                                                           management,           plus midterm review:
              cross-checking linkages between the
                                                           technical (teacher    2 x 4 years x 8 people x 2 weeks
 12–48        MOET/DOET/lead LTTUs planning and
                                                           education),           = 128 weeks; 2 x 12 people x 2
 months       results, providing support in case of
                                                           procurement, social   weeks = 24 weeks
              disputes relating to verification (LTTUs
                                                           and environmental     Total: 152 person weeks
              or the MOET/IVA)
                                                           safeguard
                                                           specialists, M&E
           Independent audit/assessment of                 Independent           2 people for 5 weeks.
 Other
           verification of results                         technical expertise   Total: 10 person weeks
 Note: M&E = Monitoring and evaluation.

121.The skills mix of the task team required for fiduciary implementation support is shown in
Table 4:

                                   Table 4. Task Team Skills Required
                       Skills                            Staff Weeks                       Trips
Governance                                                    10                            n.a.
Fiduciary                                                     30                             3




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                                     Page 37
Proposed Financial Management Action Plan

122.It is recommended that the following actions be agreed with the Government before the
credit negotiations and subsequently, be implemented during the Program execution:

        (a) Proposed Program actions. The Government will build and implement an effective
            IA function for the Program within two years from the signing of the FA.

        (b) Other requirements. The MOET and the MOF should issue guidance on the
            performance-based budgeting/allocation before negotiation within six months from
            the signing of the Financing Agreement.

Proposed Procurement Action Plan

123.In accordance with the results of the assessment presented above, it is recommended that the
following PAP be agreed with the Government before the credit negotiations and subsequently
be implemented during the Program:

            a. All proposals for detailed designs, construction supervision, and bids for civil
               works, whether below or above cost estimates, shall be evaluated; and proposals
               and bids shall not be rejected only on the basis of minor, non-substantive
               deviations.

            b. At least 60 percent of contracts for consultancies and 85 percent of contracts for
               works and goods will be competitively bid annually; no contract having cost
               estimates above the thresholds for using DC/SSS method set forth in the law and
               regulation will be awarded on DC/SSS basis.

            c. Firms on the local, national, or the Bank debarment list8 will not be allowed to
               participate.

124.To facilitate the effective monitoring of Program procurement, the reporting system and
practices should improve. It is therefore proposed that Program implementation reports prepared
by the LTTUs should include the following information on procurement performance:

            a. Copies of updated PPs

            b. Procurement transactions completed in the reporting period which list the
               following information, among others:

               i.        Contract title and code

              ii.        Approved cost estimate

             iii.        Procurement method followed


8
   The national debarment list can be found at http://muasamcong.mpi.gov.vn/; the Bank debarment list at
http://www.worldbank.org/debarr; and the temporary suspension list at https://clientconnection.worldbank.org.



ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                            Page 38
             iv.        Advertisement date

              v.        Participating bidders’ names and their bid prices as read out and recorded

             vi.        Names of bidders rejected and reasons for rejection

            vii.        Name of successful bidder and bid price offered

            viii.       Date of contract award approval

             ix.        Contract signing date

              x.        Final contract amount

             xi.        Contractual completion date

            xii.        Actual completion date

            c. Procurement inspections/audits conducted during the reporting period (copies of
               reports attached)

            d. Dates, venues, numbers of participants who attended procurement training, and
               capacity-building activities conducted during the reporting period (lists of
               participants attached)

            e. Emerging procurement and contractual issues that require attention and actions

125.The OM should provide for development of the best practice guidelines by the MOET for
procurement activities including the following:

            a. Preparation of medium-term PPs showing all packages to be procured by the
               LTTUs (whether or not funded by the Program) during at least an annual budget
               cycle

            b. Use of market prices as a basis for cost estimate (including for consultant fees)

            c. Ensuring adequate length of advertising with tender documents available from the
               first day of advertising. If not directly forbidden by law, bidders should be
               permitted to examine tender documents at the LTTU office before deciding to
               purchase. Clear procedures for disseminating information/clarifications to bidders
               should be introduced, perhaps including a pre-bidding meeting or site inspection
               for larger subprograms

            d. Establishment of clear, objective, and appropriate bid evaluation criteria which
               should be included in the instructions to bidders

            e. Introduction of sole-sourcing procedures, particularly for recruitment of
               consultants designed to ensure that the qualifications of the best available




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                    Page 39
                candidates are compared and evaluated and that there is an auditable record of the
                decision making process

126.Capacity support should be provided to support the LTTUs to comply with procurement
rules and procedures. Further details on this support are included in the Technical Assessment.

Governance and Application of the Anticorruption Guidelines

127.It is recommended that the following actions be agreed with the Government, reflected in
the OM, and subsequently, be implemented during the Program:

        (a) Implementing agencies systematically disclose information on the Program activities
            to the public, including financial information throughout the implementation of the
            Program

        (b) Agreement on information sharing and reporting on fraud and corruption
            allegations. Based on this assessment and the team’s field visits, there does not
            appear to be a unified national system for collecting and reporting on how the
            authorities handle allegations of fraud and corruption. Therefore, to ensure that the
            client will be able to comply with its reporting obligations under the Anticorruption
            Guidelines, the client has committed to provide this information from the eight
            participating agencies and the Ministry of Education and Training. The inspectorate
            under the MOET should be tasked to aggregate and inform the Bank of the number of
            fraud and corruption allegations, as well as how they are handled (investigated,
            mitigated and/or sanctioned) according to an agreed simple template (see Table 5).
            The information should be collected from each LTTU, as well as from the concerned
            GIs under the MOET, and should be reported to the Bank team at least annually.

                     Table 5. Proposed Template for Reporting Complaints
                           [NAME OF REPORTING ENTITY]
  Item                               [Summary Title of Complaint]
  Reference No.                      [Reference number assigned to complaint]
  Location                           [City/Area]
  Date Received                      [Date]
  Complainant                        [Name of Complainant or Blank, if anonymous]
  Anonymous                          [Y/N]
  Alleged Perpetrator                [Name(s)]
  Description of Allegation          [Summary of specific allegations made]
                                     [Initial Review, Investigation, Prosecution, and so
  Stage of Handling of Allegation
                                     on]
  Description of Progress in
                                     [Summary of progress made]
  Investigation
                                     [Provide final investigative report where
  Outcome of Investigation
                                     available]




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                  Page 40
        (c) Clarify debarments under the Program. In the light of the readily available debarment
            lists at the provincial and national levels, the Bank should seek an agreement with the
            client to (i) share the respective debarment list and basic information including the
            name of the debarred entity, date and duration of debarment, and reason for
            debarment (the Bank should make it readily available to the MOET to share it with
            the participating LTTUs) and (ii) supervision and audit should be carried out during
            implementation to establish actual performance on enforcing the debarment lists.

        (d) Client to ensure that Program participants are obligated to cooperate with Bank
            investigations. The World Bank has also received evidence of a written
            communication from a competent central government authority (i.e. MOET) to the
            relevant Program entities (such as universities, education management units etc.),
            which sets out the obligations of those authorized to cooperate with any investigations
            under the Program, including any investigations that may be necessary by the World
            Bank.




ETEP: Fiduciary Systems Assessment Report (June 2016)                                   Page 41
