     Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
     Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                i




UNLOCKING THE POTENTIAL OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY TO
               IMPROVE WATER AND SANITATION SERVICES



                                        UGANDA CASE STUDY




                        By Mouhamed Fadel Ndaw and Samuel Dawuna Mutono

                                             November 2015
PREFACE

This report has been prepared for the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) Study on “Unlocking
the Potential of ICT Services in the Water and Sanitation Sector”. The study builds on and
complements the World Banks’ Africa Regional Strategy (2011) and the World Bank Group’s
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) strategy (2012). It further complements the E-
Transform Africa series, a collaboration between the African Development Bank, the World Bank
and the African Union, which captures the existing use of ICT in six sectors (agriculture, climate
change, education, health, financial services, government) and two cross-cutting themes (regional
trade and integration, ICT competitiveness).


WSP has spearheaded the use of ICT in many countries in particular with its contribution in
financing the use of the mWater pilot platform in countries such as Senegal, Mali, Niger and Benin,
Akvo Flow and Fulcrum in Liberia and Sierra Leone and Maji Voice in Kenya. As many sector
stakeholders are interested to learn from these pilot interventions, it is necessary to improve the
documentation on these experiences and propose practical modalities for scale-up.
There is also a very strong drive around the use of ICT in the WASH sector and a growing interest
among external partners. As such, there is a need to develop clearer partnership platforms with
both short- (i.e. project specific) and medium-term objectives, to understand the potential
information that can be generated through ICT, increase accessibility to and use of that information,
and ensure that ICT generated information is implemented more sustainably in support of WASH
objectives.
The study was carried out by the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) of the World Bank to fill a
gap in understanding how the potential of ICT can improve water and sanitation services globally
with a particular emphasis in Africa. It covers a global desk review and case studies in 7 African
countries (Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Senegal, Benin, Niger and Liberia), complemented by cases
from other regions (Latin America, North America, South Asia and East Asia) and analyses strengths
and weaknesses of existing ICT tools. It also provides evidence on how ICT can be used to leapfrog
the water and sanitation sector towards more sustainable service delivery.

As such, this study sought to not only document experiences of ICT use in the WASH sector but also
analyze them within a framework of enabling factors and barriers in terms of Vision, Process,
Customer/User, Service Delivery, Human Capacity, Governance and Finance.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                                                                              iii




TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.          INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................... 1
2.          LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS ...................................................................................................... 3
            2.1         Regulatory and Operating Environment .................................................................... 3
                        2.1.1       ICT Policy ....................................................................................... 3
                        2.1.2       ICT use in the WASH sector .......................................................... 4
3.          CASE STUDY: E-WATER PAYMENT .................................................................................. 8
            3.1         Description of the E-Water Payment Platform .......................................................... 9
                        3.1.1       Vision.............................................................................................. 9
                        3.1.2       Process .......................................................................................... 9
                        3.1.3       Customers/Users ......................................................................... 10
                        3.1.4       Human Capacity........................................................................... 10
                        3.1.5       Finance......................................................................................... 10
            3.2         Data Analysis and Findings: Assessing the impact of E-water payment platform . 11
            3.3         Discussion ............................................................................................................... 13
            3.4         Opportunities and Challenges ................................................................................. 13
4.          CASE STUDY: M4W (MOBILES FOR WATER) ................................................................. 13
            4.1         Description of the M4W System .............................................................................. 14
                        4.1.1       Vision............................................................................................ 14
                        4.1.2       Process ........................................................................................ 14
                        4.1.3       Customer/User ............................................................................. 15
                        4.1.4       Human Capacity........................................................................... 16
                        4.1.5       Finance......................................................................................... 18
            4.2         Data Analysis and Findings: Assessing the impact of M4W ................................... 20
            4.3         Discussion ............................................................................................................... 22
                        4.3.1       Trends in the WASH indicators captured by the ICT tool ............ 22
                        4.3.2       Trends in the use and operation of the ICT application itself....... 22
                        4.3.3       Gaps in data coverage ................................................................. 23
            4.4         Opportunities and Challenges ................................................................................. 23
5.          CONCLUSION ..................................................................................................................... 25
ANNEX A: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED .................................................................... 26
ANNEXB: PICTORIAL OF FIELD MISSION .................................................................................... 27
References .................................................................................................................................. Ref-1
List of Tables:

Table 1: History of ICT uptake and use in the National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) . 8
Table 2: Impact assessment of the e-water payment platform using the Impact Chain analysis ..... 11
Table 3: Summary of the M4W costs ................................................................................................ 18
Table 4: Impact assessment of the M4W tool using the Impact chain analysis ............................... 20
Table 5: Participants of the field study on the Potential of ICT in WASH in Uganda ........................ 26


List of Figures:

Figure 1: The structure of the Ministry of Water and Environment (Uganda) showing the
directorates, departments and linkages .............................................................................................. 3
Figure 2: Location of water sources in Abim district ........................................................................... 5
Figure 3: Resource coverage in the 2012/2013 FY ........................................................................... 6
Figure 4: The M4W sticker placed on the borehole to act as the source label (left) and a flyer given
to hand pump mechanics explaining how the system works (right).................................................. 16
Figure 5: The online dashboard used by the district water officer to monitor reported faults
(community members) and baseline data collection (Hand pump mechanics) ................................ 17
Figure 6: A sample M4W assessment form (left) and the feature Java-enabled mobile phones given
to the Hand pump mechanics and extension workers (right) ............................................................ 17
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                         v




ACRONYMS
  DEA                    Directorate of Environmental Affairs (Uganda)
  DWD                    Directorate of Water Development (Uganda)
  DWRM                   Directorate of Water Resources Management (Uganda)
  IRC                    International Water and Sanitation Centre
  M4W                    Mobiles for Water
  MWE                    Ministry of Water and Environment (Uganda)
  NWSC                   National Water and Sewerage Corporation
  SNV                    Netherlands Development Organisation
  Triple S               Sustainable Services at Scale
  WSDB                   Water Supply Database
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                                        1




1. INTRODUCTION
Uganda, like many developing African countries is embracing the use of Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) in the WASH sector to improve service delivery in both urban and
rural settlements. The proliferation of affordable ICTs, principally in the form of mobile phones, has
presented opportunities to address information gaps that tend to hinder service delivery by
transforming the way information is generated and shared amongst stakeholders. According to
Jiménez and Pérez-Foguet (2010) water access problems in low resource areas arise from social
and political causes rather than technical or physical problems. Having functional water services
especially in rural communities is not so much a technological challenge but rather an institutional
one. The political interference, lack of voice and visibility for the poor communities, poverty, low
literacy and weak institutional capacities make service delivery hard. The issues in the water sector
are complex and diverse and there is no single solution. However, addressing the underlying issue
of governance by establishing systems or structures to develop, manage and deliver water services
to communities is seen as critical if access to these services is to improve (Hutchings et al, pp.10,
2012).ICTs have become ubiquitous and are being applied in developing countries to support the
establishment of reliable and inclusive information practices to facilitate the management of WASH
activities and produce actionable information to achieve sustainable delivery of services. ICTs offer
ways of changing relationships between communities and service providers and provide a platform
for more affordable information dissemination, communication between service providers and
communities and monitoring of interventions in the sector (Hellström & Jacobson, 2014; Breslin,
2013).

While there are many potential benefits offered, ICT implementation, use and scale-up face multiple
challenges. Issues of poor communication infrastructure, education barriers (low literacy), politics,
culture of technology use and capacity of local government institutions to act on the information
generated must be addressed if technological interventions are to be meaningful and influence
service delivery and water access.

This report presents findings of a field study conducted in Uganda in October 2014. This report is
one of seven country case study reports that make up the third step of the WSP study Unlocking the
Potential of ICT Services in the Water & Sanitation Sector in Africa1. The case study reports sought
to address two of the following key objectives of the study: 1) Document relevant experiences of key
ICT applications in the water and sanitation sector, highlighting the strengths and weaknesses of
current initiatives, and 2) Identify binding constraints impacting ICT adoption and scale-up.

The first section of the report offers a landscape analysis of Uganda; briefly introducing the regulatory
and operating environment for the ICT and WASH sectors, looking at existing ICT use in the WASH
sector and the current state of ICT policy. The second section then looks specifically at two case
studies, the National Water and Sewerage Corporation’s e-water payment system and Mobiles 4
Water. As part of each country case study one to two ICT initiatives were examined in detail using
the dual framework analysis introduced and described in the Analytical Report .This allowed for an
increased in-depth assessment of the barriers and enabling factors of success faced by ICTs
currently in play in the African WASH sector and supported the highlighting of key principles upon
which successful sustainability and scalability models can be constructed. The study is based on
reports on the national water utility (National Water and Sewerage Corporation), and the Mobiles 4
Water intervention and interviews and focus group discussions carried out among users and



1 All study reports can be found on the Unlocking ICT Potential site in the Resources Folder. Submitted Reports
- Study on Unlocking ICT Potential
implementers in Uganda. The stakeholders that were consulted during the preparation of this report
are presented in Annex A.
  Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
  Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                                                                    3




  2. LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS
  2.1 Regulatory and Operating Environment
  The Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE) is the service authority for the water sector in Uganda
  and is responsible for setting policies and standards, and managing and regulating water resources.
  It is also charged with determining priorities for water development and management. It has three
  directorates namely; Water Resources Management (DWRM), Water Development (DWD) and
  Environmental Affairs (DEA).

  Figure 1: The structure of the Ministry of Water and Environment (Uganda) showing the
  directorates, departments and linkages. (Source: Ministry of Water and Environment)
                                                                                                                 Authorities and Agencies
                                                                                                                 (Reporting to the Minister)
                                                                                                                 ·   National Forestry
                                                        Ministry of Water and Environment                            Authority (NFA)
                                                                                                                 ·   National Water and
                                                                                                                     Sewage Corporation
                                                                                                                     (NWSC)
                                                                                                                 ·   National Environmental
                                                  To assist and advise                                               Management Authority
                                                      the Minister                                                   (NEMA)
                        Water Policy
                        Committee

DRWM
                                                                                                                 Departments, Divisions and
provides
                                                                                         Directorate of          Units:
secretarial   Directorate of Water Resources               Directorate of Water
                                                                                      Environmental Affairs      (Reporting to the PS)
services
                  Management (DWRM)                        Development (DWD)                                     ·    Finance and
                                                                                             (DEA)
                                                                                                                      Administration
                                                                                                                      Department
                                                                                                                       - Procurement Unit
              Departments:                              Departments:                 Departments:                      - Internal Audit
              ·   Water Resources Monitoring            ·   Urban Water Supply and   ·   Environmental Support         - Personnel Unit
                  and Assessments                           Sewerage                 ·   Wetlands Management           - Accounts Unit
              ·   Water Resources Planning              ·   Rural Water Supply and   ·   Forestry Support        ·    Planning Division
                  and Regulation                            Sanitation               ·   Methodology                   - Policy Analysis Unit
              ·   Water Quality Management              ·   Water for Production                                 ·    Climate Change Unit


                              accountability

                              advice and facilitation



  The Directorate of Water Resources Management (DWRM) is responsible for developing and
  maintaining national water laws, policies and regulations; managing, monitoring and regulation of
  water resources through issuing water use, abstraction and wastewater discharge permits; Integrated
  Water Resources Management (IWRM) activities; and coordinating Uganda's participation in joint
  management of trans-boundary waters resources and peaceful cooperation with Nile Basin riparian
  countries. The Directorate of water Development (DWD) is responsible for providing overall technical
  oversight for the planning, implementation and supervision of delivery of water and sanitation
  services to both urban and rural areas. The Directorate of Environmental Affairs (DEA) is mandated
  to manage environmental and wetland resources and to sustain the biophysical and socio-economic
  values of the wetlands in Uganda.

  Regarding sanitation and hygiene activities, the Ministry has a Memorandum of Understanding with
  the Ministries of Health (MoH) and Education, Science, Technology & Sports (MoESTS). The role of
  the Ministry of Water is therefore limited to development of public sanitary facilities and promotion of
  good practices of hygiene and sanitation in small towns and rural growth centers.

  2.1.1       ICT Policy
  In 2003, a national ICT policy was developed with the goal of promoting the development and
  effective utilisation of ICT, including timely access to information. Each sector was expected to design
elaborate action plans for implementation of relevant sections of the policy which together would form
the National ICT Action Plan. However, the IT policy of the Ministry of Water and Environment (2011)
is an internal policy covering email use, telephone use, connection of equipment to the ministry
network, back-up of information and naming convention. The Ministry does not have a framework or
specific policy that addresses and regulates the use of ICTs in the WASH sector.

2.1.2   ICT use in the WASH sector
The Water and Environment Sector Liaison Department (WESLD), under the Directorate of Water
Development, houses an MIS unit that is responsible for the operation and maintenance of the water
supply database (WSDB). The WSDB is the major source of information on point water sources and
piped water supplies in rural and urban areas and is regularly updated to offer more accurate
information on the status of safe water sources in Uganda. The ministry hopes to use the WSDB
information to produce a new water atlas in 2015. WESLD is also working on an initial design for a
data warehouse that will allow all ministry staff to obtain up to date reports and also to serve as a
document repository where water sector and project documents can be downloaded. Currently, the
database is accessed by Ministry staff, including district staff, but stakeholders’ access is limited to
downloading reports. Access for users outside the ministry is via the ministry website. The Ministry
maintains a log of resources downloaded from its website. To keep information updated, the ministry
regularly trains districts water officers on how to use the information for planning and budgeting,
resource allocation as well as on updating procedures. The reporting component of the WSDB has
been improved in FY 2013/2014 to include a real-time mapping tool to allow users to generate maps
of areas of interest, for example a map plotting the location of improved water sources for a specific
district, or water resource distribution and access for a particular financial year as shown respectively
in figures 2 and 3 below.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                            5




Figure 2: Location of water sources in Abim district (Source: Sector Performance Review, 2014)
                                                                                                    Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
6                                                                                           Field Review of Case Studies – Uganda



Figure 3: Resource coverage in the 2012/2013 FY (Source: Sector Performance Review, 2014)
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                                  7



Monitoring of the online access to the WSDB shows that very few ministry staff, including district staff,
are actually making use of the WSDB. Despite efforts to train users, the database is underutilised.
The ministry also continues to rely on a paper-based system to collect data on several indicators from
the districts. Information on performance of water sources (quantity of water flowing, quality of water),
functionality of water sources (rate of breaking down, frequency of maintenance, requirements for
major repairs) and existence of water user committees for every water source (and their composition
in terms of Gender) is collected quarterly from every district. District Water officers have reporting
mechanisms through the lower administrative levels (that is, extension staff at sub-county level that
collect information from the communities and relay it to the districts). The Ministry provides form
templates for data collection and these are downloaded and printed by the Districts, filled by the
extension workers and submitted back to the Ministry (by the DWO) in paper form. The MIS unit
analyses the information collected and uploads to the DWD-MIS (Directorate of Water Development
Information Management System) database. It is from here that all data on rural water from the district
local governments and other sub-sectors is accessed. The data collected facilitates the annual
updating of the WSDB database and forms part of the Water Sector and Environment Sector
Performance Report.

The ministry is planning to develop a data collection procedure manual to synchronise data linked to
key partner databases, to avoid duplicated data collection activities and to support departments that
report on the same indicators. It is hoped that other stakeholders such as local governments, the
bureau of statistics and civil society organisations will be involved. A general information system
development strategy for the ministry is also planned.
                                                                          Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
8                                                                 Field Review of Case Studies – Uganda




3. CASE STUDY: E-WATER PAYMENT
The National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) is the public utility that provides water
services to urban centers and towns in Uganda.

NWSC’s Vision is ‘To be a leading water utility in the world’ and their Mission is ‘To provide efficient
and cost effective water and sewerage services, applying innovative managerial solutions to the
delight of our customers’.

Over the last sixteen years, the Corporation has undergone tremendous structural, operational and
financial improvement. As of June 2013, the Corporation was mandated to provide services in 23
key towns across the country, representing a market of approximately 2.7 million people. As of the
end of February 2014, NWSC was operating in 40 towns with 6 more lined up for take-over by the
end of 2014. It is expected that the number of towns under the jurisdiction of NWSC will increase to
91 by June 2015. The water service coverage is estimated at 78% translating into over 3.8 million
people served in gazetted urban towns country wide, for which 94 million m3 of water is produced
per annum from 26 water treatment plants and distributed through 6,966 km of water mains. In
addition, NWSC operates 2 conventional sewerage treatment plants and 21 waste stabilization ponds
with a total sewer network length of 483 km. The work force by end of June 2014 stood at 2,200 with
a staff productivity ratio of 6 staff per 1000 connections. The number of new water connections
averages 28,000 per annum with 99.9% of these connections metered. 2

Performance improvements in the NWSC over the last sixteen years have been characterized by a
rapid expansion of the customer base which has more than quadrupled to 366,097 connections as
at December 2014; the reduction in water losses from the peak of 60% to the current performance of
33.6%; the improvement in staff productivity from 40 staff per thousand connections to 6 staff per
thousand connections. On the finance side, the Corporation turnover has more than quadrupled
between 1999/2000 and 2012/2013 and has sustained a corporate surplus after depreciation
standing at 20.2 billion UGX. This has enabled the construction of an average of over 100 km of new
water mains, 21,637 new connections, funding of minor capital investments and meeting all the co-
funding obligations for major capital investments using internally generated funds.

With a fully-fledged Information Technology department, the organization has been able to utilize
ICTs to support a number of business processes, as shown in Table 1 below, including the
implementation of an e-water payment system which is a financial platform that enables customers
to have the flexibility of when and how to pay for their water services.

Table 1: History of ICT uptake and use in the National Water and Sewerage Corporation
(NWSC)

    Year              System
    ~1990             Block mapping exercises for Kampala
    ~1993             Introduction of Billing system in Kampala (starting with big consumers)
    ~1995             Implementation of Scala Accounting system at the Head Office
    ~1999             Review of Scala implementation under the Small Towns project, Increase
                      Scala modules, User licenses and increase coverage to area offices
    ~2001 - 2003       · Expansion of country-wide WAN




2   http://www.nwsc.co.ug/index.php/about-us/ourprofile
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                                    9



                      ·    Remote access to Scala accounting system at the head office, using
                           CITRIX
                      ·    Corporate website and email system developed.
 ~2004 - 2007         ·    Call center implementation
                      ·    Upgrade of billing system
                      ·    Corporate Telephony system (VoIP)
 ~2008 - 2010         ·    Multi Company setup of Accounting system
                      ·    Internal Software development
                      ·    Handheld meter reading device implementation
                      ·    SMS/mobile solutions



3.1 Description of the E-Water Payment Platform
3.1.1   Vision
The e-water payment system was developed to facilitate and improve payment for water services by
customers. For a long time, the utility operated cash offices at every branch and had to employ
personnel to collect money from water users. In an effort to focus more on its core services/business,
that is, water services provision to its customers, the utility embarked on plans to phase out cash
offices and relinquish non-core services, for example relinquishing the collection of bills to institutions
that have the facilities to manage those services. This was also fueled by the need to reduce costs
associated with running cash offices and bill collections (for example, paying cash officers and risks
of transporting cash daily to the commercial banks) and reduce the inconveniences of payment for
its customers. The utility used to spend about 6 billion UGX annually on bill collection.

3.1.2   Process
The e-water payment application was developed internally by the Information Technology
Department of NWSC using a prototyping approach. The initial prototype was run in parallel with
some customers paying their bills in selected banks while others paid at the utility’s cash offices.
Payment in the bank required a customer to fill out a deposit form and submit it together with the
money to be paid to the cashier in the bank. This resulted in a lot of discrepancies as some accounts
were wrongly credited due to human error. The utility then developed a version that included an
interface between the bank’s core financial system and the customer accounts database which was
integrated with an SMS function. When a customer paid their bill, his or her account was credited in
real time and an SMS notification sent to the customer. In August 2010 this version was piloted with
one bank (Bank of Africa) and once successful was rolled out to other banks. With time, all cash
offices were closed as more customers moved to the e-water system. Currently, this service has
been rolled out to 25 banks (or financial institutions) in Uganda.

To increase the convenience of payment and to reduce payment arrears, the utility partnered with
four telecom companies that were implementing mobile money services to allow customers to pay
bills using their mobile phones. As a financial platform, e-water was developed following financial
procedures, processes and manuals that stipulated controls that had to be replicated in the system.
The financial institutions already have data quality controls in place allowing information output into
the utility’s system to be verified. The system has a reporting module that allows for extraction of data
by profiled users, for example billing officers who upload bill batches and accountants who log in to
reconcile accounts and load into the billing system. All information is kept in the e-water system until
the utility receives an electronic bank statement that is fed into the billing system. Erroneous
information on the statements is sent back to the banks for verification. The different branches then
log into the system to pick the reconciled transactions of customers in their areas of operation and
load them into the billing system to update the customer accounts.
                                                                       Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
10                                                             Field Review of Case Studies – Uganda



3.1.3   Customers/Users
The e-water payment platform was developed to be used by all customers of the utility who receive
water services from the utility (approximately 350,000 connected customers) as well as a number of
companies that use the utility’s commercial services , for example, renting of office space, payment
for new connections or re-connections and the quality testing laboratory. For customers to use the
system, they simply need to walk into any participating bank or subscribe to the mobile money
platform of their telecom provider.

3.1.4   Human Capacity
The e-water payment platform relies on established human capacity and infrastructure both within
the banks that receive the payments as well as within the telecom providers who receive mobile
money payments and credit the accounts of the utility. Initially, the implementation of an e-water
payment system created a burden of reconciling transactions, in response NWSC has automated the
reconciliation process and has set up a unit of trained reconciliation accountants to deal with the
exceptional cases

3.1.5   Finance
The only development costs incurred were on personnel within the utility that developed the system
as the IT department had to recruit software developers to work on the system. Maintenance of the
e-water infrastructure is currently one of the areas the utility is spending a substantial amount of
money. To manage country-wide connections, it costs the utility approximately 1.5bn UGX annually.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                                                                                          11



3.2 Data Analysis and Findings: Assessing the impact of the E-water payment platform
Table 2 below assesses various aspects of the development, implementation and application of the e-water payment tool. The ICT impact chain developed
by Gigler (2011) is used to assess the social and human impact of the ICT intervention. This involves an assessment of the information and communication
options that have been made available, and the ability of the communities to use these opportunities to improve the quality of their lives.

Table 2: Impact assessment of the e-water payment platform using the Impact Chain analysis (Gigler, 2011)

            Condition                        Dimension                                                    Assessment
       Information Needs             Information needs           The need to focus on core activities of water services provision to urban areas and towns
      (existing information         Communication needs          was the key driver for this tool. With a number of financial institutions in place as well as the
            ecologies)             Communication channels        increased use and affordability of mobile technology, electronic payments were considered
                                      Information gaps           more convenient and cost-effective for both the customers and the utility.


         Access to ICTs              Access to electricity       The areas served by the utility, urban areas and towns, have access to electricity and are
       (ICT Infrastructure)       Access to ICT infrastructure   covered by all the major telecom providers in Uganda. According to the 2014 statistics from
                                     Geographic location         the Uganda Communications Commission, over 53.3% of Ugandans use mobile phones 3.
                                                                 Most of these users are in urban areas and towns and frequently use mobile phones for
                                                                 communication and to carry out financial transactions. The Financial institutions that NWSC
                                                                 partners with are strategically located in the urban centers and towns so customers have
                                                                 access to payment points. Furthermore, all the telecom providers currently support mobile
                                                                 money payment platforms. Therefore, regardless of the telecom provider one subscribes
                                                                 to, all customers are able to pay for their water services using their mobile phones.
        Basic Use of ICTs                  Literacy rates        The e-water payment platform is appropriate for the customers served by the utility. Since
        (Simple ICT use)                 Level of education      the utility serves a vast number of users country wide it uses English as opposed to a local
                                        Socio-cultural context   language, which has not impeded usage. Residents are either literate or semi-literate but
                                         Basic ICT training      capable of using technology to make payments or use their banks to effect payments to the
                                                                 utility without needing to be trained.



3   http://www.ucc.co.ug/data/qmenu/3/Facts-and-Figures.html
                                                                                                                               Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
12                                                                                                                     Field Review of Case Studies – Uganda



           Condition                   Dimension                                                       Assessment
 Meaningful use of the ICT        ICT Capacity building        The closure of cash offices at NWSC forced customers to use the e-water payment system.
            tool                Local and relevant content     The existing infrastructure within the financial institutions and telecom providers to support
 (Level of use of the tool)    Technical local appropriation   mobile payments has greatly contributed to the sustainability of the payment platform.
                                      Sustainability           NWSC has set up a reconciliation unit to deal with exceptions of erroneous payments and
                                                               has also revamped its customer care center to respond to customer queries. The system
                                                               is integrated with the billing system and customers are able to request their bills and make
                                                               payments without physically moving to the utility offices but rather through use of their
                                                               phones.
     Enhanced Information            ICT Capabilities          Because of the convenience that mobile technology gives to customers, more are using the
      Capability (multiplier       Information literacy        mobile phones to pay for services than walking to the banks or financial institutions. This is
            effect)            Communication Capabilities      also driven by the ability to query how much one owes the utility and immediately proceed
                                  Content Capabilities         to the payment options provided. The service is not complicated and no complaints have
                                 Local technical & social      been logged by the utility in terms of the technology itself since the service was extended
                                      appropriation            to support mobile payments. The utility has registered improvements in payments since
                                                               customers are able to pay outside office hours and on weekends.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                                  13


3.3 Discussion
With the e-water payment system, NWSC has been able to collect payments from 98% of its current
customer base. Customers now have more payment points since the participating banks have more
branches than the utility country wide. Also, customers are more willing to use the system to pay for
services as their accounts are credited in real time as opposed to the previous system that required
time for reconciling bank payment records with the customer accounts database. This payment
platform has remained attractive to customers because there are no added costs incurred by the
customers in terms of bank payments. Even with the introduction of a tariff for mobile money
payments, the convenience the service provides outweighs the cost. Telecom operators charge a
tariff of 1,300 Uganda Shillings (approx. 40 cents) that is paid by the customer. The cost is deducted
off the customer’s mobile money account as soon as payment is made. With the introduction of
mobile payments, the bill collections have increased by 15%. Since e-water became the mode of
operation, it has influenced the creation of an institutional policy on payments for water services. A
finance management manual has also been developed to accommodate the use of the e-water
payment platform.

With the implementation of e-water, NWSC has been able to reduce costs of operating non-core
activities and increase revenues that have in turn been invested in the core-functions of the utility, for
example core staff development and infrastructure development.

3.4 Opportunities and Challenges
One of the main challenges the utility faced was the need to develop an integrated platform or
interface with various banks that used different core banking systems to connect with its own core
customer banking system. To solve this, a generic interface was developed and used together with
a uniform protocol which allowed the different banks to access the utility’s database.

With the closure of cash offices a number of staff became redundant and had to be re-trained and
redeployed as field officers to support enforcement and curb illegal connections, arrears reduction,
non-revenue water reduction and customer care.

Numerous complaints have been raised regarding poor customer services/care while paying bills but
the utility has no jurisdiction over bank employees. Since the utility has no control over its customers’
experiences in the banks, customers are encouraged to then use alternative banks or mobile
payments. A fully fledged customer service center has been set up to handle customer complaints.

In implementing e-water, NWSC has had to keep improving the payment platform based on user
experiences and feedback. Not all the requirements for this platform were clear from the beginning
and therefore the development methodology adopted allowed for improvements and a better
understanding of stakeholder needs. Aside from the e-water payment system the utility runs other
systems, for example an automated billing system (internally developed), an e-procurement platform,
a Human Resources management system and a water quality information system (that processes
water test results from the utility’s commercial laboratory used by other water service providers,
breweries and beverage companies). The utility has successfully built enough capacity to develop,
maintain and support the use of ICT tools.


4. CASE STUDY: M4W (MOBILES FOR WATER)
In 2010, the Ministry of Water and Environment in Uganda published a Water atlas that led to the
development of the Water Supply Database (WATSUP). The water atlas used information on water
coverage and functionality of water sources that was collected in 2009 and was therefore over a year
old at the time of publication. This lead to the identification of the need to have more reliable and
cost-effective mechanisms for updating functionality information, especially for rural water supply,
                                                                          Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
14                                                                Field Review of Case Studies – Uganda


along with the need for better systems that produced actionable information that could lead to
improvement in the delivery of water services, especially for rural communities in Uganda.

4.1 Description of the M4W System
4.1.1   Vision
In March 2011, the M4W (Mobile Phones for improved water access) concept was developed by SNV
(Uganda) and Makerere University. Makerere University developed the system while SNV were to
be the implementers. In June 2011, a consultative meeting was held by SNV and Makerere to present
the M4W concept to other NGOs in the WASH sector. IRC/Triple-S (Sustainable Services at Scale)
joined the M4W initiative during the project initiation while Water Aid (Uganda) joined in January
2012, after the system had been deployed in the initial five districts. According to Peter Magara of
IRC/Triple-S, low functionality rates in rural areas and a lack of information to aid planning and
respond to the issues that affect water users in rural communities motivated the development of the
M4W system. M4W was developed to improve efficiency in reporting faults, trigger actions for
response to reported faults and improve the efficiency in updating both the district and national
information systems on rural water supply.

4.1.2   Process
SNV Uganda first approached Makerere University with their dual challenge concerning the lack of
reliable information on rural water sources and the need to facilitate reporting and repair of faults in
rural communities. As Makerere University had already undertaken some research on the use of
mobile-based tools in rural or poorly connected environments, they recommended mobile-based
technology.

Makerere in partnership with the implementing partners conducted a review of the literature, existing
systems and data collection processes to understand the issues in the water sector, specifically in
rural water. Meetings were then held with officials from the ministry as well as NGOs in the sector
who were implementing other systems. A field visit to Lira district (one of the implementing districts)
was conducted, which included interviews with the district water officers and focus group discussions
with the hand pump mechanics, community development officers and health assistants. Based on
the information collected, an initial prototype was developed and deployed first in two districts
(Kabarole and Lira).

The system uses a generic workflow system engine (YAWL) that allows for process configuration.
This design was to allow for process flexibility, modifications and also for future scale-up where a
new district profile could be easily created and added onto the platform. The forms for data collection
(similar to what the ministry uses for the WATSUP update) were re-designed to run on the mobile
phones without consuming a lot of memory. The system was evaluated and refined within the same
year (2011) and then deployed in five more districts (Kasese, Kyenjojo, Arua, Masindi and Amuria).
The system has undergone several iterations based on feedback from the users. Currently, the 3rd
version is running and has been deployed in three more districts; that is Paliisa, Katakwi and Napak
by Water Aid - Uganda.

In principle, districts are the custodians of community information. The system was developed so that
data submitted by the hand pump mechanics was to be reviewed and approved by the district
extension staff (the Community development officers and health assistants) before being posted.
This created inefficiencies and unnecessary constraints since the extension staff where not
conducting the reviews despite the efforts by the implementers to involve them in the project. To work
around that, data from the hand pump mechanics was directly posted into the system but the
extension staff had permission to review what had been submitted.

The implementation of the M4W system has faced a number of challenges since its inception in 2010
in terms of both the technology and the users. At the time of first deployment, affordable smart phones
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                                  15


were not readily available on the Ugandan market and phones that were affordable were limited in
functionality in terms of processing power, performance and low memory. Despite the limitations the
implementers chose to use low cost feature phones that could run basic java applications and were
replaceable by the districts in case of loss. Slow 2G connectivity provided in the rural areas at the
time meant that the system was unable to function in an online mode. The system therefore had to
be enabled to work in an offline mode. Human error also presented challenges. A number of Hand
pump mechanics personalised the phones and tampered with the application. Once sim cards were
removed from the phones, internet settings were disrupted and phones had to be retrieved from the
users. Also, the application was mistakenly deleted and had to eventually be moved from the ‘games’
folder of the phone into the ‘applications’ folder. Furthermore, the semi-literate users were struggling
to input passwords and so the developers re-designed the authentication component to allow users
to log into the system once and remain signed in. Finally, one of the aims of the M4W system was to
use existing institutional structures to prevent the need for incentives. However, the lack of
supervision by existing institutions at the district level created unnecessary delays in information
gathering.

Another similar system, Akvo FLOW by Water For People (WFP), was also being implemented at the
same time the M4W system was deployed. However, as FLOW was only being used to collect data,
WFP was using its own data collectors without the involvement of the existing institutional
frameworks. This was looked at by the ministry and the M4W implementers as an artificial intervention
because of a lack of sustainability and the requirement of continuous incentivising of the data
collectors. Furthermore, this tool was not contributing to capacity development at the community level
in terms of improving the capabilities of hand pump mechanics or extension staff.

To ensure quality of data, a number of quality controls were built into the system. These included
permissions to review submitted data by district extension staff and district water officers. The forms
provided a set list of possible answers for a user to select from and were designed to not allow certain
responses and to not accept empty fields. The OpenXdata platform that was used to develop the
form also uses skip logic to further ensure quality control in data input. Skip logic in the data forms is
a mechanism that directs a user or data collector to a series of questions based on their responses.

M4W has been scaled-up from the initial two districts to ten. The scale-up plan was informed by the
experience from the initial two districts in which it was deployed. For the scale-up to take place,
information on the rural administrative units for a district is extracted from the WATSUP database
together with the initially mapped water sources in the district and imported into the M4W database.
A district profile is then created and the mobile phones are configured based on the created user and
district profile. The number of phones is dependent on the number of rural administrative units in the
district. This profile as well as the district shape files are loaded onto the system. Training is then
conducted for the district staff and the hand pump mechanics.

4.1.3   Customer/Users
There are three levels of users of the tool. First are the community members. To use the tool,
community members use their mobile phones to send a structured SMS to report a fault/problem with
their water source. The cost of the SMS to the user is approximately 220/= UGX. Training and
outreach at the community level was provided by the hand pump mechanics and the extension staff.

Secondly the mobile platform is used by trained hand pump mechanics to respond to the faults
reported by the communities and to submit assessments. Hand pump mechanics are required to
have a java-enabled phone loaded with the application and internet access (to facilitate data
submissions). The phones and mobile internet bundles are provided by the implementers. However,
district water officers are given laptops and modems for internet access by the ministry to facilitate
their work. To encourage hand pump mechanics to collect baseline data, a monetary incentive (an
equivalent of 1USD per water source reported on) was given. Collecting baseline data is not the
responsibility of hand pump mechanics according to the institutional framework but since the
                                                                        Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
16                                                              Field Review of Case Studies – Uganda


mechanics were expected to visit the communities to train community members and label the water
sources, the implementers capitalised on this opportunity to have the mechanics collect the baseline
data as well. Baseline data collection was a one-off activity for every district and not continuous.
Functionality information is thereby updated using the reports from the communities and hand pump
mechanics.

The third level of use is for the online system, mainly used by the district water officers and
implementers to monitor responses to faults and to generate management reports. The general
public has access to the website (http://m4water.org/) that provides statistics of rural water supply
indicating non-functional water sources and reasons for non-functionality (based on data collected
by the system), maps showing water source distribution and location and summary information about
the project. Currently the data is owned by the implementing partners but the overall plan is to hand
the system over to the Ministry of Water and Environment.

4.1.4   Human Capacity
Hand pump mechanics were trained on how to use the tool and were tasked to train the community
members. System manuals as well as mobile phones with the application loaded were given to the
hand pump mechanics and the extension staff with water source labels and flyers to use for training
the communities on how to use the system. The district water officers were trained on the use of the
online system to monitor reported faults and to ensure that they were being resolved by the hand
pump mechanics. Both the hand pump mechanics and water officers were trained on how to
troubleshoot the phones. Approximately, 90 hand pump mechanics, 90 extension staff and 10 district
water officers have been trained to use the tool to date.

Figure 4: The M4W sticker placed on the borehole to act as the source label (left) and a flyer
given to hand pump mechanics explaining how the system works (right)
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                     17


Figure 5: The online dashboard used by the district water officer to monitor reported faults
(by community members) and baseline data collection (by Hand pump mechanics)




Figure 6: A sample M4W assessment form (left) and the feature Java-enabled mobile phones
given to the Hand pump mechanics and extension workers (right)
                                                                        Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
18                                                              Field Review of Case Studies – Uganda




4.1.5   Finance
The M4W project was initially financed by the Africa Technology & Transparency Initiative (ATTI) with
30,000 USD. The majority of this fund was spent on the development of the technology in terms of
setting up the infrastructure, paying the developers, purchasing handsets and deployment (including
training) in the first five districts. For the subsequent deployment and maintenance, the M4W
consortium contributed 20,000 USD. Currently, the annual running costs of the system are budgeted
at 300 million UGX. The major costs include replacement of the mobile phones (each mobile handset
costs approximately 40USD), and management of the infrastructure (including the implementation of
additional features on the system) and the personnel to maintain the system.

Table 3: Summary of the M4W costs

 Item                                                                Cost (USD)
 Development cost (including purchase of phones for 4 districts)     30,000
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                             19


 Development cost (including purchase of phones for additional   20,000
 districts and maintenance; 2011-2014)
 Server hosting (outsourced)                                     720 (annually)
 Charging phones (by hand pump mechanics)                        ~ 5 per month
                                                                                                                             Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
20                                                                                                                   Field Review of Case Studies – Uganda



4.2 Data Analysis and Findings: Assessing the impact of M4W
Table 4: Impact assessment of the M4W tool using the Impact chain analysis (Gigler, 2011)

          Condition                  Dimension                                                      Assessment

      Information Needs         Information needs          Prior to the development of M4W, SNV (one of the implementers) carried out action research
     (existing information     Communication needs         on the poor functionality of rural water supply. It was discovered that a number of sources were
           ecologies)         Communication channels       non-functional due to either poor maintenance or reporting mechanisms within the rural
                                 Information gaps          communities. Existing institutions in local government were not sufficiently supported to monitor
                                                           water supply and this led to many inefficacies.

       Access to ICTs            Access to electricity     The typical users of the M4W initiative are based in rural communities with very limited access
     (ICT Infrastructure)          Access to ICT           to electricity and unstable telecom coverage. Community users and hand pump mechanics have
                                    infrastructure         to move to nearby towns (or trading centres) to have their phones charged at a cost. This has
                                 Geographic location       resulted in loss of phone batteries as batteries are easily swapped and the phones themselves
                                                           are stolen at the charging centres, resulting in additional expenses for the implementers to
                                                           replace the lost phones as the system users cannot afford to replace them.

      Basic Use of ICTs            Literacy rates          The community users are typically rural farmers, semi-literate and use their phones for voice
      (Simple ICT use)           Level of education        calls as opposed to SMS. The M4W application was developed in English and yet many rural
                                Socio-cultural context     hand pump mechanics are semi-literate. A number of them were discontinued and replaced with
                                 Basic ICT training        those who could use the phones. In other districts, users had to bring along people who would
                                                           later re-train them on how to use the phone and the system. This has caused delays in
                                                           submitting information to the system and also caused the need for more training which the
                                                           implementers are not in a position to continue funding.

 Meaningful use of the ICT      ICT Capacity building      M4W was intended to provide information to update both the district and the ministry databases.
            tool              Local and relevant content   Since the ministry does not have a flexible information system, the structure for a data
 (Level of use of the tool)         Technical local        warehouse was developed by the MIS working group of the ministry that would allow all of the
                                     appropriation         different information systems in the sector to provide information to the data warehouse. This
                                     Sustainability        would further allow querying and analysis of information by different stakeholders.
                                                           Unfortunately, this data warehouse had not yet been implemented and so the M4W application
                                                           has not yet been integrated with the Ministry’s information system to support automatic
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                                                                                       21



          Condition                     Dimension                                                      Assessment

                                                             information updates. With no linkages to any other systems, the M4W system is still operated
                                                             and managed by the developer (Makerere University) and stakeholders are given access to
                                                             download reports or files that they can use to lobby for funding and for their own planning.

                                                             The ministry is not yet keen on taking over the M4W initiative and this makes its sustainability
                                                             and use in the districts very uncertain especially when the implementation or project period for
                                                             the implementers comes to an end.

                                                             Failure to create a business model around the use of M4W especially for the hand pump
                                                             mechanics resulted in low use of the technology. The M4W implementers are certain that if hand
                                                             pump mechanics start to see the M4W phone as a tool that supports their business, since they
                                                             get paid for repairing community water sources and collecting data, they would have optimum
                                                             use for this tool and eventually make it sustainable for themselves.
   Enhanced Information               ICT Capabilities       The M4W has been considered a successful initiative because it has demonstrated that mobile
    Capability (multiplier          Information literacy     based tools can work in rural settings. It has demonstrated that it is a more cost-effective and
          effect)                     Communication          easier approach to getting more reliable information than current paper-based routines or
                                        Capabilities         systems that the Ministry uses. It has also been able to demonstrate that real time information
                                   Content Capabilities      on functionality status is possible to have compared to the length of time it took the Ministry to
                                  Local technical & social   compile the data for the WATSUP data. However, the uptake of the tool among community
                                       appropriation         members is low mainly due to the cost of reporting a fault and poor sensitisation on how to report
                                                             faults. Part of the reason for this is that no funding had been put aside for the sensitisation
                                                             activities and the districts are not financially able to run the M4W activities without the help of
                                                             the implementers.
                                                                           Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
22                                                                 Field Review of Case Studies – Uganda




4.3 Discussion
The M4W system has generally enhanced follow-up on water facilities in need of repair, has enabled
prompt assessment of defects and has improved functionality especially in situations where the
community is able to pay for the repair of the water source. Furthermore, about 1,705 additional water
sources were mapped using M4W that were not originally in the WATSUP database. Of the sources
considered functional, the M4W baseline study found that 1,104 (19%) water sources were not
functional. Although it has registered some achievements especially regarding the collection of data,
as discussed in 4.3.2 the low uptake within the communities and poor responsiveness have
hampered its success.

4.3.1   Trends in the WASH indicators captured by the ICT tool
The M4W tool was developed with the major aim of monitoring functionality of rural water sources.
This was specifically to be achieved by: improving efficiency in reporting faults of rural water sources,
reducing the down-time of water sources that are reported as non-functional by the communities and
providing real time information on the functionality status of water sources so as to regularly and cost-
effectively update the district and national water information systems.

     a) Update of information
The Ministry collects information on rural water sources through annual surveys that are conducted
every quarter. The M4W was meant to support the ministry in this function and to make data collection
cheaper, faster and more reliable. However, the ministry has continued to use its paper-based annual
survey since there is no linkage between the M4W system and the Ministry’s system (or database).

     b) Use of data for planning
The data from the M4W is currently extracted and used by the implementing organisations for their
own interests and assessment. However, this data is not being used by the Ministry to plan for
improved service delivery. The district water officer of Kabarole says he uses the data to monitor the
status of water access in the communities and to some extent uses the information to guide the
budgetary process and lobby for funds to rehabilitate sources that are non-functional.

     c) Reducing downtime of water sources/increasing response time
During the implementation of the tool, it was expected that hand pump mechanics on receiving a fault
report would conduct an assessment and submit a repair report. The reality however is that some
mechanics do not send these reports while others submit these reports much later. Furthermore,
district water officers who were supposed to close ‘tickets’ (referenced faults) when repairs have been
completed, have not been consistent in doing so. This has made tracking of response time and
downtime very difficult.

4.3.2   Trends in the use and operation of the ICT application itself
The uptake of the M4W has been very low. Part of the reason is attributed to the cost of the SMS
that is met by the community user. The developers are working on a new version of the system that
will allow users to send SMS to a toll free number. It is hoped that this will increase usage of the tool
among the community members. A community user from Katentebere village (in Kabarole district)
says she has never used the system because the hand pump mechanic hurriedly explained the
concept to her as he placed a sticker on the pedestal of the borehole that she is in charge of. She
was given a flyer with the system details but the mechanic also provided his private telephone number
at the back of the flyer. When she has a problem, she calls the personal number of the hand pump
mechanic. This community member like many others believes the SMS system may not be as reliable
and yet more costly and the officer who is notified may not respond. Calling the hand pump mechanic
directly is seen as more reliable and feasible. About 715 SMS were sent by water users from Lira
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                                 23



and Kabarole districts to the system since 2011, and [only] 187 water sources (26%) were repaired
on the basis of these messages.

According to Peter Wakholi from Makerere University, M4W has not necessarily improved the
functionality of rural water in the 10 districts in which it has been implemented, but has greatly
contributed to the understanding of the issues that affect functionality of rural water sources. It has
produced information that all stakeholders can work with for better planning especially district water
officers and the Non-Governmental Organisations (the implementers – SNV, IRC/Triple-S and Water
Aid) who have formed the M4W consortium.

4.3.3     Gaps in data coverage
At the start of the implementation, the system assumed existence of structures at the community
level, for example, the Water User Committee (WUC) that manage the water sources on behalf of
the community. It was assumed that at least one of the members would report a problem in case it
was too costly for any other community user. However, the realities have been different as
approximately 33% of the water sources do not have these structures in place4. This further affects
the number of complaints that the system is able to capture thus creating inconsistencies in actual
functionality figures generated by the tool.

Furthermore, all reported faults were to be logged into the system. However, many community users
resort to calling the hand pump mechanics directly and although the water sources may eventually
get fixed (or not), this information is never logged into the system. This makes it difficult to have the
true picture of the functionality status of rural water sources covered by the tool.

Community extension staff (health assistants and community development officers) who monitor
service delivery activities at the community level were given phones to conduct water quality
assessment and verify information submitted by the mechanics. However, these staff are also
responsible for monitoring activities in other sectors like education, agriculture and health. Although
the implementers anticipated that the extension staff would follow up on reports to check that repairs
have been made and also report on sanitation and water quality assessment, there has been no
registered use of the system by these staff. The major cause of this is their increased workload in
other sectors and poor facilitation to do the M4W tasks. This has created a gap in the information
available from the communities regarding WASH activities in the rural communities.

4.4 Opportunities and Challenges
In order to collect the one data set for the country wide WATSUP database update the Ministry of
Water and Environment (Uganda) spent approximately 2 billion Uganda Shillings (approximately
1,000,000 USD). In contrast, according to Mr. Wakholi (the M4W developer), the M4W project was
able to use the same processes and institutional structures to collect baseline data in 10 districts at
a cost of only 600 million UGX. A national wide exercise using the M4W platform has been estimated
to cost approximately 250,000 USD.

Poor connectivity always creates challenges in transferring of data, so there is a need for flexibility
and to allow for offline modes. This may not be ideal for systems that depend on real-time data but
at least allows for service continuity. For example, the offline mode allows for data collection and
information to be uploaded to the database when connectivity is restored.




4   http://m4water.org/
                                                                            Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
24                                                                  Field Review of Case Studies – Uganda



The existence of bureaucracies can hamper access to information. Before the M4W initiative,
information on rural water was only accessible through the district water officer, but technology
platforms can improve access to information by multiple stakeholders for improved planning and
decision making. Furthermore, technology can allow for community engagement and participation
whereby, communities are able to report faults directly to the district without having to go through
their local leaders and or hand pump mechanics.

The M4W has been regarded as a ‘proof of concept ’ that mobile technologies can be used to support
processes that have been previously paper-based. The low uptake by the community members is
blamed on poor sensitisation mechanisms. The Ministry can therefore ride on the success and
potential of this tool and use its existing structures and community sensitisation budgets to engage
with communities and provide support to improve the uptake of this tool. The M4W system has not
yet provided evidence on the utilization of the information for planning and resource allocation mainly
because the integration with existing information flows used by the service authority (the Ministry)
has not yet taken place. It has also not yet been integrated within the official reporting structures of
the Ministry even though it offers potential to support the reporting mechanisms within the ministry
especially on rural water sources.

M4W was purely a donor-implemented project, without whom the project seems unsustainable. The
failure of the ministry to take it up poses a risk to the sustainability of this intervention. Already, the
exit of Water Aid (Uganda) from Masindi in 2013/2014 has had an impact on the use of this application
as it was fully supported by the organisation. IRC/Triple-S has closed operations in Uganda (as it
was a 5 year project that came to an end in October 2014) and this means that the districts that have
been supported by this organisation will struggle to keep M4W running.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                                25




5. CONCLUSION
Flexibility of the technologies is always important, implementing a configurable and reactive system
that accommodates user feedback and allows for such feedback to inform the re-design of the system
goes a long way in producing an intervention that responds to the user needs, is appropriate and will
be continuously used. Initially, with M4W community members were expected to report faults, thereby
triggering the creation of a ticket and action by the hand pump mechanic. However, in many
communities, members call the hand pump mechanic directly and these complaints are never logged
into the system. In response the system has now been modified to allow hand pump mechanics to
report faults on behalf of the communities.

Technology should also be designed to meet the basic information needs. In terms of capabilities,
technology should be simple and easily usable by the intended users. For the case of rural community
based interventions, reducing the number of tasks (or screens) a user is expected to perform will
make the technology more usable.

For community-based systems to remain sustainable, there has to be institutional support. In
situations where officers of established institutions are reluctant to support the communities in using
these interventions, implementers can partner with Community Based Organisations to oversee
implementation at the community level. For example, Water Aid (Uganda) is partnering with
Community based organisations in Napak (a very remote district in Uganda) to oversee and support
the use of M4W.

Many intended users of mobile technologies live in areas with poor infrastructure especially electricity
supply. These already financially-constrained community members have to pay for charging their
devices. This may contribute to the low use of technological interventions. Therefore, it is useful to
consider solutions that cater to the power/electricity challenges. Solar powered mobile devices are
available on the market and can be used as alternatives for such communities.

Uganda needs a policy that regulates and supports the use of ICT in all sectors especially the WASH
sector. It is therefore recommended that the relevant ministries work together with the National IT
Authority to develop a sector specific ICT policy to regulate the development and use of ICTs in the
sector.

Overall, technological solutions should be able to address not only information gaps/challenges but
also cultural challenges especially within the governance structures. Communities alone cannot
sustain technological interventions without the support of the national authorities and civil society.
There is a need to invest in infrastructure especially electricity or alternatives, for example solar
power, as well as stable telecommunication networks. The ministry needs to get involved in the
implementation of ICT interventions to not only keep them sustainable but also to protect its citizens
from being exploited.
                                                                      Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
26                                                            Field Review of Case Studies – Uganda




ANNEX A: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED
This case study report has been prepared based on information gathered during a field visit in
Uganda in October 2014. During this field mission, interviews were conducted with various official
and focus group discussions with the rural ICT tool users. The table below provides a list and
categories of the participants of this field study.

Table 5: Participants of the field study on the Potential of ICT in WASH in Uganda

     Tool         Category/Location                Name
     E-water      NWSC (Utility: urban & towns)    · Ronald Muwanguzi, Head of IT (NWSC)
     payment

     M4W          M4W Consortium                   · Chemisto Satya Ali (SNV)
                  (International
                  organisations/implementers)      · Peter Magara (IRC/Triple S)

                                                   · Grace Alupo (Water Aid – Uganda)

                  Makerere University/Omni         · Peter Wakholi (Developer)
                  Tech

                  User & District Intermediary     · Pius Katuramu (District Water Officer -
                                                     Kabarole

                  User: Hand Pump Mechanics        · Balyebuga Stephen

                                                   · Bwango Godfrey

                                                   · Mwanguhya Bonny

                                                   · Bright David

                  User: Health Assistant           · Tumuhairwe Olive

                  User: Community members          · 4 participants (Names withheld) ; kidubuli -
                                                     Rwengaju

                                                   · 2 participants (Names withheld) ; Katentebere
                                                     - Ibaale

                  WSP                              · Sam Mutono – WASH Specialist
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                                                                            27




ANNEX B: PICTORIAL OF FIELD MISSION




      Focus group discussion with Kabarole District hand pump mechanics   Community members from Kidubuli – Rwengaju community
      and health assistant: District water officer in attendance
                                                                                                             Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
28                                                                                                   Field Review of Case Studies – Uganda




     Community members from the Katentebere – Ibaale community   A community Development Specialist inspects a borehole in
                                                                 Katentebere – Ibaale community during the field visit.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Studies - Uganda                                               Ref-1




REFERENCES
B-S.,Gigler, “’Informational Capabilities’ – The Missing Link for the Impact of ICT on
development,” Working Paper Series No.1; E-Transform Knowledge Platform, The World
Bank, March, 2011.

Jiménez, a., & Pérez-Foguet, a. (2010). Challenges for Water Governance in Rural Water
Supply: Lessons Learned from Tanzania. International Journal of Water Resources
Development, 26(2), 235–248. doi:10.1080/07900621003775763

J. Hellström and M. Jacobson, “‘You Can’t Cheat the Community Anymore’– Using Mobiles
to Improve Water Governance,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. on M4D, Dakar, 2014, pp. 48–59.

Ministry of Water and Environment,“Water and Environment Sector Performance Report
2014,” Government of Uganda Report, pp. 17–18, Oct., 2014.

Ministry of Water and Environment website [Online]. Available: http://www.mwe.go.ug/.
[Accessed: 11-Nov-2014].

M. T. Hutchings et al., “mWASH : Mobile Phone Applications for the Water , Sanitation and
Hygiene Sector,” N. Ross, and P. Luu (Eds), Pacific Institute, CA, April, 2012 [Online].
Available: http://www.indiasanitationportal.org/sites/default/files/Full_Report_MWASH.pdf

N. Breslin, “Changing relationships : ICT to improve water governance,” in World Water
Week report, 2013, pp. 1–16. [Online]. Available: http://www.rural-water-
supply.net/en/resources/details/536.

SNV, & IRC/Triple-S., “Mobile phone technology to improve functionality of rural water
soruces,” Briefing Note, April, 2012.
