     Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
     Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                  i




UNLOCKING THE POTENTIAL OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY TO
               IMPROVE WATER AND SANITATION SERVICES

                                  KENYA CASE STUDY




                                              By

                         Mouhamed Fadel Ndaw and Patrick Nduati Mwangi

                                          August 2015
PREFACE

This report has been prepared for the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) Study on “Unlocking
the Potential of ICT Services in the Water and Sanitation Sector”. The study builds on and
complements the World Banks’ Africa Regional Strategy (2011) and the World Bank Group’s
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) strategy (2012). It further complements the E-
Transform Africa series, a collaboration between the African Development Bank, the World Bank
and the African Union, which captures the existing use of ICT in six sectors (agriculture, climate
change, education, health, financial services, government) and two cross-cutting themes (regional
trade and integration, ICT competitiveness).


WSP has spearheaded the use of ICT in many countries in particular with its contribution in
financing the use of the mWater pilot platform in countries such as Senegal, Mali, Niger and Benin,
Akvo Flow and Fulcrum in Liberia and Sierra Leone and Maji Voice in Kenya. As many sector
stakeholders are interested to learn from these pilot interventions, it is necessary to improve the
documentation on these experiences and propose practical modalities for scale-up.
There is also a very strong drive around the use of ICT in the WASH sector and a growing interest
among external partners. As such, there is a need to develop clearer partnership platforms with
both short- (i.e. project specific) and medium-term objectives, to understand the potential
information that can be generated through ICT, increase accessibility to and use of that information,
and ensure that ICT generated information is implemented more sustainably in support of WASH
objectives.
The study was carried out by the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) of the World Bank to fill a
gap in understanding how the potential of ICT can improve water and sanitation services globally
with a particular emphasis in Africa. It covers a global desk review and case studies in 7 African
countries (Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Senegal, Benin, Niger and Liberia), complemented by cases
from other regions (Latin America, North America, South Asia and East Asia) and analyses strengths
and weaknesses of existing ICT tools. It also provides evidence on how ICT can be used to leapfrog
the water and sanitation sector towards more sustainable service delivery.

As such, this study sought to not only document experiences of ICT use in the WASH sector but also
analyze them within a framework of enabling factors and barriers in terms of Vision, Process,
Customer/User, Service Delivery, Human Capacity, Governance and Finance.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                                                                             iii




TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.   INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................... 1
2.   LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS ...................................................................................................... 2
     2.1     Regulatory and Operating Environment .................................................................... 2
                         ICT Policy ....................................................................................... 3
                         ICT use in the WASH sector .......................................................... 3
     2.2     Selected ICT4WASH Applications in Kenya ............................................................. 4
                         Maji Voice ....................................................................................... 4
                         WARIS............................................................................................ 6
                         Jisomee Mita .................................................................................. 7
                         Mobile field assistant .................................................................... 10
                         Mmaji ............................................................................................ 10
                         WASPA MIS Tools ....................................................................... 10
3.   CASE STUDY: MAJIDATA ................................................................................................. 12
     3.1     Description of the MajiData System ........................................................................ 12
                         Vision............................................................................................ 12
                         Process ........................................................................................ 13
                         Customer/User ............................................................................. 15
                         Human Capacity........................................................................... 16
                         Finance......................................................................................... 16
     3.2     Data analysis and key findings................................................................................ 17
     3.3     Discussion ............................................................................................................... 21
                         Trends in the WASH indicators captured by the ICT tool ............ 21
                         Trends in the use and operation of the ICT application itself....... 21
                         Disparities in data collection along income/wealth and gender
             distribution ................................................................................................. 21
                         Any other gaps in data coverage ................................................. 21
     3.4     Opportunities and Challenges ................................................................................. 22
4.   CONCLUSION ..................................................................................................................... 24
ANNEX A: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED .................................................................... 25
ANNEX B: PICTORIAL OF FIELD MISSION ................................................................................... 27
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................... 1


List of Tables:
Table 1: Impact assessment of the MajiData tool using the Impact chain analysis .......................... 17
List of Figures:
Figure 1: Ministry of Water and Irrigation (MWI) institutional arrangements ...................................... 2
Figure 2: Decreased resolution time and number of complaints processed through Majivoice ......... 5
Figure 3: WARIS user interface .......................................................................................................... 6
Figure 4: Collected revenue and loan repayment before and after Jisomee Mita .............................. 9
Figure 5: MajiData dashboard 1 ........................................................................................................ 12
Figure 6: MajiData dashboard 2 ........................................................................................................ 13
Figure 7: MajiData dashboard 3 ........................................................................................................ 13
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                        v




ACRONYMS
 CAK                      Communications Authority of Kenya
 ICT                      Information And Communication Technology
 KNBS                     Kenya National Bureau Of Statistics
 KPI                      Key Performance Indicators
 MIS                      management information systems
 NCWSC                    Nairobi City Water And Sewerage Corporations
 SMS                      Short Message Service
 WASREB                   Water Services Regulatory Board
 WASPA                    Water Service Providers Association
 WARIS                    Water Regulation Information System
 WSP- World Bank          World Bank’s Water And Sanitation Program
 WRMIS                    Water Resources Management Information System
 WSTF                     Water Services Trust Fund
 WSB                      Water Service Boards
 WSP                      Water Service Provider
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                                       1




1. INTRODUCTION
ICT in the Kenyan water sector is at the forefront of supporting improved performance and efficiency
in service delivery. All the key sector players, including the regulator and service providers currently
have ICT applications in use, with many still evolving. At the national level, ICT use is facilitating data
collection and analysis using simple/user friendly applications such as WARIS, a web-based tool for
performance assessment of water service providers and MAJIDATA, a database on urban poor water
and sanitation service delivery. In the urban sub-sector, applications are being used to support most
operation and business processes, including billing.

All stakeholder consultations with regulators, development partners and civil society highlighted that
Kenya has sufficient human capacity to drive ICT processes and that the private sector is a key
partner in sustaining the use of ICT given their edge in infrastructure and technical capacity,
underscoring the need for partnerships to leverage the different capabilities and sector needs.

This report presents findings of a field study in Kenya that took place in October 2014. The first
section offers a landscape analysis of Kenya, looking at the regulatory and operating environment of
the water and ICT sector and then a more detailed look at six ICT applications currently in use by the
key water sector institutions visited during the consultations. The second section then looks
specifically at the case of MajiData. The case study report has been prepared based on consultations
with key water sector stakeholders in Kenya, along with literature on ICT for development and the
sampled applications. The stakeholders that were consulted during the preparation of this report are
presented in Annex A.
                                                                             Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
2                                                                      Field Review of Case Study – Kenya




2. LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS
     2.1 Regulatory and Operating Environment
The Ministry of Water and Irrigation has the overall mandate for policy formulation and oversight of
water sector services in Kenya. The functions of the Ministry are separated between service delivery
and water resources management, with decentralisation of the roles for regulation, asset
management, and service provision to the different administrative levels as shown in figure 1 below.
Regulation and asset management are the main responsibility of the central government with service
provision decentralised to water service providers (WSPs) at the local/county level.

Figure 1: Ministry of Water and Irrigation (MWI) institutional arrangements




        Source: Kenya annual water sector report 2012 – 2013

The above institutional structure is aligned to the 2000 Water Bill, however, as of 2014 there is a new
draft bill being discussed in parliament. The new draft bill attempts to align the institutional roles with
the provisions in the 2010 government of Kenya (GoK) constitution which, beyond acknowledging
water as a basic human right, calls for further devolution of the service provision function to county
governments. This bill is also anticipated to provide guidance on how to manage the transition
process, cognisant of existing capacity of county governments and the change management process.
Further, as part of this reform process, the number of ministries in Kenya has been
reduced/amalgamated and the water sector is now under the Ministry of Environment, Water and
Natural Resources. In addition, a multi-stakeholder transition authority has been set up and a Water
Sector Transition Implementation plan developed to guide the process.

Discussions with WSP-World Bank however, indicated that there is a lot of uncertainty concerning
the direction the devolution process will take as some of the provisions in the 2014 water bill are not
similarly appreciated by all stakeholders. This is particularly true in regards to the
separation/delineation of the current role of the Water Service Boards (WSBs) versus the counties,
especially during the transition process. The means of addressing trans-boundary water resource
management and water development issues for service areas that cover more than one county is
another potential issue of contention.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                                  3



According to the Water Services Regulatory Board (WASREB) impact report on water sector
performance for the period 2013-2014, the reform of the water sector in Kenya has seen many
improvements in water resources management and service delivery with the different players visibly
taking on their assigned roles. This is evidenced by the achievements of the water resources
management authority and the clear roles of WSBs and Water Service Providers (WSPs). However,
the water sector is still faced with several challenges that limit this performance (MWI 2013). These
include but are not limited to:

   Weak monitoring and evaluation of sector activities which is linked to limited accountability and
    information management systems. The water resources management information system
    (WRMIS) was identified as one key area that needed attention;
   Weak financial reporting;
   Unclear coordination between sector actors leading to less than desirable performance;
   High population growth that does not match the resource allocation and investment in water and
    sanitation infrastructure. This is reflected in the low coverage figures at 53.3% for water and
    66.7% for sanitation compared against the universal coverage 2015 MDG target;
   High non-revenue water; and
   Poor utilisation of information management systems at WSB levels leading to inadequate
    planning for service provision based on unreliable data.

ICT has substantial potential to help address the above challenges and improve the efficiency and
performance of the Kenyan water sector.

         ICT Policy
Kenya has adopted ICT as a major thrust and building block to development, including it as one of
the key pillars for development in Kenya’s vision 2030, a strategic roadmap towards realization of
social and economic development by the year 2030.

The ICT driven development process has been facilitated by the liberalization of the market and
development of key infrastructure including the national optic fibre backbone infrastructure (NOFBI)
and a Government Common Core Network (GCCN) intended to serve as a shared and secure
interoperable Government-wide ICT architecture. With this infrastructure, over 95% of the country’s
population has access to mobile phones and as of June 2014, internet connectivity was estimated at
54.8 % (CAK, 2014). IDC 2014 estimates that there has been an increase of about 3 billion USD
(about 3.2% of GDP) in government spending on ICT over the period 2006 to 2013. This provides a
conducive environment for the introduction and scaling up of ICT in development processes.

The regulatory environment for ICT is rich with several guiding pieces of legislation including the
Kenya Information and Communications (Amendment) Act, 2013 that replaced the information and
Communications Act (KCA) of 1998; Science and Technology Act (Cap. 250) of 1977; and Kenya
Broadcasting Corporation (KBC) Act of 1988, ICT ACT 2011, the national ICT policy 2006 and cyber
security policy. The Kenya Information and Communications (Amendment) Act, 2013 allows for
establishment of an autonomous regulatory body, the Communications Authority of Kenya (CAK)
replacing the Communications Commission of Kenya (CCK). The national ICT policy 2006 provides
guidance on use of ICT in development through defining measures to stimulate increased investment
and use of ICTs in different sectors, provisions for human resource development and industry
standards, promotion of different strategies including E-government and facilitating the development
of sectoral IT policies and strategies.

        ICT use in the WASH sector
ICT in the water sector in particular is at the forefront of supporting improved performance and
efficiency in service delivery. All the key players including the regulator and service providers have
                                                                           Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
4                                                                    Field Review of Case Study – Kenya



different ICT applications in use, with many still evolving. Generally ICT is used by stakeholders
working at the national level and/or within the urban sub-sector. At the national level, ICT use is
mainly to facilitate data collection and analysis using simple/ user friendly applications like WARIS, a
web-based tool for performance assessment of water service providers and MAJIDATA, a database
on urban poor water and sanitation service delivery. In the urban sub-sector, applications are used
to support most of the operation and business processes, including billing.

While the water sector has many players making use of ICTs each system or application is
independent and there is limited interoperability between them. This is noted in the case of MajiData
and WARIS, where data from the former is manually extracted and imported into the latter. A similar
situation is also noted with utilities, where each have different ICT applications in use for their work
flow processes.

All stakeholder consultations with regulators, development partners and civil society highlighted that
Kenya has sufficient human capacity to drive ICT processes and that the private sector is a key
partner in sustaining the use of ICT given their edge in infrastructure and technical capacity,
underscoring the need for partnerships to leverage the different capabilities and sector needs.
Furthermore, it was noted that most ICT applications in use in the water sector receive the majority
of their financing externally from development partners limiting sustainability especially in the
absence of post-development support.

     2.2 Selected ICT4WASH Applications in Kenya
The water sector in Kenya has moved towards more advanced ICT facilitated data collection and
management due to technology advancement and reduced infrastructure costs. Several applications
are now in use to aid performance measurement, and improve business/work process and
governance through availability of reliable information. Below are six of the key applications
discussed during stakeholder consultations in Kenya.

       Maji Voice
    a) Vision
Majivoice was developed with the aim of improving efficiency, responsiveness and governance of
urban water service providers through provision of an efficient and transparent system to coordinate
and resolve consumer complaints raised to Water Action Groups (WaGs). WaGs are part of the
WASREB strategy (through its consumer and public affairs department) to strengthen consumer
engagement/dialogue and thus provide targeted response based on clear understanding of needs.

The idea was conceptualised in 2010-11 and developed further during the 2012 water hackathon in
Kenya. WASREB was one of the institutions that presented a problem – the need for a feedback
mechanism for handling consumer complaints – to be solved by this hackathon. A Prototype was
developed from the Hackathon results and site studies undertaken in select WSPs (Eldoret and
Mombasa) to further refine the prototype. Targeting of test sites was based on purposive sampling
considering representation from each WSB and areas with existing WAGs.

    b) Process
Majivoice is a mobile to web system based on open-source software that serves as a platform for
consumers to log their complaints to the WSP. Complaint logging is done via registered short code
service (USSD), structured Short Message Service (SMS), or on the web using a computer or internet
enabled phone. Complaints can still be received by phone calls and later manually logged into the
Majivoice system by the WSP. The SMS cost is borne by consumers who are motivated by the
opportunity to obtain fast response to complaints. After a complaint has been worked on, an ‘end of
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                                   5



a workflow process’ is completed by a senior manager at NCWSC and a feedback sms sent to the
customer to indicate action taken.

Specifications for and development of Majivoice were based on results of site surveys in eight regions
identified for the pilot. Following the initial systems development stage, Majivoice was rolled out to
two utilities: Nairobi city water and sewerage corporation (NCWSC) and Nakuru water. Application
development is still a work in progress with external capacity building support involving basic
maintenance still being provided to NCWSC by a consultant.

NCWSC Field teams have a mobile version that shows tasks and reports (assessment forms) on
action undertaken. Quality assurance is provided through a time stamped ticketing system and
WASREB has a dash board that can be used for monitoring purposes. Through this, comparison with
historical data can also be done in case of need for triangulation to ensure accuracy of data provided.

    c) Users
Majivoice has been a useful tool for decision making and several benefits have been realised through
its use including, improved work flow processes, improved response time to customer complaints
and thus improved customer confidence in the utility. The tool has also contributed to a clear
understanding of the business operating environment informing utilities and WASREB where the
main focus of interventions should be; for example NCWSC realised that the main challenge for the
corporation was in billing, leading to the development of a new meter reading system.

WASREB is developing an indicator on customer service and this will further facilitate defining
impacts of MajiVoice on utility performance. Some regulators, such as those in Zambia, have
expressed interest in adopting a similar tool to Majivoice.

Figure 2: Decreased resolution time and number of complaints processed through Majivoice




    d) Uptake and Lessons Learnt
Majivoice’s implementation and success has been driven by the fact that it responded to an
immediate and already recognised need; utility performance and thus customers satisfaction was low
and this motivated customers to buy into the process faster.
                                                                          Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
6                                                                   Field Review of Case Study – Kenya



Majivoice retains existing customer management processes where possible and is considered as a
valuable addition to work flow processes, including planning, technical support and customer
feedback. The fact that it was perceived by NCWSC staff as an improvement to existing systems
further contributed to the successful application of Majivoice.

The potential of Majivoice to improve all aspects of service delivery is yet to be maximised. The
information obtained through Majivoice can potentially be used by different stakeholders outside of
the utility, for example by CSOs/DPs in order to advocate for increased financing to the sector and
to engage policy makers on the development of conducive policies on subsidies or ICT security.

Stakeholder involvement during the development process is a key driver to the success of any ICT
application. End-users are particularly important as they will influence the sustainability of the
initiative. The experience of involving customers in the development and training phases is reported
to have facilitated acceptance of Majivoice by target communities including bearing the cost of use.

Internet connection and cost of use also affected uptake of the tool. The limited internet connectivity
in areas where smaller WSPs operated delayed deployment of Majivoice. In some cases, based on
KEWASNET member experience, it was reported that some communities – in trying to avoid user
costs – do not use the application directly but report complaints to WAGs who then send the SMS to
the utility.

       WARIS
    a) Vision
WARIS (Water Regulation Information System) was developed out of the need for a user friendly and
reliable monitoring and reporting system to facilitate WASREB’s mandate of monitoring WSPs. The
tool was developed based on existing national performance monitoring indicators. The development
was outsourced to private consultants and was financed with support from GIZ.

WARIS is a web-based database with performance indicators reported on by WSBs and is used for
preparing the annual WASREB impact report. The application has been in use since WASREB
inception and has evolved over time, based on results of user experiences. WSBs are provided with
a template by email and CDs distributed to WSPs through WSBs and capacity building/ training
undertaken at the beginning of each reporting cycle. Annual refresher events also serve as a
feedback session on operation and assessment of WARIS. System upgrades are then undertaken,
for example to add new modules such as one on informal settlements.

WARIS version 2.0 started as a stand-alone system, which has now been upgraded to WARIS
version 3.0. The upgrade was in response to technology evolution, enhanced capacity within
WASREB in the use and management of ICT applications, as well as in response to the need for a
more efficient and user friendly system. WARIS 3.0 is based on a central database and has both an
online/web-based version and an offline option for WSPs with limited internet connectivity. It also has
an inbuilt validation system for QA e.g. out of range values. Figure 2 below provides a screen shot of
the WARIS 3.0 dashboard/ user interface.




Figure 3: WARIS user interface
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                                      7




    b) Process
WARIS has evolved over time, with changes made to the structure and content to respond to
feedback and user requirements. Experience of users in WASREB revealed the need for systems to
be dynamic and to respond to changing needs, address gaps in the initial development process and
thus remain relevant and user friendly. For example updates such as adding modules were initially
difficult because WARIS 2.0 is a standalone system and the system structure was rigid requiring
deleting the database and reinstalling for any update to be made.

The WASREB strategy of involving different user departments, including IT and M&E, yielded positive
results in the pace of ICT uptake, the development team of any new ICT application/tool should be
multi-skilled to ensure all organisation needs are catered for.

Some of the key challenges of WARIS 2.0 were incompatibility with existing infrastructure of the
WSPs in particular operating systems, malware and system errors for dealing with localised systems.
Development of the upgrade to WARIS 3.0 was much simpler given the high user interface during
the deployment phase of WARIS 2.0 and the advantage of utilising the existing platform; Staff within
WASREB were already conversant with the system and were able to identify improvement measures.

Data and thus MIS are decision support tools; the quality of data has a direct correlation with any
decision made. In recognition of this fact, WASREB is developing an indicator for data accreditation
to ensure reliability and confidence in data, given the often conflicting statistics provided by different
sector stakeholders.

The availability of quality and timely information is seen to have some influence on the level of
financing that the sector receives from both the government and development partners. The
integration of ICT tools in service delivery, especially in data management, has enabled WASREB to
identify areas that need to be prioritised.

       Jisomee Mita
    a) Vision
                                                                          Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
8                                                                   Field Review of Case Study – Kenya



The Jisomee Mita initiative was part of the World Bank’s Water and Sanitation Program (WSP- World
Bank) supported “Maji Mashinani” program under the Athi Water Services Board – the regulator of
NCWSC - to improve service delivery to the urban poor. The “Maji Mashinani” initiative was first
piloted in Kayole SOWETO, an informal settlement in Nairobi’s
Eastlands area, as an expansion of the water supply network and
                                                                              Informal settlement
to promote improved water supply access through a micro
                                                                         residents live in a ‘kadogo”
financing model - using social connections financed through low
                                                                          (small scale and hand to
cost loans to residents. A 2010 socio-economic study by the World
                                                                            mouth) economy. The
Bank showed a high willingness to pay for water in Kayole, which
                                                                         success of Jisomee can be
has a population of approximately 90,000. However, the cost of a
                                                                         attributed the fact that bills
new connection at KSH 8215 was close to 70% of the average
                                                                           are more manageable
monthly household income. The loan was to facilitate residents’
                                                                           given flexible payment
ability to afford this connection cost upfront. Financing was done
                                                                          where one can pay for as
in partnership with K-Rep Bank, however, NCWSC still had the
                                                                                 low as weekly
challenge of collecting revenue from the consumers. Revenue
                                                                                 consumption.
collection in the area was very low, if done at all, because the
security of NCSWC meter reading and billing field staff could not
be guaranteed. Informal water service providers initially resisted NCWSC intervention because of
potential loss of revenue and the reining in on illegal connections. Jisomee Mita was thus adopted as
a solution to address the issues of non-payment of bills and insecurity of meter readers, as well as in
recognition of the low and often unpredictable incomes of the urban poor.

    b) Process
Jisomee Mita is a web-based ICT platform that enables water consumers to use a mobile phone to
query and receive current water bills at a frequency of their convenience by sending their meter
reading to NCWSC and receiving instant feedback. A customer takes the meter readings as trained,
sends the reading by phone using SMS to NCWSC, NCWSC then calculates the water consumed
and sends a response SMS indicating consumption and the amount to be paid. At the end of each
month, NCWSC reconciles each customer’s bill and sends the outstanding amount plus a component
on the amortized loan amount for the social connection. To date it is reported that over 80% of the
customers have fully paid up their loans. Through this service, customers are also able to send
queries concerning inconsistencies in bills. Payments are made through the mobile payment platform
using safaricom’s MPESA.

The user requirements and system design was done by NCWSC and development of the application
by the local private sector. The original prototype developed is still being used with enhancements
made based on lessons from the pilot. NCWSC intends to scale up the intervention to other locations
using a participatory approach and it is anticipated that a new version will be developed. Benefits of
the Jisomee Mita initiative in improving service delivery and utility performance have been
acknowledged, however the scaling up process is largely driven by the pace of roll out of the “Maji
Mashinani” program. This is attributable to the high financing resource requirements for infrastructure
development since the water supply network to most of the informal settlements is informal in nature
or non-existent.

    c) Uptake and Lessons Learnt
The success of any application is dependent on its response to user needs and requirements.
Jisomee Mita is said to have been adopted at a very high pace because it facilitated satisfying a
critical need for potable water by informal settlements that are often not prioritized by utilities. In
addition, it responds to the income patterns of this segment by providing flexible and affordable
payment options.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                                   9



The uptake of Jisomee Mita by NCWSC has been facilitated by the fact that it addresses key
challenges for the utility around revenue collection in informal settlements, areas often viewed as
commercially unviable and high risk. Availability of management buy in is also a key driver for
introduction and adoption of ICT as part of an organization’s work flow processes. Management and
staff of NCWSC were actively engaged in the development and deployment of Jisomee Mita, which
facilitated faster acceptability. User buy in was supported by the low consumer confidence levels in
the quality of traditional billing mechanisms attributed to inconsistent/unreliable meter readings.
However NCWSC did need to offer additional incentives to consumers, such as writing off arrears,
to encourage buy in.

The main NCWSC customer management system (CMS) is not dynamic (easily modified), making it
vendor dependent. This limits modifications that can be done by NCWSC as all changes have to be
done by the developer. For example, all source codes (software programs) are written in Spanish
and NCWSC staff are not in a position to alter them. In addition, costs for modifications are high – it
was reported that an initial quote of USD 60,000 was received for system integration so NSCWSC
has to run parallel systems, CMS and Jisomee. Since the Jisomee application is essentially at the
development stage with the first pilot barely six months old, further development work and integration
are envisaged.

The Jisomee platform does not run on a database and with the growing volumes of data, its
performance will be compromised. NCWSC is therefore planning to upgrade to a more advanced
database like ORACLE or MySQL; this will be part of the scheduled migration to new infrastructure.

Payments made by Jisomee customers through the bank are not reflected in the Jisomee system as
the banking interface is only linked to CMS. NCWSC’s operational costs are currently high because
of subsidizing the costs of the SMS and tariffs for MPESA payment in addition to having to pay the
service provider managing the MPESA gateway. However, this is justified by the increased monthly
collections that reached an average of around 600,000 KES between May 2014 and December 2014
and a reduction in bill generation costs since deployment of Jisomee. The graph below shows the
revenue collected by NCWSC as well as loan repayments by customers before and after the launch
of Jisomee Mita.

Figure 4: Collected revenue and loan repayment before and after Jisomee Mita




                         Kayole Project Financial Performance *1 USD = 90 KES
                                                                           Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
10                                                                   Field Review of Case Study – Kenya



          Mobile field assistant
NCWSC also uses a Mobile meter reader, the “mobile field assistant” to perform meter reading
functions. This initiative was benchmarked from the Johannesburg Water Utility and its customization
to the Nairobi context was done in-house and funded by the utility. The mobile field assistant uses
smart phones to collect information on geo-references, meter readings and location of households.
It supports extended work process functions, for example an automatic routing system is incorporated
as part of the software and meter readers are presented with a route plan. There is also a dedicated
access point network provided by the service provider (safaricom) that ensures security of data.

There was initial resistance to the new system and as part of the change management process a one
month training for all staff and the board of directors was organized to explain the capabilities of the
system.

NCWSC currently estimates the operating costs for this system at about USD 82,000 (7m KSH),
despite this seemingly high cost, several benefits and opportunities have been realized as detailed
below.

     i.   The costs of meter reading have significantly reduced. There is an estimated 88% reduction
          in lifecycle cost for basic infrastructure (android mobile phone vs previously used data
          loggers).
   ii.    NCWSC has seen a reduction in non-revenue water (NRW) from 40 to 38.5%.
  iii.    Improved governance has been achieved through availability of reliable data, reduced
          customer complaints and knowledge of actual customer base.
 iv.      Utilities in other African countries have expressed interest in the mobile meter reader and
          NCWSC is considering the potential of a commercial venture. Whereby the proprietorship
          rights would be maintained by NCWSC as means of sustainability and resource mobilization
          to reduce the need for external subsidies and/ or financing.
     v.   Charging the phones is a challenge as most phone batteries last about 4 hours. Providing
          phone power banks has been considered as an immediate solution but there is no reliable
          supplier of these power banks. Some companies within the private sector have expressed
          interest in supporting the application. For example, LG in providing phones, IBM and
          Samsung in providing a storage solution for managing big data. The latter are considering
          undertaking research to develop a sustainable data management solution for large data sets
          and applications suitable for low income settlements. NCWSC is exploring the option of
          engaging LG to provide customized phones with extended battery life.


          Mmaji
Mmaji is a mobile phone based application that provides information to customers in informal
settlements on availability and price of water in order to support informed decisions on which public
water point to purchase from. It works in a similar methodology to the stock market. Information from
water points is collected at frequent intervals during the day and collated to provide up to date data
to consumers.

Consumers have several payment options involving direct cash and IT solutions. A recent innovation
is the use of public transport travel cards that are loaded with credit and allow for access to public
water supply and ablution points at discounted prices.

          WASPA MIS Tools
Water service providers association (WASPA) operates an internal performance review mechanism
for member WSPs that collects data on 54 key performance indicators (KPIs). Some of this
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                               11



information is manually collected and maintained in a database based on simple excel based
spreadsheets.

Information is used for tracking progress against KPI to design improvement strategies, identify
advocacy themes for WASPA and priority intervention areas. Some of these KPIs are the same as
those collected by WASREB, however, there is no comparison or correlation done with WASREB
data. The key challenge is that WASPA data is more up to date whereas that by WASREB refers to
the previous fiscal year.

WASPA has a simplified excel based MIS tool for monthly data collection that is used for data
triangulation to ensure quality and consistency in data reported. WASPA tries to ensure that similar
data sets are reported by WSPs to both WSBs and WASPA albeit the process being limited to
participating WASPA members.
                                                                          Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
12                                                                  Field Review of Case Study – Kenya




3. CASE STUDY: MAJIDATA
     3.1 Description of the MajiData System
        Vision
MajiData was intended to provide planning data for improved governance and finance allocation in
the urban sub-sector. This is in addition to establishing a harmonized criteria for defining water and
sanitation coverage given the differing performance measurement criteria and perceptions among
water sector stakeholders. Previously, pro-poor statistics were based on estimates and data collected
mainly by civil society organizations, some of which had no clear basis. This made assessment
towards realization of MDG 7 targets difficult and often resulted in high
investment costs and skewed resource allocation.                             “Previously, Kibera was
                                                                                 described as the
MajiData is essentially an online database for socio-economic data on         largest slum in Africa
the urban poor and is limited to unserved urban settlements in Kenya.         with a population of 1
These settlements are defined by the WSTF on the basis of population             million. Through
density and do not necessary coincide with the boundaries of                   MajiData, the actual
delineated water service areas. Data was obtained for several                     population was
indicators, including population, household size, water access by            determined to be about
source of supply and service level, use of household water treatment,         300,000 in actual fact
payment for water, size and number of dwellings in a particular town,           dispelling previous
sanitation access, and statistics on flood prone areas.                       assertions” Han Seur,
                                                                                        GIZ
The MajiData dashboard as shown in figures 4 to 6 can be
manipulated to provide user defined information, for example by
administrative category from national to town level, key indicator, or particular slum.

Figure 5: MajiData dashboard 1
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                                13



Figure 6: MajiData dashboard 2




Figure 7: MajiData dashboard 3




        Process
        a) Background
MajiData was conceptualized in 2008 by GIZ (as a result of a personal initiative of the GIZ program
manager) in response to the need for reliable pro-poor planning data that was identified and
prioritized as a key undertaking during the 2007 water sector review performance. The undertaking
committed to establishing a baseline on available unplanned urban settings as well as coverage
statistics therein. However, no financing was allocated by GoK to support the process, so GIZ offered
technical and financial resources as part of its support to the Kenya water sector reform process
aimed at improving governance in the water sector. GIZ also provided leverage, having been involved
with similar work in Zambia.
                                                                            Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
14                                                                    Field Review of Case Study – Kenya



This role was delegated to the WSTF due to its existing capacity and its mandate of supporting the
MoWI in providing water supply and sanitation services to rural and underserved urban communities.
MajiData should have been hosted by WASREB as industry regulator, but in 2008 it had a lean
institutional structure with limited capacity to handle MajiData process requirements. WSTF works
mainly with WSPs and was motivated by the need to improve value for money in its investments
given the huge financing gap and often exaggerated and unreliable data provided by WSPs in
proposals.

The development process was outsourced to the private sector by GIZ and the same consultant who
developed the Zambia system (Aquatis) was engaged.

Following concept development, WSTF agreed upon the structure of the user interface and key
indicators using a participatory approach involving key stakeholders including the Kenya national
bureau of statistics (KNBS). A multi stakeholder consultation was held to synchronize sector
requirements, with KNBS playing a key role in data validation.

        b) Methodology/development process
Development of the data collection protocol was facilitated by a team from Zambia that had
implemented a similar tool (in Zambia). Data collection tools were developed in partnership with local
authorities, MoWI, KNBS, WSPs and WSBs based on initial tools developed by WSTF. Database
development was done in-house by outsourced project staff (consultants).

A project data collection team trained in partnership with local authorities and residents collected data
using dwelling interviews and FGDs. Data collection started in 2009 and concluded in 2011, with the
process taking a long time as a result of limited human and financial resources. Initial project
financing from GIZ was obtained in 2009 and targeted the Lake Victoria south region; scaling up to
other areas was demand driven based on sector stakeholder needs for development and availability
of funds.

The main objective was to provide a baseline on pro-poor water and sanitation, following stakeholder
consultations, however, during development, the scope was expanded to include other parameters
important for pro-poor urban service delivery like information on housing.

Due to fund limitations, the initial concept involved developing a pro-poor database that would be
stored on DVD. This was later changed with the coming on board of Google and IBM which were
interested in providing solutions for improving analysis of large data volumes and ICT supported
customer feedback mechanisms. Google’s core competence was in web-based systems and came
in to support the development of an interface to facilitate the transition from external hardware storage
to a web-based system. The design process was done by Kenyans with Google providing technical
and financial support.

Data incompatibility was a challenge during the data entry process requiring rigorous cleaning up,
triangulation and in some cases repeat data collection. Furthermore data collected in the northern
Kenya region with high levels of insecurity at the time is not considered reliable.

        c) Scalability
Current data on the MajiData platform is dated, with no upgrade since 2011 because of funding
limitations and the project-based nature of the initiative. A major update of MajiData is however
planned with support from the German Government. It is anticipated that the process will actively
involve and include tools that will allow for direct linkage with WARIS. WSTF anticipates that the data
collection process will be institutionalized and incorporated within the current performance
measurement framework of WASREB since requirements are similar. However, this is arrangement
is currently at a conceptualization stage and an agreement is yet to be reached.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                                 15



The scale-up plan includes an SMS based direct feedback system to the MajiData platform to
incorporate a complaints system that is will address community issues. One of the key objectives of
MajiData that was not realised is developing a platform for consumer feedback. It is hoped that the
SMS system will provide this information on consumers’ concerns.

With support from the Gates foundation, the WSTF is now developing a tool to facilitate M&E and
performance measurement for all projects financed through the fund. The tool is intended to adopt a
results chain model with data collected annually on smart phones and linked with MajiData. This
project is also developing an android based application to facilitate real time data storage and
analysis. It is planned that the user interface will be accessed by all stakeholders including local
community users. Previously used paper-based forms have been replaced with automation using
android phones.

WSTF reported that most of data on the MajiData database is not used, with an estimate of about
2% of the data used frequently. This may be attributable to the fact that there is no backend
connection for users outside WSTF and that parameters/indicators collected are not frequently used
by sector stakeholders – for example the database collected extensive information on housing status.
This limits the rate of scaling up use and further development as there is no motivation for resource
contributions.

        Customer/User
The concept that led to development of MajiData originally envisaged a national platform and/or
database on urban poor service delivery indicators. During the development and deployment process
managed by WSTF, MajiData primarily focused on WSTF needs albeit with indicators relevant for
other sector stakeholders.

The database is managed centrally by WSTF and can be accessed through the MajiData website
(MajiData.go.ke). Users have limited user rights and currently export data manually into their
independent systems for analysis for different planning uses. WASREB for example uses it as
baseline data on pro-poor service delivery while CSOs and WSPs use it to obtain information to
provide basis for intervention and for resource mobilization.

Consultations indicated that MajiData is the only comprehensive database on urban poor service
delivery in Kenya and thus has the potential to be a very useful tool to development partners in this
arena. The incentive to use it cannot be overstated especially for a demographic segment where data
is often overstated and/or estimated. Another incentive is the free use/ open data it provides making
data availability affordable to development practitioners. Mr. Shivaji from KEWASNET noted that
MajiData has been a very useful resource for KEWASNET members, providing baseline data and
the basis for defining data collection requirements in urban poor settlements.

The MajiData interface only allows external users to view available data and no direct analysis can
be made. Users therefore have to extract data from MajiData and perform additional analyses using
other tools to suit their different needs. The available data is also dated since the database has not
been updated since 2011 making it almost redundant for current initiatives as well as the objectives
for which MajiData was developed.

The above limitations highlight the need to incorporate MajiData into WSP and WASREB plans for
performance monitoring and accountability on service delivery to the urban poor. Consultations with
WASREB indicated the intention to integrate MajiData into WARIS 3.0 and with provisions to annually
update as part of WSP reporting. However, the WSTF is considering the option of co-hosting with
WASREB as a transition arrangement.
                                                                           Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
16                                                                   Field Review of Case Study – Kenya



        Human Capacity
Development of MajiData was originally outsourced to the private sector mainly due to limited skill in
WSTF at the time and to build on similar work already done by the consultant. The WSTF currently
has a well-resourced IT department with capable staff to handle the operational requirements of
MajiData, in addition, the Kenya IT sector has sufficient skill in case of new staffing requirements for
the upgrade. However, the question of future ownership of MajiData and the shape it will take still
remains given the need for integration and synergy within the sector and recognition of the mandates
of KNBS and WASREB in data provision and performance measurement respectively

        Finance
MajiData was mainly financed by GIZ through WSTF, the original budget of 1.5 million Euros covered
2,000 areas as part of the initial baseline. Other stakeholders came on board during the scale up to
other regions.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                                                                                            17




3.2 DATA ANALYSIS AND KEY FINDINGS
The table below assesses various aspects of the development, implementation and application of the MajiData tool. The ICT impact chain developed by
Gigler (2011) is used to assess the social and human impact of the ICT intervention. This involves an assessment of the information and communication
options that have been made available, and the ability of the communities to use these opportunities to improve the quality of their lives.

Table 1: Impact assessment of the MajiData tool using the Impact chain analysis (Gigler, 2011)

          Condition                          Dimension                                                     Assessment
     Information Needs                  Information needs           Before MajiData, information on informal settlements/ urban poor was scarce and often
    (existing information              Communication needs          unreliable. The application enabled availability of reliable planning data and provided the
          ecologies)                  Communication channels        WSTF a basis for evaluation of funding proposals to ensure equity of access as well as
                                         Information gaps           better targeting of available and limited resources annually.
                                                                    Development partners, including civil society and other advocates for marginalized
                                                                    communities such as the urban poor require reliable data. MajiData provided this and
                                                                    currently, the KEWASNET CEO notes that its members like KWAHO have used
                                                                    information in their rights based advocacy.
       Access to ICTs                   Access to electricity       MajiData is a web-based application that requires internet connection. GoK has invested
     (ICT Infrastructure)            Access to ICT infrastructure   heavily in ICT infrastructure and connectivity which facilitates its use. Statistics from KCC
                                        Geographic location         indicate an increase of over 18 million internet subscribers over the last 10 years, an
                                                                    indicator of the high potential of ICT use in Kenya and for MajiData. The application is
                                                                    currently used by WSPs, CSOs working in urban poor settlements, WSBs and WASREB.
                                                                    All these already use ICTs in their operations so can easily navigate and use the tool,
                                                                    which is simple and user friendly especially given that the current user rights outside
                                                                    WSTF are limited to viewing reports and data sets. However, with service provision
                                                                    devolved to counties, their capacity to use web based applications needs to be
                                                                    established.
      Basic Use of ICTs                    Literacy rates           The original concept was to provide data on urban poor settlements and distribute on
      (Simple ICT use)                   Level of education         DVD to key stakeholders. With additional funding attracted as a result of the realized
                                        Socio-cultural context      potential of having reliable data and utilization, MajiData capabilities were enhanced to
                                         Basic ICT training         make it web-based. The initial development phase was participatory with key sector
                                            Poverty rates
                                                                                                                                Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
18                                                                                                                        Field Review of Case Study – Kenya



         Condition                    Dimension                                                        Assessment
                                   Connectivity costs         players involved in defining indicators, which contributed to the early adoption because
                                                              of the perceived relevance of the data to be provided.
                                                              WASREB, the regulatory authority did not have a reliable source of data on the urban
                                                              poor, which MajiData provided. This is used as baseline information as part of annual
                                                              impact reporting, however, the data is dated since no updates have been made since
                                                              2011.
                                                              The potential for MajiData was largely acknowledged by many of the stakeholders
                                                              consulted yet continued meaningful use will require proper institutional arrangements and
                                                              integration with existing ICT applications like WARIS and Majivoice using similar data.
                                                              The institutional arrangements will require identification of the best placed stakeholder to
                                                              host the application and provide financing for the required operational costs.
                                                              The application provides reliable data on urban poor particularly on population and water
                                                              and sanitation coverage, a first in KENYA. However, information is currently owned by
                                                              WSTF and other institutions have limited user rights on the MajiData platform and view it
                                                              as a WSTF initiative; This limits sustainability of use in an arena with (i) different existing
                                                              applications that can be manipulated to suit individual needs and (ii) unclear financing
                                                              mechanisms to keep the application running and data relevant.
                                                              The financial and social sustainability of MajiData is still not clear. Firstly, the intervention
                                                              is still at its pilot phase and no updates of data have been made since the final data
                                                              collection exercise in 2011. Secondly the data collection was largely driven by availability
                                                              of funding from the stakeholders who required the data, hence the lack of continuity after
                                                              initial funding.
 Meaningful use of the ICT       ICT Capacity building        MajiData provided a comprehensive database on urban poor statistics. Application
            tool               Local and relevant content     development and deployment was done in a participatory manner and information
 (Level of use of the tool)   Technical local appropriation   collected was at the micro level. Key stakeholders especially in the water and housing
                                     Sustainability           sectors were thus able to define their requirements. This facilitated meaningful use of the
                                                              data and confidence in the planning and resource allocation at the time.

                                                              Current users, including WASREB, CSOs as represented by KEWASNET and WSPs,
                                                              undertake analytical assessments as part of their performance reporting and advocacy
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                                                                                        19



          Condition                         Dimension                                                   Assessment
                                                                  work. It can thus be asserted that users have sufficient capacity to utilize MajiData and
                                                                  have benefited from the statistics.

                                                                  MajiData user rights are limited, with only WSTF having full rights to directly manipulate
                                                                  data on the platform. However, the data is currently manually exported by the other users
                                                                  and used to support analytical and performance measurement functions beyond currently
                                                                  defined indicators in MajiData. This makes it cumbersome to use given the existence of
                                                                  different unlinked applications of the different users.

                                                                  The sector does not have an established coverage definition presenting disparities on
                                                                  urban poor indicators for the case of MajiData. The fact that sector players have to
                                                                  perform additional / extended analyses on MajiData may make it redundant if another
                                                                  viable option for obtaining urban poor statistics is found.

                                                                  MajiData initiative was project driven and depended on available resources. Since 2011
                                                                  no update has been made to the data decrying its sustainability and continued relevance.

    Enhanced Information                   ICT Capabilities       Currently there is no linkage or direct interoperability between applications in use and
     Capability (multiplier              Information literacy     MajiData; all users outside WSTF have to extract data from the MajiData platform and
           effect)                   Communication Capabilities   perform any required analysis using other tools. This is time consuming and compromises
                                        Content Capabilities      ownership of information provided. Before MajiData, WSTF had a lean IT department but
                                       Local technical & social   with the growth of the institution as enhanced in part by the use of ICT applications to
                                            appropriation         support planning and other business processes, the department has since grown in size
                                                                  and technical capacity. MajiData development and deployment also involved capacity
                                                                  building. MajiData experience also helped highlight the need for reliable information- from
                                                                  the inconsistencies between existing data and that collected through the MajiData
                                                                  initiative; strengthening the M&E systems and thus the IT department.

                                                                  KEWASNET intends to build a knowledge management center and anticipates to use
                                                                  MajiData as one of its information bases.
                                                                                         Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
20                                                                                 Field Review of Case Study – Kenya



     Condition   Dimension                                        Assessment
                             WSTF funding is now better targeted and beneficiaries (WSPs) are able to attract funding
                             even outside WSTF because of the increased confidence in data provided to justify their
                             funding proposals. In addition, WSTF reported increased value for money and
                             transparency of its finance allocations. From the latter, it can be implied that more
                             people have been served as a result of improved knowledge of actual need.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                                 21


3.3 Discussion
        Trends in the WASH indicators captured by the ICT tool
Data collection was a one-time exercise due to budget limitations so no trends based solely on
MajiData can be obtained. However, it provided extensive baseline information on water and
sanitation statistics on the urban poor delineated across different administrative and water service
provider service areas. This provided a good platform to prioritise resource allocation as well as
identify areas that were being marginalised in addition to estimating the actual needs in these
settlements.

        Trends in the use and operation of the ICT application itself
MajiData was first conceptualised to improve urban poor service delivery but the need to incorporate
other indicators, such as land tenure was also realised. The initial use was mainly by WSTF and its
partners to improve quality of proposals and allow for equity in service delivery, the scope has
increased to include performance reporting by WSBs and planning by key development practitioners
working on urban poor settlements.

The first phase of the project targeted only the Lake Victoria south region but with increased funding
the scope was extended to other areas. This process was demand driven based on the need for
information by other stakeholders to design projects as WSTF did not have sufficient funds to cover
the whole country.

WASREB also recognises the legitimacy of the database and uses it as baseline data in obtaining its
performance statistics. Other sector stakeholders like CSOs use it for planning interventions and
resource mobilisation because it is currently the most comprehensive database on urban poor.

Most of the ICT applications used by utilities in Kenya are aimed at improving business processes,
such as meter reading and billing. The Jisomee Mita results and concept highlighted the contribution
informal settlements can offer to improvement of NCWSC revenues, however, statistics on the urban
poor are lacking and NCWSC relies on the customer updates done during registration. Currently,
from discussions held there does not seem to be any inter-linkage between existing applications that
require urban poor statistics and MajiData.

        Disparities in data collection along income/wealth and gender distribution
MajiData considered the urban poor demographic segment and as such all settlements were
considered to represent the lower wealth/ income bracket of the urban poor.

        Any other gaps in data coverage
The first data set obtained for the MajiData database was collected in 2009, with the demographic
and social economic changes taking place in these settlements, the data contained therein cannot
be reliably used for current planning initiatives.

Settlements in the database are delineated by the project definition that is based on population
density and is only limited to urban poor pockets. However, with the devolution process, planning
should be done at county level and the boundaries of these settlements do not match county
boundaries, which presents inconsistencies in defining county coverage statistics for the urban poor.

Data collected in the northern Kenya region which faced substantial insecurity at the time cannot be
relied upon. Most of the data was obtained from village chiefs with no validation or other quality
control mechanism employed.
                                                                              Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
22                                                                      Field Review of Case Study – Kenya


3.4 Opportunities and Challenges
Collection of data for the MajiData initiative commenced during a period of political instability following
the highly contested 2008 election and the field team had to deal with ripple effects of post-election
violence. Data in some cases could not be reliably obtained due to insecurity, creating some gaps.
In addition, the project started out in one region (Lake Victoria north) and the scale up process was
not well defined as the criteria for inclusion was sometimes arbitrary. As with any data collection
exercise, there was some data incompatibility, with missing field records or inaccurate records
provided by local authorities and in some cases, data collection had to be redone. In the end the
data collection exercise required substantial resources; this was exacerbated as much of the
information assumed to be readily available, such as boundary lines and names of settlements, was
not. This experience calls for adequate planning and the allocation of adequate human and financial
resources during any data collection exercise.

Some MajiData indicators were not based on standard definitions, for example geographic
boundaries. This situation was complicated further by the unclear geographic boundaries for villages
and names of settlements. In some cases, the data collection exercise identified slums/ unplanned
settlements which were not in administrative records and as such not recognized. Furthermore,
MajiData has helped highlight the need for standard coverage definitions and indicators relating to
urban poor particularly for the water sector. The disparity in coverage statistics, due in part to different
definitions –JMP and MajiData, attest to this. Han Seur from GIZ reported that as a result, WSTF is
refining definitions used by MajiData and discussions are being held with key sector stakeholders to
have these standardized and adopted nationally.

MajiData has a restricted interface that is currently not interconnected with the different applications
and /or databases used and managed by the different users. This presents the challenge of
managing the interfaces between data collectors, developers, local authorities, water service
providers and the WSTF. Additionally, the large quantity of tools in use by the water sector results in
the collection of similar data, creating inconsistency of information, suboptimal use of resources and
can compromise decision making. The similar data requirements coupled with the highly consultative
development process of MajiData presents opportunities for inter-operability of existing applications.
For example, the WASREB impact report which is developed using WARIS requires data on urban
poor and so does NCWSC for planning and management of its Jisomee Mita and other pro-poor
initiatives. However, what was apparent from discussions with different stakeholders was that most
of the applications are donor financed and the integration process is not easy to achieve.

The original plan was to incorporate a feedback mechanism within MajiData but this did not take root
for several reasons including the development of another application – Majivoice with financing from
a different donor. Currently, WSTF is using social media and radio to obtain feedback with an
incentive proposed for consumers who can locate the MajiData application on their mobile phones.
However, the communication campaign was only recently launched and results have not yet been
fully established. With already established and functional applications like Majivoice, the need for
integration is apparent and should be considered during the design of the MajiData upgrade. Another
opportunity lies in the use of KNBS data for making projections or trend analysis during analysis using
MajiData. However, there are challenges with compatibility since KNBS data is sample based and
considers a ten year horizon.

WSTF has had three previous failed attempts to develop an M&E system, most of which were project
driven and focused on results monitoring for trust fund projects. Involvement of different user
departments in WSTF including top management and the different stakeholders amplified the need
for this data as well as creating opportunity for additional financing to the initiative. MajiData is used
by CSOS and WSPs in resource mobilization and planning. This has contributed to an improved
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                                   23


quality of proposals, increased visibility of unplanned settlements translating into more people
actually served, equity of access and quantification of the actual needs. It was also reported that
World Bank-WSP utilises MajiData to design subsidies as part of its programs supporting improved
service delivery to the urban poor. The MajiData platform facilitated increased community, county
and WSP interaction on issues of targeting and equity of service provision. Interest has been
expressed by other stakeholders, including the Ministry of Health, to utilize a similar platform to
MajiData, or use the MajiData platform to extend parameters to include data on clinics.

As noted in the above discussion, there is no clear sustainability plan for MajiData, which is currently
hosted by WSTF, albeit the recognition of usefulness of information by sector stakeholders. The
major missing links relate to financing and institutional arrangements for managing the MajiData
platform. WASREB, which also maintains its mandate in all the reform provisions seems better placed
to take on the hosting role in the long term. This will allow for better integration and synergies in
applications used to report on sector performance. The ministry of water, as a neutral party in the
development of the application should also take a leading role managing this transition, providing the
necessary oversight.
                                                                              Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
24                                                                      Field Review of Case Study – Kenya


4. CONCLUSION
Experiences from MajiData and WARIS show that the costs of data collection are very high and the
quality and quantity of data available is often overestimated. All information management initiatives
should therefore be adequately planned for and well-resourced if reliable data is to be obtained and
the benefits of informed planning attained.

The majority of the ICT applications in Kenya are externally financed and development partners (DP)
always have unique interests that need to be harmonised. Public institutions that are recipients of DP
support thus need to develop sufficient capacity to facilitate dialogue and levelling of expectations so
that common objectives are mutually agreed upon and sector needs are put at the forefront. DPs
also have a great influence on the sustainability of ICT use as their support is time bound and
continuity is dependent on institutionalisation of the interventions.

Technology often requires a mindset change towards ICT and institutional capacity to enhance the
momentum with which it is taken on. Support of top management is a critical catalyst to successful
introduction of ICT in the sector as it involves organizational change. It was reported that Kenyans
are willing to pay for good service, based on the high rate of mobile phone penetration and experience
with Majivoice where residents incur the cost of the SMS. This opportunity can be capitalised upon
when up scaling any of the above applications and/ or in the introduction of new ICT applications in
the WASH sector.

The local private sector is the perceived leader in ICT in terms of capacity and should be adequately
engaged. For example, including considering concession arrangements where private sector can
finance the development of applications as with the Hackathon experience.

The devolution process is still evolving with roles of different sector actors still unclear, the water bill
2014 is still under deliberation yet it has provisions that may require changes in the way some of the
institutions work. The transition plan should thus be well communicated. Proposed institutional
arrangements for any ICT application will need to be aligned with the new provisions and should
evolve as the institutional mandates are confirmed and capabilities strengthened.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                               25




ANNEX A: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED
The case study report has been prepared based on consultations with key water sector stakeholders
in Kenya, along with literature on ICT for development and the sampled applications. The table below
provides a list of the stakeholders consulted as part of this field study.

  NAME                       DESIGNATION                                INSTITUTION
  Toni Sittoni               Communication Specialist                   WSP - World Bank
  Patrick Nduati Mwangi      Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist     WSP - World Bank
  Eng. Nelson Bosuben        Senior Programme Officer (Urban)           WSTF
  Ali J. Boru                Technical Auditor                          WSTF
  Kegga Muthoni              Quality Assurance Officer                  WSTF
  Han Seur                   Advisor to WSTF                            GIZ
  Eng. Robert Gakubia        Chief Executive Officer                    WASREB
  Herbert Kassamani           Director, Consumer and Public Affairs     WASREB
  Joshua Waweru               MajiVoice consultant                      WASREB
  Brenda Anzagi               ICT                                       WASREB
  Samson Shivaji             Chief Executive Officer                    KEWASNET
  Martin Nang’ole            ICT Director                               NCWSC
  Owen Wanjala               Systems Analyst                            NCWSC
   Eddah Gacholi              Executive Officer                         WASPA
   Job Kangicu                National Technical Advisor                WASPA
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                       27




ANNEX B: PICTORIAL OF FIELD MISSION




                 Consultation with the Staff of WSTF




                 Consultation with the Staff of WASREB
                                            Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
28                                    Field Review of Case Study – Kenya




     Consultation with the Staff of NCWSC
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Kenya                                                           Ref-1




REFERENCES
    1. IDC 2014: Breaking barriers with technology: A special report on the Kenyan ICT market.
       An examination of Kenya's ongoing technology-powered transformation and push to
       transition to a Knowledge Society and regional ICT powerhouse.
    2. Gigler 2011, Informational Capabilities – The Missing Link for the Impact of ICT on
       development, Working Paper Series No.1; E-Transform Knowledge Platform, Working
       Paper, The World Bank.
    3. MajiData.go.ke
    4. Ministry Of Information And Communications, Kenya: National Information &
       Communications Technology (ICT) Policy 2006
    5. World Bank 2012: WATER HACKATHON: Lessons Learned
    6. WASREB 2014: Impact 2014 - A Performance Review of Kenya’s Water Services Sector
       2012 - 2013
    7. MWI 2013: Water sector performance report 2012-13
    8. CAK 2014: Quarterly sector statistics report - fourth quarter of the financial year 2013/14
       (Apr-Jun 2014)
