     Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
     Field Review of Case Study – Liberia                                  i




UNLOCKING THE POTENTIAL OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY TO
               IMPROVE WATER AND SANITATION SERVICES

                                            LIBERIA CASE STUDY




                         By Mouhamed Fadel Ndaw and Deo-Marcel Niyungeko

                                              November 2015
PREFACE

This report has been prepared for the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) Study on “Unlocking
the Potential of ICT Services in the Water and Sanitation Sector”. The study builds on and
complements the World Banks’ Africa Regional Strategy (2011) and the World Bank Group’s
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) strategy (2012). It further complements the E-
Transform Africa series, a collaboration between the African Development Bank, the World Bank
and the African Union, which captures the existing use of ICT in six sectors (agriculture, climate
change, education, health, financial services, government) and two cross-cutting themes (regional
trade and integration, ICT competitiveness).


WSP has spearheaded the use of ICT in many countries in particular with its contribution in
financing the use of the mWater pilot platform in countries such as Senegal, Mali, Niger and Benin,
Akvo Flow and Fulcrum in Liberia and Sierra Leone and Maji Voice in Kenya. As many sector
stakeholders are interested to learn from these pilot interventions, it is necessary to improve the
documentation on these experiences and propose practical modalities for scale-up.
There is also a very strong drive around the use of ICT in the WASH sector and a growing interest
among external partners. As such, there is a need to develop clearer partnership platforms with
both short- (i.e. project specific) and medium-term objectives, to understand the potential
information that can be generated through ICT, increase accessibility to and use of that information,
and ensure that ICT generated information is implemented more sustainably in support of WASH
objectives.
The study was carried out by the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) of the World Bank to fill a
gap in understanding how the potential of ICT can improve water and sanitation services globally
with a particular emphasis in Africa. It covers a global desk review and case studies in 7 African
countries (Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Senegal, Benin, Niger and Liberia), complemented by cases
from other regions (Latin America, North America, South Asia and East Asia) and analyses strengths
and weaknesses of existing ICT tools. It also provides evidence on how ICT can be used to leapfrog
the water and sanitation sector towards more sustainable service delivery.

As such, this study sought to not only document experiences of ICT use in the WASH sector but also
analyze them within a framework of enabling factors and barriers in terms of Vision, Process,
Customer/User, Service Delivery, Human Capacity, Governance and Finance.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Liberia                                                                                                                 iii




TABLE OF CONTENTS
1           INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................... 1
2           LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS ...................................................................................................... 2
            2.1         Regulatory and Operating Environment .................................................................... 2
                        2.1.1       ICT Policy ..................................................................................................... 3
                        2.1.2       ICT use in the WASH sector ........................................................................ 4
3           CASE STUDY: AkvoFLOW .................................................................................................. 5
            3.1         Description of AkvoFLOW ......................................................................................... 5
                        3.1.1       Vision............................................................................................................ 5
                        3.1.2       Process ........................................................................................................ 5
                        3.1.3       Customer/User ............................................................................................. 6
                        3.1.4       Human Capacity........................................................................................... 7
                        3.1.5       Finance......................................................................................................... 7
            3.2         DATA ANALYSIS AND KEY FINDINGS ................................................................... 9
            3.3         Discussion ............................................................................................................... 11
                        3.3.1       Trends in the WASH indicators captured by the ICT tool .......................... 11
                        3.3.2       Trends in the use and operation of the ICT application itself..................... 11
                        3.3.3 Disparities in data collection along income/wealth and gender
                        distribution ............................................................................................................... 11
                        3.3.4       Any other gaps in data coverage ............................................................... 12
            3.4         Opportunities and Challenges ................................................................................. 12
4           CONCLUSION ..................................................................................................................... 13
ANNEX A: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED .................................................................... 15
References .................................................................................................................................. Ref-1


List of Tables:
Table 1: Impact assessment of the AkvoFLOW tool using the Impact chain analysis (Gigler, 2011) 9

List of Figures:
Figure 1: Organigram of the WASH sector in Liberia .......................................................................... 2
ACRONYMS
3G       third generation of mobile telecommunications technology
4G       fourth generation of mobile telecommunications technology
ACE      Africa Coast to Europe: marine fiber cable between the West coast of Africa
ACF      Action Contre la Faim
CBO      Community Based Organisations
CLTS     Community-Led Total Sanitation
CLWSA    Community Led Water and Sanitation Activities
CSO      civil society organization
EFSVL    Emergency Food Security and Vulnerable Livelihoods (Oxfam programme)
FLOW     Field Level Operations Watch
GIS      geographic information system
GNI      Gross National Income
GPS      global positioning systems
GSM      Global System for Mobile Communications
ICT      information and communication technology
IT       information technology
KAP      Knowledge, Attitude and Practice
LISGIS   Liberia Institute of Statistics & Geo-Information Services
LTA      Liberia Telecommunications Authority
LWC      Liberia WASH Consortium
LWSC     Liberia Water and Sewerage Corporation
MB       Mega Bites
MDGs     Millennium Development Goals
M&E      Monitoring and Evaluation
MOPT     Ministry of Post and Telecommunications
NGO      non-governmental organization
NTCU     National Technical Coordinating Unit
NWSHPC   National Water Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Committee
SCADA    Supervisory control and data acquisition
SD       Secure Digital memory card
SPSS     Software package for statistical analysis
UNDP     United Nations Development Program
UNICEF   United Nations Infant and Children Fund
USD      United States Dollar
WASH     Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
Wi-Fi    A local wireless technology or wireless network
WHO      World Health Organization
WSP      Water and Sanitation Program
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Liberia                                                                         1




1 INTRODUCTION
ICTs are used to enhance process efficiency, governance and transparency and have a direct role
in promoting economic development. These technologies encourage greater competitiveness and
facilitate new ways to organize productioni. ICTs also have an important role to play in social and
human development.

Investments in ICTs, especially in broadband, mobile telephony and mobile phone networks, have
been demonstrated to promote economic development ii,iii,iv,5. It has been estimated that in Africa,
South of the Sahara, mobile network operators have had a direct economic impact valued at USD 32
billion, including the payment of USD 12 billion in taxes, and have contributed to 4.4 % of gross
domestic product. They have also created the equivalent of more than 35 million full time jobs while
at the same time supporting the development of more than 50 innovation centres, techno hubs,
laboratories and incubators across the continent v.

The use of ICTs in the water sector is growing in importance and reach vi. Managing the sector
requires dealing with large volumes of data from a multitude of components, infrastructures and
equipment that generate a complex, large, continuous and ever changing stream (“big data”) that is
oftentimes unstructured, ever growing and that presents itself in often fragmentary and
heterogeneous waysvii. The digitization of this data stream helps to better understand and to better
manage drinking water resources and the infrastructure upon which water services depend as well
as all of the steps in the value chain that are required for managing drinking water to the benefit of
all and to do so in an integrated, visual and systematic way.

ICTs help to improve the collection, management, display and sharing of the information that is
required by operators, concessionaires, planners and decision makers responsible for the
performance of WASH services. Furthermore, ICT use in the WASH sector facilitates easy
coordination of different WASH actors on the ground and encourages transparency in aid projectsviii.
Online monitoring also leads to better time management and greater accuracy in data collection. This
contributes to more and improved information that has increased accuracy and a reduction in data
entry and transcription errors.

The WASH sector in Liberia is fragmented, with split responsibilities. Knowledge on the extent, state
and quality of WASH infrastructure and services across the country has been very limited.
AkvoFLOW has presented an opportunity to address the information gaps. Since the first introduction
of AkvoFLOW the application has been picked up by various stakeholders, it is estimated by Drake
Ssenyange, the Programme Coordinator of the Liberia WASH Consortium (LWC) that approximately
50%1 of the actors in the WASH sector in Liberia are currently using AkvoFLOW, while others
continue to rely on alternative tools, excel templates for example, to report to NWSHPC.

This report presents findings of a case study on Liberia 2.The first section offers a landscape analysis
of Liberia, looking at the regulatory and operating environment, existing ICT use in the WASH sector
and the current state of ICT policy. The second section then looks specifically at the case study of
AkvoFLOW. The study is based on consultations with key water sector stakeholders in Liberia, along
with literature on ICT for development and the sampled applications. The stakeholders that were
consulted during the preparation of this report are presented in Annex A.



1 WSP Liberia notes that the figure may be higher as the NWSHPC have stressed that all WASH actors should
report to the dashboard.
2
  A field visit originally planned for Liberia in October 2014 was cancelled due to the Ebola outbreak. Instead
interviews with key sector stakeholders were conducted over the phone, skype and email.
2 LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS
2.1 Regulatory and Operating Environment
The main ministries involved in the Liberian WASH sector are the Ministry of Public Works and the
Ministry of Health. At present, while there is no WASH specific ministry in Liberia, the Government
has established a National Water Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Committee (NWSHPC)
working out of the Ministry of Public Works, which has been instituted to drive the sector agenda
and coordinate the various stakeholders. The organization of the sector is depict ed in Figure 1.

A national WASH Sector Strategic Plan (2012 – 2017) is in place together with the WASH Sector
Investment Plan (2012 – 2017) and the WASH Sector Capacity Development Plan (2012 – 2017)ix.
The National Technical Coordinating Unit (NTCU) is responsible for overall coordination and
technical support to Community-Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) activities in Liberia. In February 2013
the first WASH Joint Sector Review was held to review 2012 WASH sector progress. Since then
annual WASH JSRs have taken place, during which all stakeholders come together and discuss
progress towards sector strategic goals. A list of WASH projects is being compiled b y the
NWSHPC.

Figure 1: Organigram of the WASH sector in Liberiax




The following government and institutional stakeholders play key roles in the Liberian WASH
sector:

       Rural Water Supply: The Ministry of Public Works;
       Urban Water Supply & Sanitation: Liberia Water and Sewer Corporation (LWSC);
       General Hygiene & Sanitation: The Ministry of Health & Social Welfare;
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Liberia                                                                      3



          School Sanitation: Ministry of Education;
          Statistics: Liberia Institute of Statistics & Geo-Information Services (LISGIS); and
          Liberia CSOs WASH Working Group.

There is also a strong presence of international organizations and NGOs:

          The Liberia WASH Consortium (LWC) consists of Oxfam, Concern Worldwide, Tearfund,
           ACF and WaterAid;
          The World Bank – Water and Sanitation Program;
          UNICEF;
          WaterAid;
          UNDP GoAL WASH;
          CHF Internationa;l and
          USAID Liberia.

The Liberia WASH Consortium was set up in “ 2007 as a response to poor Water, Sanitation and
Hygiene (WASH) access, lack of harmonization and coordination in the sector, insufficient
national policy frameworks and weak sector governance in Liberia. The Liberia WASH
Consortium now consists of 6 members: Action Contre la Faim (ACF), Concern Worldwide,
Oxfam, Tearfund, WaterAid and Population Services International (PSI). The Consortium also
has associate members and local CSO partners including the WASH CSO Network, Youth &
Disable Network and the WASH Reporters & Editor Network of Liberia (WASH R&E) ”xi.

The Liberia Water and Sewerage Corporation (LWSC) leads implementation in urban areas, drawing
on substantial government subsidies and donor support, while NGOs generally manage
implementation in rural areas.

According to the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Program 2014 Update, Liberia is on track to
achieving its targets under the MDG for waterxii with 73% of the population having access to drinking
water. However, the country is not on track for the improved sanitation target of 18% and unlikely to
reach the more ambitious national targets for either water or sanitation.

Coordination and governance of the sector has much improved over the last 5 years but
implementation remains a challenge. Investment in the sector by the Government of Liberia is also
minimal, with the bulk of water supply, sanitation and hygiene promotion funded by donors.
However there is support for the creation of a WASH ministry with its own budget and planning.
Furthermore as a result of the Ebola outbreak, the profile of hygiene promotion has been raised, with
increased importance being placed on hand washing and there have been increasingly regular
WASH sector meetings.3

2.1.1      ICT Policy
According to the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) xiii, Liberia occupies the 153rd rank out
of 166 countries in the ICT Development Index which measures ICT access, use of ICTs, and skills
related to ICT use. In 2013, access to mobile broadband services (500MB) cost 113 % of Gross
National Income (GNI) per capita, one of the highest in the world.

As a result of damage sustained to the telecom infrastructure during the civil war there is no fixed
telecom network in the countryxiv, with the exception of roughly 25 kilometres of fiber optic cable
located in and around Monrovia that was established in 2013 following the landing of the ACE cable;
the first and only submarine fiber optic cable to land in Liberia to date xv. Internet access is extremely
slow except for agencies and organizations that are directly connected to the fiber optic infrastructure
in and around Monrovia. Telecommunication services in Liberia in general are limited, especially in


3
    AkvoFLOW, one of the tools highlighted in this report also supported reporting during the outbreak.
rural areas where “phone calls may not go through for hours, text messages are being delivered days
late, and mobile money transfers are taking up to a week to processxvi”. There are plans for the
creation of a national broadband backbone but as of the end of 2014 implementation had not yet
started.

In the absence of a fixed telecommunications infrastructure, the telecommunications market is based
nearly exclusively on wireless technologies. Four GSM operators compete for customers. According
to analysts, the market is not effectively monitored by the telecommunications regulator, the Liberia
Telecommunications Authority (LTA) because of a lack of resources, technical expertise and
documentation. It is estimated that mobile penetration is at 78% and internet penetration is at 8.3% xvii.
High speed 3G as well as 4G wireless services are available. Competition in the mobile sector has
led to some of the lowest call prices in all of Africa, even though as mentioned above call quality is
an issue.

Liberia adopted a national ICT and telecommunications policy in 2010 xviii which emphasizes the
importance of broadband for national development. The MOPT (Ministry of Post and
Telecommunications) is responsible for policy formulation. Until 2013, the country relied on expensive
and bandwidth-limited satellite telecommunications for international connectivity. The key players in
the telecommunications sector are the private sector mobile network operators, including
Lonestar/MTN, Cellcom, Novafone and Libtelco, the Liberia Telecommunications Company, the
national telecommunications operator.

ICT use is a limiting factor restraining economic development and investment in Liberia. Given the
restricted financial resources available to the Government of Liberia at this time, this will likely remain
so for the foreseeable future unless the national broadband deployment strategy is enacted and
access to fiber optic is sufficiently deregulated to interest a possible private sector investor. Fiber
optic deployment can have a significant impact on economic development and this can drive the
commercial interests of investors who may then be persuaded to work with the Government of Liberia
to fund the roll out of a national broadband fiber optic network.

2.1.2   ICT use in the WASH sector
There are a number of IT applications in use by stakeholders in the WASH sector. These include
GEOSPAGO, an application that is used for sanitation mapping (latrine blocks, drainages, open
defecation areas, etc.), and AkvoFLOW used for mapping of water supply systems and describe in
detail in Section 3.

The LWSC uses SAGE50 which is an advanced accounting package developed by Peachtree
Software but does not make use of any WASH specific IT applications. The LWSC is also currently
developing a mobile money application in collaboration with local mobile network operators that will
allow its roughly 10,000 customers to pay their bills using their mobile phones.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Liberia                                                                  5




3 CASE STUDY: AKVOFLOW
3.1 Description of AkvoFLOW
AkvoFLOW is open-source software that is used in the WASH sector for smartphone based field
surveysxix. FLOW stands for “Field Level Operations Watch”. The AkvoFLOW software can be loaded
onto any Android smartphone with GPS functionality and a camera to act as an integrated mapping
device connected to a central databasexx. An AkvoFLOW enabled phone can be used to:

       Fill in a survey (e.g., on water points) on the touchscreen,
       Take a picture of the survey object with the phone camera,
       Capture the GPS location of the surveyed object with one click,
       Submit all data to a central server.

AkvoFLOW brings together three elementsxxi:

    1. Handheld data collection
    2. A web based dashboard to manage and analyze surveys and data
    3. Visual based reporting tools displayed in Google Maps and Google Earth.

3.1.1   Vision
When Liberia emerged from civil war, the national infrastructure was still severely impaired. Many of
the 7,500 water points across the country were not functioning. More important, the exact status and
location of the water points were not known. While several actors, mostly NGOs, were involved in
providing emergency water supplies by sinking boreholes and installing water pumps, these efforts
were not coordinated. A need to inventory the water holes and their status was initiated as a first step
to understanding the status of water supply across the country in order to improve access to drinking
waterxxii. A national water point mapping exercise was therefore undertaken with the help of the
Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) of the World Bank xxiii.

From December 2010 to May 2011, the WSP conducted a systematic inventory of water points in
Liberiaxxiv. 150 data collectors were trained and deployed and equipped with phones using
AkvoFLOW software to map the rural water points. Since the first introduction of AkvoFLOW the
application has been picked up by various other stakeholders, it is estimated by the Liberia WASH
Consortium (LWC) that approximately 50% of the actors in the WASH sector in Liberia are using
AkvoFLOW.

3.1.2   Process
        a) Background
AkvoFLOW was chosen for the task of water point mapping, and by extension of all field level
surveying, in order to overcome the limitations faced by traditional data collection methods. In the
case of LWC, in the past, each member would conduct their own surveys often times with different
approaches, questionnaires and sampling methods. This approach was time consuming and raised
difficulties in consolidating data and measuring change. AkvoFLOW is preferred over other
technologies because of the limited internet connectivity that exists in Liberia, especially in rural
areas. Many applications require Wi-Fi or mobile network connectivity to submit collected survey data
which presents a challenge. Similarly, intensive smartphone use requires regular charging and often
the purchase of extra batteries. The AkvoFLOW application can run in offline mode using the
nonvolatile memory in the smartphone which helps to conserve battery power. Furthermore,
smartphone memory capacity is sufficient to accommodate around 1,200 surveys. In the event that
more memory is required, Secure Digital (SD) memory cards can be swapped in an out of the
smartphone accordingly. SD cards can also be used for backup in the field in case the smartphone
breaks down.
        b) Methodology/development process
The experience of the Liberia WASH Consortium (LWC)

The acquisition of AkvoFLOW has led to significant changes in the operating procedures and mindset
of the LWC, affecting activities even beyond water supply. The LWC also undertakes many
assessments related to Ebola and its impact (EFSVL - Emergency Food Security and Vulnerable
Livelihoods, gender, etc.), and all of these surveys are now being undertaken using AkvoFLOW.

The efficiency and effectiveness of surveys has been greatly improved. The LWC has developed a
user manual and staff have been trained on how to design a simple survey using AkvoFLOW and
how to use smartphones for field level data collection. When sufficient data has been acquired or
when the surveyor is finished for the day, he or she will proceed to a Wi-Fi or mobile connection point
and upload the data to the central AkvoFLOW server on the internet. The data is acquired on the
central dashboard instantaneously allowing for immediate analysis, display and sharing of data.

The experience of Unicef Liberia

Unicef Liberia initially started using AkvoFLOW to collect information on water points and later
expanded this to also collect data on sanitation activities in the rural areas under the Community Led
Total Sanitation (CLTS) programme that is meant for elimination of open defecation and improving
sanitation coverage in rural areas. The CLTS activities involve community outreach and encourage
community members to build their own latrines. Unicef collects relevant information - including GPS
coordinates, community name, district name, etc – for all communities that are being visited for CLTS
triggering and later on for all communities that became open defecation free (ODF) and that data is
included in the Akvo Dashboard. With the rise of Ebola, Unicef also used AkvoFLOW to assess the
WASH situation in health facilities. Enumerators visited health facilities and gathered data on existing
water points and latrines using smartphones.

Unicef is still experimenting with AkvoFLOW and seeks to expand its use geographically while also
looking at new application areas where AkvoFLOW can be put to use.

        c) Scalability
Across Liberia, all 15 counties have Government of Liberia WASH Coordinators who are been
equipped with and trained in the use of mobile phones for collecting WASH data. As a result, these
government officers are now providing information that is fed into the AkvoFLOW dashboard. The
availability of information from all 15 counties will help to provide an ongoing and up-to-date picture
of water supply across the country.

As a result of using AkvoFLOW, the coordinating role of the National Water Sanitation and Hygiene
Promotion Committee Secretariat has greatly improved. Data is more readily available to all actors
in the field and as a result, coordination is easier and has greatly improved.

At the present time, AkvoFLOW is used by the organizations working in the promotion of WASH
activities in Liberia, but eventually, it is hoped that the communities themselves will be able to use
AkvoFLOW to better manage their water assets.

3.1.3   Customer/User
The immediate users are the enumerators that have been trained by the various WASH stakeholders
that have adopted AkvoFLOW. These include the LWC, Unicef, the Ministry of Public Works, Global
Communities (USAID), UN Women and a number of other NGOs (Living Water, etc.). It is estimated
by the LWC that approximately 50% of the actors in the WASH sector in Liberia are using AkvoFLOW.
Local Government of Liberia officials were also trained in the use of AkvoFLOW but without
smartphones.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Liberia                                                                   7



Private sector engagement in the use of AkvoFLOW has been limited. The only private sector
operator of significance in the WASH sector is the Liberia Water and Sewerage Corporation and they
have not adopted AkvoFLOW to survey the water kiosks in Liberia.

At the LWC, stakeholders were involved right from the beginning. The greatest challenge was
acclimatizing users to the smartphones. Implementation was achieved using workshops, small group
training as well as individual follow-up when tracking data entry. Akvo staff also helped with group
and one-on-one training.

LWC members who use AkvoFLOW mentioned easier report preparation and increased satisfaction
with the monitoring system. The use of AkvoFLOW has strengthened the Consortium. Based on
evidence gathered using AkvoFLOW it is now easier to identify which interventions work and which
do not. This builds confidence in development decision making. The net result is a strengthening of
organizational capabilities of LWC members.

Unicef Liberia has been largely satisfied with their use of the application. One of the major advantages
of using AkvoFLOW has been much better access to data for reporting purposes. AkvoFLOW has
been used to help measure progress on the rate at which communities are becoming Open
Defecation Free (ODF).

3.1.4      Human Capacity
Training needs were aligned with the resources of the agencies involved, especially those in the
LWC. Manuals were developed by the LWC with the help of Akvo and are used by enumerators. The
manuals were complemented with smartphone and Akvo training. Once trained and experienced,
enumerators felt more confident in their work than they had been when using paper based forms.
While there is no official AkvoFLOW user community in Liberia, there are many organizations in the
WASH sector using the tool and meeting regularly which facilitates sharing of experiences with
AkvoFLOW.

The National Water Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Committee Secretariat has the capacity to
manage the application on a day to day basis without intervention from Akvo, with the exception of
minor technical issues. The IT department at Oxfam Liberia has also provided substantial IT
assistance, especially in terms of selecting the best smartphone.

3.1.5      Finance
The water point mapping project that took place in late 2010 to mid-2011 was funded by WSP (~60%),
UNICEF (~35%) and CHF/USAID (~5%), with considerable logistical and knowledge support coming
from the Ministry of Public Works, the Liberian statistical agency LISGIS, the Ministry of Health, the
US NGO Water for People, and the local WASH Consortium, in particular OXFAM. WSP’s primary
government partner was the Ministry of Public Works, which provided office space, local knowledge
and contacts, help with recruitment, and official government support and legitimization xxv.

LWC received an innovation fund grant from Oxfam of USD 50,000 to acquire and pilot the use of
AkvoFLOW. The LWC initially underestimated the cost of adopting AkvoFLOW and the demand has
grown significantly. A key challenge for the LWC is the recurring fee to be paid to Akvo for the use of
the AkvoFLOW dashboard, approximately EUR 10,000 /year. Additional funds are also required for
training and re-training to take into consideration staff turnover, for follow-up, for support from Akvo,
which is Euro 512/day4, as well as funds to replace stolen and damaged smartphones. Up to 50% of


4   The LWC uses roughly 8-10 days in a year
smartphones are lost and the agency pays for the replacement. There are also costs associated with
increased bandwidth use. The LWC estimates annual operating costs at EUR 25,000.

In the future, LWC will be confronted by the payment by results approach where implementation is
paid for up front by the Consortium, and reimbursed once the donor has been provided with evidence
of the development outcomes contracted for. The advantage of using AkvoFLOW is that it provides
the evidence required for payment. In the new business models now being considered to fund
development, a tool such as AkvoFLOW has a very important role to play. LWC can also demonstrate
to other agencies the usefulness of these tools. Oxfam is now looking at how to upscale the use of
AkvoFLOW so that other program areas can benefit from its use.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Liberia                                                                                                                            9



3.2 DATA ANALYSIS AND KEY FINDINGS
The table below assesses various aspects of the development, implementation and application of AkvoFLOW. The ICT impact chain developed by Gigler
(2011)xxvi is used to assess the social and human impact of the ICT intervention. This involves an assessment of the information and communication options
that have been made available, and the ability of the communities to use these opportunities to improve the quality of their lives.

Table 1: Impact assessment of the AkvoFLOW tool using the Impact chain analysis (Gigler, 2011)

           Condition                           Dimension                                                     Assessment
      Information Needs                   Information needs            The Government of Liberia requires basic information on water point infrastructure,
     (existing information               Communication needs           especially in rural areas. Paper based assessments are time and resource consuming;
           ecologies)                                                  results are also a challenge to integrate across the country and between agencies and
                                        Communication channels
                                                                       government.
                                           Information gaps            Communication channels are restricted, given the limited penetration and high cost of
                                                                       mobile telephony services and electricity.
                                                                       Knowledge on the extent, state and quality of WASH infrastructure and services across
                                                                       the country has been very limited. This knowledge is essential in combating and
                                                                       preventing disease, including Ebola.
        Access to ICTs                    Access to electricity        Access to electricity is not an issue in Government of Liberia county offices, but it is an
      (ICT Infrastructure)             Access to ICT infrastructure    issue at the local and community level. However neither electricity nor internet
                                                                       connectivity is required to operate the smartphones with AkvoFLOW. Offline data entry is
                                          Geographic location
                                                                       possible. Remote locations may require enumerators carry more spare smartphone
                                                                       batteries and SD cards for data backup and storage.
      Basic Use of ICTs                      Literacy rates            Literacy and education levels of enumerators are not an issue in the use of AkvoFLOW
      (Simple ICT use)                     Level of education          by NGOs, Government of Liberia personnel and other actors in the sector. These could
                                                                       present challenges when and if AkvoFLOW is used at the local and community level.
                                          Socio-cultural context
                                                                       Basic IT training is not an issue. Connectivity costs are high, but offline data collection
                                           Basic ICT training          mitigates this problem. In more remote locations, smartphone batteries and SD cards are
                                              Poverty rates            essential.
                                           Connectivity costs
                                                                       AkvoFLOW has been assimilated and integrated into the operations of the organizations
  Meaningful use of the ICT               ICT Capacity building        and agencies that have adopted it. The National Water Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion
             tool                                                      Committee Secretariat manages the AkvoFLOW dashboard and uses it extensively.
                                        Local and relevant content
                                                                       Capacity to use AkvoFLOW is provided by the Secretariat.
  (Level of use of the tool)           Technical local appropriation
                                              Sustainability
                                                                                                                          Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
10                                                                                                                  Field Review of Case Study – Liberia



           Condition                  Dimension                                                    Assessment
                                                            Water point mapping provided a baseline in 2011, but data is dated and needs to be
                                                            revisited. Other WASH indicators need to be included beyond water point data, such as
                                                            sanitation indicators

                                                            Using AkvoFLOW has resulted in increased ease of access to baseline and midterm
                                                            information for donor and government reports; AkvoFLOW users have expressed
                                                            satisfaction with the monitoring system, and are able to use the information collected to
                                                            benefit programme design. The data acquired and the analysis of this data has been
                                                            appropriated by the Government of Liberia and by stakeholders using the application

                                                            The cost of using AkvoFLOW is significant for NGOs and likely for the Government of
                                                            Liberia as well. The long term sustainability of using AkvoFLOW depends on Government
                                                            of Liberia support, which has not been forthcoming. Sustainability still has a ways to go
                                                            and it is likely that in the short to medium term, donor support will be required to support
                                                            the ongoing and extended use of AkvoFLOW in the Government of Liberia and among
                                                            NGOs.

     Enhanced Information            ICT Capabilities       Usual IT technical capabilities are required to deal with most technical assistance
      Capability (multiplier       Information literacy     requests. However, more technical issues require the intervention of Akvo specialists in
            effect)                                         the Netherlands. The National Water Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Committee
                               Communication Capabilities
                                                            Secretariat has acquired the skills to train and equip Government of Liberia staff with
                                  Content Capabilities      AkvoFLOW and smartphones configured for its use.
                                 Local technical & social   Enumerators do not require much in the way of information literacy but the diffusion of
                                      appropriation         smartphones, which are not heavily used in Liberia has encouraged greater IT literacy.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Liberia                                                               11


3.3 Discussion
3.3.1   Trends in the WASH indicators captured by the ICT tool
The WASH indicators captured have been useful to establish a baseline of existing water points and
related infrastructure. This information was not available before and now allows the Government of
Liberia and its partners in the sector to better plan for strengthening the water supply sector and to
start thinking about how a tool such as AkvoFLOW can be used in the sanitation sector, amongst
others.

The data is used to understand which WASH indicators are leading or lagging in achieving national
development goals and the Millennium Development Goals. It is expected that as AkvoFLOW use
expands to other WASH sectors and especially to the sanitation sector, a better understanding of the
situation will result and priorities for action will be more readily apparent as a result.

AkvoFLOW can be used in many different sectors where reporting on infrastructure is required. Given
the move towards payment by results programming and aid delivery, the use of AkvoFLOW is timely,
because it allows development partners and implementers a way to provide quantitative as well as
qualitative evidence of performance, achievement and results and to tailor the data collected to meet
the specific needs of the client or stakeholder.

3.3.2   Trends in the use and operation of the ICT application itself
AkvoFLOW was purchased off the shelf so the application did not undergo any significant
modifications or customization when it was first acquired. However, the users at the LWC have been
coordinating with the Akvo staff in Europe to identify concerns and improve the performance and
functionality of the application. LWC undertook a learning workshop after one year of using
AkvoFLOW. Based on the feedback from this exercise, the GPS function in AkvoFLOW was modified
to improve its performance. To date, the LWC has been satisfied with the upgrade. LWC would like
more visualization tools to get a more visual picture of things to improve on the existing tables and
graphs. For mapping purposes, the LWC uses GOESPAGO to provide geographic information
system (GIS) functionality.

AkvoFLOW has been used by many organizations in the WASH sector in Liberia. The National Water
Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Committee uses AkvoFLOW to report regularly to the President’s
Office on all WASH outputs. The tool has been used to better understand the state of WASH activities
in Liberia and the actors involved. AkvoFLOW has also been used to encourage WASH actors to
provide timely reports on their work to the other development actors in the sector. Now even
Government of Liberia WASH coordinators at the county level are making use of AkvoFLOW.

One issue of concern reported by Unicef is the frequency with which data in the Secretariat
AkvoFLOW dashboard is made available to stakeholders in the WASH sector. WASH sector
stakeholders do not have direct access to the AkvoFLOW dashboard at the Secretariat; instead they
receive reports that are issued periodically by the National Water Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion
Committee Secretariat. Stakeholders would appreciate more regular access.

While greater use of AkvoFLOW has been observed at the county level, the updating of water point
maps needs to continue on an ongoing basis. Unicef has attempted to assist with this endeavor but
has faced a lack of resources and management capacityxxvii.

3.3.3   Disparities in data collection along income/wealth and gender distribution
No disparities in data collection based on gender were recorded in the field. The gender dimension
in the data collection was not considered in a systematic way. There are a small number of female
data collectors working with the LWC but most are male and no significant disparities were recorded
                                                                           Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
12                                                                   Field Review of Case Study – Liberia


on this basis. Given that the data being recorded had to do exclusively with community assets such
as water points, gender issues were not an overt concern.

Because smartphones are relatively expensive in Liberia, staff were not very familiar with their use
and had to be trained accordingly. This was not a major concern as learning was straightforward.
Gender specific information is not being collected at this time

Access based on rural or urban locations has not been an issue, apart from the fact that in
communities that are remote, updates are challenging for logistical reasons.

3.3.4   Any other gaps in data coverage
There is still room for innovation in the use of AkvoFLOW applied to other WASH related data
collection and analysis priorities in Liberia. There is still a ways to go however before AkvoFLOW can
be used at the local and community level. Cost of access to AkvoFLOW and to acquire smartphones
and maintain them will be an ongoing concern as well, that will limit data coverage.

3.4 Opportunities and Challenges
The WASH sector in Liberia is fragmented, with split responsibilities, water points for example are
under the Ministry of Public Works while sanitation falls under the Ministry of Health. The National
Water Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Committee Secretariat is trying to collect all of the WASH
related information from the different stakeholders involved, including from Government of Liberia
agencies and ministries.

At the government level collecting information is challenging as relevant data is acquired and kept in
separate ministries. Bringing this data together to be included in the AkvoFLOW dashboard at the
National Water Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Committee Secretariat has been a challenge. The
Secretariat had to persuade health officials to work together with the officials at Public Works and
vice versa. The Secretariat was successful in getting agreement whereby both ministries will send
the data they collect respectively to the Secretariat and then this data will be made available through
the AkvoFLOW dashboard at the Secretariat.

Probably one of the most important opportunities going forward is to further explore the possibilities
to extend the use of AkvoFLOW to gather more data related to drinking water, including eventually
water quality data, as well as data from the sanitation sector. Along with the water point data
collected, the opportunity exists to extend data collection to other users of drinking water such as
schools, hospitals and clinics. In the absence of piped water infrastructure in rural areas, AkvoFLOW
will be of great value as a simple to use tool to assess the state of existing WASH infrastructure and
services. Furthermore, as a result of using the application it is possible to assess infrastructure needs
and priorities on a county by county basis and allocate resources accordingly.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Liberia                                                              13


4 CONCLUSION
In the era of the payment by results approach to development assistance, the advantage of using
tools such as AkvoFLOW becomes apparent. Opportunities to use these and related ICTs will
become increasing important.

Continuous experimentation with ICT applications such as AkvoFLOW needs to be encouraged in
order to enhance the capacity of the National Water Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Committee
Secretariat, the LWC, Unicef, the WSP and other organizations to understand and recognize
opportunities where ICT use can be implemented to address some of the problems facing the WASH
sector in Liberia.

Efforts to build a national broadband infrastructure to reach all counties and major centers around
the country need to be encouraged. A national broadband infrastructure that works well can be the
basis for promoting greater economic, human and social development in general. It can also help the
WASH sector in Liberia to move beyond human enumerator driven data gathering. Access to reliable
and available mobile telephony services will also establish the foundation upon which more
sophisticated and automated ICT systems can be exploited to enhance the management and return
on investments in the WASH sector. With large scale broadband access, telemetric tools become
available and IT embedded systems, sensors and actuators can be used to manage and monitor
continuously and in real time piped water as well as sanitation infrastructure and related WASH
infrastructure and services. This can form the basis of further rationalizing WASH infrastructure and
services and even enhancing the marketability and commercial viability and private sector interest
and investment in these infrastructures and in the basic services that rely on them, to the greater
benefit of all, including the Government of Liberia. In essence, the lack of both broadband and WASH
infrastructure, and for example, piped water infrastructure in rural areas of Liberia represents an
opportunity for the country to leap frog the development of the WASH sector that has been taking
place in neighbouring countries.

By developing broadband infrastructure and dependent services at the same time and at the same
rate as WASH infrastructure is being developed, the opportunity of embedding smart WASH solutions
arises. This is an advantage than can lead to much greater returns on investments in the WASH
sector and at the same time, carry the potential for private sector driven investment in this sector
throughout the country, but starting with individual rural centers, one at a time, as is the case in
countries such as Benin, where smart WASH solutions have already created value in WASH as a
result of the greater transparency and efficiency in service delivery that ICTs afford.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Liberia                                                               15




ANNEX A: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED
The case study report has been prepared based on consultations with key water sector stakeholders
in Liberia, along with literature on ICT for development and the sampled applications. The table below
provides a list of the stakeholders consulted as part of this case study.

  NAME                         DESIGNATION                                INSTITUTION
                               Water and Sanitation Specialist
  Deo-Marcel Niyungeko         dniyungeko@worldbank.org                   WSP Liberia, World Bank
                               Asst. Manger commercial Field Service      Liberia Water and
  Isaac Ebenezer Hinneh,       dhinneh@gmail.com                          Sewerage Corporation
                               IT Manager, ezunah1@ymail.com, +231        Liberia Water and
  Tony Azuma                   886556600                                  Sewerage Corporation
                               Programme Coordinator,
  Drake Ssenyange              dssenyange@oxfam.org.uk                    Liberia WASH Consortium
                               Monitoring and evaluation and learning
  Aliou                        officer                                    Liberia WASH Consortium
                               Chief of the WASH Section,
  Patrick Sijenyi              psijenyi@unicef.org                        UNICEF Liberia
  Mussa Uwesu
  Ramadhani                    WASH specialist, muwesu@unicef.org         UNICEF Liberia
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study – Liberia                                                          Ref-1


REFERENCES

iWaverman, L., M. Meschi et M. Fuss. 2005. The Impact of Telecoms on Economic Growth in
Developing Countries. In “Africa: the impact of mobile phones”. Moving the debate forward. The
Vodafone Policy Paper Series. No. 2, pp. 12-25, March 2005.
http://info.worldbank.org/etools/docs/library/152872/Vodafone%20Survey.pdf
iiChristine Zhen-Wei Qiang and Carlo M. Rossotto, “Chapter 3: Economic Impacts of Broadband”,
in Information and Communications for Development 2009: Extending Reach and Increasing
Impact (Washington, D.C., World Bank, 2009), p. 45, http://go.worldbank.org/NATLOH7HV0.
  Broadband Commission for Digital Development, Broadband: A Platform for Progress – Executive
iii

Summary (ITU/UNESCO, June 2011), p. 8,
http://www.broadbandcommission.org/report2/executive-summary.pdf.
iv Waverman, L., M. Meschi et M. Fuss. 2005.
v  GSMA. 2012. Rapport 2012 de l’Observatoire de la téléphonie mobile en Afrique subsaharienne.
Résumé. 6 pages. GSMA. Londres. http://www.gsma.com/publicpolicy/public-policy-
resources/mobile-observatory-series
vi ITU. Unesco. 2014. Partnering for solutions: ICTs in Smart Water Management . 60 pp. Mar. ITU,

Geneva. http://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-t/oth/0b/11/T0B110000253301PDFE.pdf
vii ITU. 2014. Smart water management in cities. ITU-T Focus Group on Smart Sustainable Cities.

Focus Group Technical Report. 46 pages. Oct. http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
T/focusgroups/swm/Pages/default.aspx
viii Dutch WASH Alliance. 2014. Annual progress report 2013. April 2014. 50 pp.
http://www.washalliance.nl/wp-content/blogs.dir/2/files/sites/2/2014/06/WASH-Alliance_Progress-
Report-2013.pdf
ix Liberia WASH Consortium. 2015. Sector coordination. http://wash-liberia.org/sector-coordination/
x Liberia WASH Consortium. 2015. Partners. http://wash-liberia.org/sector-coordination/partners/
xi AllAfrica. 2014. Liberia: WASH Consortium Breaks Ground for EU 3.3 Million Euro Water Facility

Project. http://allafrica.com/stories/201403191250.html
xii WHO/Unicef Joint Moniroting Programme. 2014. Liberia: estimates on the use of water sources

and sanitation facilities (1980 - 2012).
http://www.wssinfo.org/documents/?tx_displaycontroller%5Btype%5D=country_files
xiii ITU. 2014. Measuring the Information Society Report 2014 . International Telecommunication

Union, Place des Nations, CH-1211 Geneva Switzerland. 270 pages. http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
D/Statistics/Pages/publications/mis2014.aspx
xiv Kelly, T. and D. Souter. 2014. The Role of Information and Communication Technologies in Post

conflict Reconstruction. World Bank. http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/book/10.1596/978-1-4648-
0074-0
xv NetHope Global Broadband and Innovations Alliance (GBI). 2014. Information and

communications technology response to the Liberia Ebola crisis. Desk Review and
Recommendations for Private Sector Engagement. Oct 24.
http://solutionscenter.nethope.org/assets/collaterals/USAID_LiberiaICTDeskReview_Final_Nov414.
pdf
xvi NetHope Global Broadband and Innovations Alliance (GBI). 2014. Information and

communications technology response to the Liberia Ebola crisis. Desk Review and
Recommendations for Private Sector Engagement. Oct 24.
http://solutionscenter.nethope.org/assets/collaterals/USAID_LiberiaICTDeskReview_Final_Nov414.
pdf
xvii Budde.com 2015. Liberia - Telecoms, Mobile and Broadband - Market Insights and Statistics.

Executive summary. End 2014. http://www.budde.com.au/Research/Liberia-Telecoms-Mobile-and-
Broadband-Market-Insights-and-Statistics.html
xviii Liberia telecommunications Authority. 2010. Policy for the Telecommunications and Information

Communications Technology (ICT) sectors .
http://www.lta.gov.lr/doc/ICT%20_%20Telecom%20Policy%20Main%20Body.pdf
xix Akvoflow. 2015. Smartphone based field surveys. http://akvo.org/products/akvoflow/
                                                                         Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
2                                                                  Field Review of Case Study – Liberia




xx  WSP. 201?. Project summary. Waterpoint Mapping in Liberia Using FLOW Technology. 2 pages.
https://www.wsp.org/sites/wsp.org/files/publications/WSP-FLOW-Liberia-Watermapping-
Summary.pdf
xxi Water For People. 2015. What we do. Akvo FLOW . http://www.waterforpeople.org/what-we-do/
xxii WSP. 2011. New Mobile Technology Helps Liberia Map Rural Water Points, Informs Strategy .

http://www.wsp.org/FeaturesEvents/Features/new-mobile-phone-based-technology-helps-liberia-
map-rural-water-points-infor
xxiii WSP. 2014. Delivering Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene in Fragile and Conflicted Affected States.

Learning Review of WSP’s Technical Assistance Program. (P131964). March 10–14, 2014 Nairobi,
Kenya. http://www.wsp.org/sites/wsp.org/files/publications/WSP-Summary-Findings-Learning-
Review-WSP-FCAS-TA-Program-2014.pdf
xxiv Akvo. 201?. Water points inventory using FLOW . http://wash-liberia.akvoapp.org/project/776/
xxv WSP. 201x. (Probably 2011 or 2012) Project summary: Waterpoint Mapping in Liberia Using

FLOW Technology. https://www.wsp.org/sites/wsp.org/files/publications/WSP-FLOW-Liberia-
Watermapping-Summary.pdf
xxvi Gigler. 2011. Informational Capabilities – The Missing Link for the Impact of ICT on

development. Working Paper Series No.1; E-Transform Knowledge Platform, Working Paper. The
World Bank.
xxvii WSP. 2014. Delivering Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene in Fragile and Conflicted Affected

States.
