                     SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM



                  Enhancing Teacher Education Program




                          Technical Assessment




                                JULY 20, 2016




                                PREPARED BY
                              THE WORLD BANK

                                      1

ETEP – Technical Assessment
                              2

ETEP – Technical Assessment
                                       ABBREVIATIONS



ADB             Asian Development Bank
BOET            Bureau of Education and Training
CPD             continuous professional development
CPS             Country Partnership Strategy
CTPA            Core Teachers and Principal Advisor
DLI             Disbursement-linked Indicator
DOET            Department of Education and Training
DTEM            Department of Teacher Education and Management
ECE             Early Childhood Education
ESSA            Environment and Social Systems Assessment
ETEP            Enhancing Teacher Education Project
FCER            Fundamental and Comprehensive Education Reform
FSA             Financial Systems Assessment
FSQL            Fundamental School Quality Level
GDP             Gross Domestic Products
GOV             Government of Vietnam
GPE             Global Partnership of Education
IBRD            International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICT             Information, Communication and Technology
IDA             International Development Association
IDEO            Intergenerational Deaf Education Outreach Project
ISM             Implementation Support Mission
IT              Information Technology
IVA             Independent Verification Agency
LMS             Learning Management System
LTTU            Lead Teacher Training University
M&E             Monitoring and Evaluation
MDGs            Millennium Development Goals
MOET            Ministry of Education and Training
MOF             Ministry of Finance
MOLISA          Ministry of Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs
MPI             Ministry of Planning and Investment
NPV             Net Present Value
NTEP            National Teacher Education Program
ODA             Official Development Assistance
ODL             Open Distance Learning
OECD            Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

                                              3

ETEP – Technical Assessment
PA              Performance Agreement
PAD             Program Appraisal Document
PAP             Program Action Plan
PDO             Program Development Objective
PforR           Program for Results
PISA            Program for International Student Assessment
PMU             Program Management Unit
RGEP            Renovation of General Education Project
RTTI            Readiness to Teach Index
SEDP            Socio–Economic Development Plan
SEDS            Socio-Economic Development Strategy
SEQAP           School Education Quality Assurance Program
SRPP            School Readiness Promotion Project
TA              Technical Assistance
TEIDI           Teacher Education Institution Development Index
TEIP            Teacher Education Improvement Project
TEMIS           Teacher Education Management Information System
TGE             Total Government Expenditure
TPP             Trans-Pacific Partnership
TTI             Teacher Training Institution
TTU             Teacher Training University
UNESCO          United Nations Education Science and Culture Organization
US              United States
USD             United States Dollar
VHLSS           Vietnam Household Living Standard Survey
VND             Vietnamese Dong
VNEN            Vietnam Global Partnership for Education - Escuela Nueva Project




                                                4

ETEP – Technical Assessment
                                                                   Table of Contents



I.                 COUNTRY CONTEXT ...........................................................................................................4
II.                SECTORAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT...............................................................5
III.               STRATEGIC RELEVANCE ................................................................................................12
IV.                RELATIONSHIP TO THE CPS AND RATIONALE FOR CHOICE OF INSTRUMENT
                   17
      A.           RELATIONSHIP TO THE CPS                                                                                                  17
      B.           RATIONALE FOR CHOICE OF INSTRUMENT                                                                                       18
V.                 PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................19
      A.           PROGRAM SCOPE                                                                                                            19
      B.           PROGRAM FOR RESULTS                                                                                                      22
           Part I: Results Areas                                                                                                            24
           Part II: Technical Assistance                                                                                                    27
      C.           PROGRAM FINANCING                                                                                                        28
      D.           PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE                                                                                            28
      E.           PROGRAM BENEFICIARIES                                                                                                    28
      F.           PROGRAM KEY RESULTS AND DISBURSEMENT LINKED INDICATORS                                                                   29
      G.           INSTITUTIONAL AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENT                                                                             31
      H.           RESULTS MONITORING AND EVALUATION                                                                                        33
VI.                PROGRAM TECHNICAL SOUNDNESS ...........................................................................34
      A.           EVALUATION OF TECHNICAL RISKS                                                                                            35
           LTTUs as drivers for change                                                                                                      35
           Core Teachers as change agents at school level                                                                                   36
           ICT-based support for teaching and learning                                                                                      37
           Assessment of teachers’ professional development needs                                                                           38
      B.           EVALUATION OF INSTITUTIONAL AND MANAGERIAL RISKS                                                                         39
VII.               PROGRAM EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK ..................................................................41
      A.           BUDGET STRUCTURE FOR TEACHER TRAINING                                                                                    41
      B.           PROGRAM BUDGET STRUCTURE                                                                                                 43
      C.           FINANCIAL SUSTAINABILITY                                                                                                 44
      D.           FINANCIAL PREDICTABILITY                                                                                                 45
VIII.              ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS .....................................................................45
      A.           OVERALL ECONOMIC BENEFIT ESTIMATION                                                                                      46
      B.           OVERALL ECONOMIC COST ESTIMATION                                                                                         47

                                                                               5

      ETEP – Technical Assessment
  C.          COMBINING COST AND BENEFIT CALCULATION                                              47



                                         I. COUNTRY CONTEXT

1.       Vietnam has experienced rapid and inclusive economic growth since the early 1990s.
Economic renovation (Doi Moi) reforms launched in 1986 have transformed it from one of the
world’s poorest countries to a lower-middle-income one—with per capita gross national
income (GNI) of US$1,980 in 2015. Growth has also been inclusive: incomes have risen across
the income distribution, with only modest increases in inequality. The percentage of people
living in extreme poverty dropped from 50 percent in the 1993 to less than three percent today.
Key social indicators and access to basic infrastructure have also improved substantially.

2.      Nonetheless, significant challenges remain. Although over the long term ethnic
minorities have seen notable improvements in welfare, large gaps between ethnic minorities
and the majority population remain. Remaining poverty is increasingly concentrated among
ethnic minorities, who now constitute 14 percent of the population but 60 percent of the
poor. In 2014 the poverty rate was 57.8 percent among ethnic minorities, compared to 6.3
percent among the Kinh and Hoa ethnic majority. The most recent data show worrying signs
that progress on ethnic minority welfare has stalled.

                       Figure 1: Social Indicators for Disadvantaged Ethnic Minorities


         Infant Mortality Rate                                  44
                                                                                     Ethnic Minorities
           (per 1000 births)           10
                                                                                     Kinh & Hoa
       Rate of Stunting                                         43%
 (% of Children Under Age 5)                       26%

   Improved Sanitation (%)                                              52%
                                                                                                  88%

          Rate of Enrollment                                 [VALUE]%
       in Upper Secondary (%)                                                    [VALUE]%



                   Source: Vietnam 2035: Based on the VHLSS 2014 and the MICS 2010 and 2014

3.     Vietnam has also achieved impressive outcomes on gender equality. Gender differences
in school enrollment and attainment are minimal, and the gender wage gap is modest. But
women remain outliers in private- and public sector leadership positions. There are sharp
gender differences in business and particularly in government and political spheres, where the
leadership is overwhelmingly male. In the last decade and a half, the share of women in the
National Assembly has declined and is now at 24.4 percent. Few chairs of National Assembly


                                                         6

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
committees are female. The civil service has a large share of women, but their representation in
leadership positions is low, mostly at lower levels.1

4.     These mentioned challenges are well understood by the Government, as reflected in the
recent Vietnam 2035 report it jointly prepared with the World Bank Group.
        2
5.        Vietnam has also achieved impressive outcomes on gender equality. Gender
differences in school enrollment and attainment are minimal, and the gender wage gap is
modest. However, women remain outliers in private- and public-sector leadership positions.
There are sharp gender differences in business and particularly in government and political
spheres, the leadership is overwhelmingly male. In the last decade and a half, the share of
women in the National Assembly has been declining and is now at 24.4 percent. Few chairs of
National Assembly committees are female. The civil service has a large share of women, but
their representation in leadership positions is low, mostly at lower levels.3

6.      In sum, socio-economic achievement in Vietnam has led to growth that has benefited
almost all Vietnamese. However, this phenomenon of “all boats rising? has not substantially
narrowed socio-economic gaps or increased opportunities. Ethnic minorities continue to lag
behind other groups and women cannot seem to break through the Vietnamese version of the
“glass ceiling?. Considering these persisting differences between populations and the sexes,
what policy changes should may better prepare Vietnam for an uncertain but promising future
while ensure that all will benefit.

7.      Environmental degradation coupled with the impact of global climate change threaten
the long-term sustainability of the country’s development. In addition, despite major
infrastructure spending needs, Vietnam faces shrinking financing options on account of growing
fiscal pressures and insufficient private sector participation. Furthermore, the institutions of
governance that were adequate to carry the country to its lower-middle-income level are now
exposing gaps that need to be addressed with urgency and boldness, especially as pressures
emerge from economic integration, urbanization, an aging population, and aspirations of a
rising middle class.

                          II. SECTORAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT

8.      Achievements and Challenges. Vietnam has always emphasized education as a keystone
of its development policy. As one sign of this commitment, it allocates nearly 20 percent of
public expenditures to education, significantly above the Organization for Economic Co-



1
  For ethnic minorities in general, and for ethnic minority women in particular, access to leadership positions (and
the civil service, for that matter), is significantly lower than for Kinh and Hoa women.
2
  Vietnam 2035: Toward Prosperity, Creativity, Equity, and Democracy. Overview Report. World Bank and the
Ministry of Planning and Investment of Vietnam. February 2016
3
  For ethnic minorities in general, and for ethnic minority women in particular, access to leadership positions (and
the civil service, for that matter), is significantly lower than for Kinh and Hoa women.
                                                           7

    ETEP – Technical Assessment
operation and Development (OECD) average of 12.9 percent.4 A national network of schools,
colleges and universities has expanded dramatically improving access to education at all levels.

9.      The country has essentially achieved universal primary education. It is now moving
towards universal preschool education for five-year-old children and universal lower secondary
education. Between 2001 and 2010, net enrollment rates at lower secondary and high school
levels increased from 70 percent to 85 percent and 33 percent to 50 percent respectively.5

10.      Vietnam has also make considerable progress in creating better learning conditions in
schools. The Ministry of Education and Training (MOET) has developed the “Fundamental
School Quality Level (FSQL)? in 2006, which establishes minimum standards for physical
facilities, school organization and management, teaching materials and teacher support, and
school-parent linkages for primary students. Full-day schooling for primary and lower secondary
education has gradually expanded to increase learning hours.

11.    Vietnam has also attained higher levels of student learning achievement. Its
performance on the 2012 Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) 6 surpassed the
OECD country average and many developed economies.7 In addition, variation around the mean
scores was relatively small.

                                                                   12.     While      achievements      are
        Box 1: Tomorrow’s Vietnamese must be able to:              impressive, Vietnamese authorities are
     Master communication, computational and scientific           concerned that their education system is
      competencies                                                 not well positioned for the age of
     Work and learn in teams
     Apply knowledge and seek out information to solve
                                                                   globalization      and     international
      problems                                                     competition because it does not provide
     Integrate formal and non-formal learning, declarative        the population with the skills and
      knowledge (or knowing that) and procedural knowledge         competencies needed for producing
      (or know-how)
                                                                   greater value in the future.8 Addressing
     Access, select and evaluate knowledge in an information-
      soaked world                                                 these challenges is the next frontier of
     Develop and apply several forms of intelligence, beyond      education development in Vietnam.
      mastery of subject content.                                  Fully recognizing the importance of
     Create, transpose and transfer knowledge
                                                                   these issues, Vietnam’s 2011-2015 SEDP
     Cope with ambiguous situations, unpredictable problems
      and unforeseeable circumstances                              stated that the “quick development
     Cope with multiple careers, learning how to locate oneself   of…high quality human resources is
      in a job market, choose and fashion the relevant education   essential      for     the     country’s
      in consequence

4
  Education at a Glance, OECD. 2011. Page 248.
5
  United Nations Education Science and Culture Organization (UNESCO). 2015. Vietnam: Education for All 2015
National Review.
6
  PISA (Program for International Student Assessment) is a worldwide study by OECD in member and non-member
nations of 15-year-old school pupils’ scholastic performance on mathematics, science and reading. V ietnam scored
511 (17th place out of 65 tested countries) on math, 508 on reading (19th place), and 528 on science (8th place).
7
  OECD. 2012. PISA 2012, Result in focus retrieved from www.oecd.org/pisa/.../pisa-2012-results-overview.pdf.
8
  Skilling Up Vietnam: Preparing the Workforce for the Modern Market Economy, World Bank. November 2013
                                                             8

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
industrialization, modernization, and the development of a knowledge-based economy.?9 The
2015-2020 SEDP confirmed this finding.

13.    There is also unfinished business. Gaps in education achievement and opportunity
mirror many of the trends pointed out above. There has been considerable progress over the
last two decades, with almost all ethnic minority children and girls enrolling and attending
primary schools,10 and minor difference in enrollment rates for lower secondary education for
ethnic minorities and none concerning gender.


                                                                                                Math Scores, by Wealth Quantile
                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                   Age




                                                      Math Score, Age Normalized Score
                                                                                         0.5

                                                                                           0
                                                                                                    5          8          12         15
                                                                                         -0.5

                                                                                          -1         Poorest Quantile       Second Quantile
                                                                                                     Third Quantile         Richest Quantile




1.      In terms of learning, gaps between children from majority groups and those from
disadvantaged ethnic minorities are narrowing. Over the last decade, ethnic minority children
have registered impressive gains in mathematics, reading, and particularly Vietnamese language.
However, gaps persist, in part because scores for all populations have been increasing over
recent years.
2.      However, the access profile for ethnic minorities changes dramatically starting with
upper secondary school. From the age of 14 (the last year of lower secondary) a steep fall-off in
ethnic minority enrollment begins and relatively few children from ethnic minorities make the
jump to upper secondary. Whereas the lower secondary enrollment rate is 85 percent, it drops to
60 percent for upper secondary (with just a third of the poorest quintile of the student population
succeeding in that transition). For the moment, this drop-off has remained steady over time. This
constitutes a major brake in higher education enrollment.

14.    Vietnam has largely achieved gender equality in general and higher education.11
However, gender gaps continue, but in different forms. Whereas there are more women
enrolled in higher education than men, they are less likely to study sciences, engineering and

9
  Vietnamese Government. 2010. Socio-Economic Development Strategy for 2011-2015
10
   The remaining primary and lower secondary enrollment gaps between disadvantaged ethnic minorities and other
groups are expected to close soon. The overall enrollment rate for ethnic minority children is 89% (steady rising by
one percent per year) but then enrollment rate for 7-9 year olds is 100%. With nominal primary and lower secondary
school dropout rates, we can expect.
11
   With the exception of ethnic minority girls.
                                                                                          9

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
other technology-oriented fields. In addition, and this is of particular import for this operation,
women tend to be underrepresented in management positions. As is the case in many
countries, there are many more female than male teachers, but far fewer female school
directors, subject specialists, district/provincial/national administrators, or university faculty.

15. Government response. Addressing the combination of “new and old business?
represents a considerable challenge for the Vietnamese education system, regardless of past
successes. Teaching higher order skills in general education will mean defining new standards,
developing new pedagogical approaches, setting up learning assessment and establishing and
applying new incentives. These changes will particularly task schools that serve more
disadvantaged populations that still struggle to meet first generation educational goals.
16. In 2013, the 11th Party Congress at its eighth meeting session recognized that Vietnam’s
education system had performed admirably, but that overall education quality remains lower
than expectations. To attend to this, Vietnam adopted the Fundamental and Comprehensive
Education Reform (FCER),12 which aims for education to meet “the requirements of
industrialization and modernization in the socialist orientated market economy and
international integration?. It constitutes a political and legislative umbrella for a broad sector-
wide reform.
17. New strategies to meet new objectives. The FCER introduces changes at every level of
education – from preschool to lifelong learning. To meet the objectives of the FCER and
organize the implementation of its broad strategies, the Government identified over 20
programs areas and charged the Ministry of Education and Training to prepare specific action
plans to implement over the five-year period of the reform. Table 1 organizes the programs by
education level: (i) System-wide; (ii) General education; (iii) Higher education; and (iv) Skills
development.




12
  Resolution No 29/NQ-TW issued on 4th November 2013 of the 8th Conference of the 11th Session of the Central
Executive Committee on Fundamental and Comprehensive Education Reform.
                                                      10

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
          SYSTEM LEVEL                   GENERAL                      HIGHER                    SKILLS
                                       EDUCATION13                  EDUCATION                DEVELOPMENT
      FCER communication         Develop new curriculum     Evaluation of science      Reorganization of TVET
     campaign                    and textbooks               and technology activities   centers
                                                             efficiency
      Complete the structure     Learning assessment                                    Renovation of vocational
     of the education system                                  Budget allocation         and professional education
                                  Preschool education       method and criteria         quality
      Mobilize domestic and     development
     international resources
                                  High school graduation
                                                              Development of higher      National Qualification
                                                             education institutions      Framework
      Amendment of              exam and university
     Education Law               entrance exam                                            Information network on
                                                                                         supply-demand of
      Promote non-public         Reform teacher training                               education and training
     education                   network
      Incentives on public       Reform pre-service and
                                                                                          Cultural and sports
                                                                                         centers
     institutions performance    in-service training
      Recruitment based on       Teaching and
     actual competencies         researching science and
                                 technology
      Development of ethnic
     minority human resources     Career orientation
      IT to support teaching     Infrastructure
     and research activities
      Enhance efficiency of
     international cooperation

      Inspectorate


18.    The FCER’s priority is general education (grades K-12), where learning approaches are to
become less content-based and more competency- and quality-based. It intends for all
Vietnamese students to obtain higher order cognitive and behavioral skills, such as the ability to
think critically and creatively, apply knowledge from many subject areas to solve practical
problems, work in teams, and convincingly communicate verbally and in writing.14 To that end,
general education will introduce, inter alia, new curricula and methods of instruction, develop a
comprehensive learning assessment system and reform teacher education.

19.   The FCER retains at the center of Vietnam’s education development strategy the
importance of equal opportunity. Thus, all students, regardless of ethnicity, income or gender
must have an equal opportunity to master these new higher order skills and competencies.
20.    Past successes in increasing access to education and higher learning achievement for
disadvantaged groups were the product of a wide array of interventions sustained over a long



13
   Many of these areas are already supported by the World Bank education program through the following projects:
SEQAP, VNEN, and RGEP
14
   Ibid.
                                                             11

      ETEP – Technical Assessment
period. The government developed and adopted both supply15 and demand16 side strategies.
The FCER now aims for an 80 percent upper secondary enrollment rate, which is attainable only
if enrollment of ethnic minorities increases rapidly. Although some of the same successful
strategies might remain pertinent, secondary education is considerably more complex what
with the variety of learning paths, the high stakes competition for tertiary education, and the
intrudction of new ways of teaching and learning. Thus, the new education sector reform may
constitute a particular challenge for ethnic minority children because it raises the bar by
introducing new skills and competencies – just when these same children have begun to
become proficient at the existing learning goals.
21.    However, the reform also represents an opportunity for ethnic minority children
because the new pedagogy favors a tailored approach to learning and teaching that takes into
consideration context, the specific characteristics of the learner and insists that all children can
succeed. In consequence, the new teacher professional profile will be particularly apt, since
teachers will need to tailor their teaching approaches to the specific challenges facing ethnic
minority children.
22.    It is difficult to predict whether the new skills and competencies will be more difficult to
master for girls or boys, although the education system should develop the tools and
mechanisms to detect any differences as they appear. However, as mentioned above, one of
the key gender issues in the education system has to do with equal access of female personnel
to leadership and management positions. The efforts to reinforce teacher education will also
provide an opportunity to affect the gender balance in higher-level positions in general
education.
23.     Teachers are at the center of the reform process. The success of such a reform will
depend almost exclusively on the preparedness of the teacher to master this new pedagogical
paradigm. One of the underlying principles of the FCER is that teachers should be equipped to
respond to different contexts that are themselves constantly changing. Essentially, the FCER will
require teachers to become increasingly professional, i.e., to adapt methodologies and
knowledge to real-time problems as they arise in his or her classroom and school. This is similar
to the professional models of medical doctors, researchers, policy analysts and other
knowledge-based fields. Training and supporting such teachers requires greater interaction
between professionals, reciprocity, hands-on mentorship and coaching and on-time advice to
solve identified problems.
24.    In sum, for teachers to acquire this new type of professional profile, they will need
school-based continuous professional development (CPD). Considering the nature of the
expected changes to teaching methodology and professional responsibility, most research on
the matter has indicated that school-based CPD (provided through face-to face and online

15
   For example, school construction and improvement programs targeting selected regions and/or population groups;
incentives to deploy teachers to remote areas and to attract ethnic minorities to the teaching profession; deployment
of specialized teachers or teacher aides (e.g., language assistants); development of programs for children whose
mother tongue is not Vietnamese.
16
   For example, school fee exemptions, discounts, school lunches, scholarships and information campaigns
                                                          12

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
platforms) has the greatest influence on teacher competencies, classroom behavior, and
effectiveness, particularly since it prepares teachers to respond to quickly changing situation
and a wider array of differing demands.17 By “bringing training to the teacher?, school-based
CPD can help teachers more effectively master these new methods and competencies.
25.     Teacher education in Vietnam has many strengths, but it is not currently in a position to
help teachers acquire this new professional profile, nor to ensure the highest quality and most
responsive onsite continuous professional development. One of the biggest challenges is that
teacher education actors do not function in a coordinated manner to meet teacher and
principal new needs. In consequence, the Ministry of Education and Training (MOET) has
prepared the National Teacher Education Program (NTEP) to enable the teacher education
system to adapt more effectively to the changing needs of teachers to meet learning
objectives.18 The NTEP focuses on one of the FCER Programs -- the Reform of Preservice and
Inservice Training -- to produce a comprehensive strategy for realigning teacher education to
the new requirements of general education. 19
26.     The NTEP is a comprehensive strategy that aims to realign teacher education to the new
requirements of general education. The NTEP proposes several paths of intervention: pre-
service training for new teachers, retraining for some teachers to obtain additional
qualifications, in-service training programs that bring teachers to training centers for specific
objectives and continuous professional development (CPD) that provide support and training to
teachers within schools.
27.     The NTEP proposes several paths of intervention: pre-service training for new teachers,
retraining for some teachers to obtain additional qualifications, in-service training programs
that bring teachers to training centers for specific objectives and continuous professional
development (CPD) that provide support and training to teachers within schools.
28.     Of the different elements of the NTEP, the Government and the World Bank agreed that
the Bank financed Enhancing Teacher Education Program (ETEP) would focus on school-based
continuous professional development. The expected changes to teacher methodology, as well
as the findings of much research on teacher professionalism, point to school-based CPD
(provided face-to face and online platforms) as having the greatest influence on teacher
competencies and behavior. By “bringing training to the teacher?, school-based CPD can help
teachers more effectively adopt new methods and master new competencies. Furthermore,
since there will be little need to recruit additional teachers because of demographic shifts and a
current surplus of teachers, school based interventions constitute the principal lever for
successfully achieving the FCER goals for general education.

17
   Francesca Caena, 2011. Quality in Teachers’ Continuing Professional Development. Education and Training
2020: Thematic Working Group ‘Professional Development of Teachers’, European Commission, Directorate -
General for Education and Culture.
18
   The National Teacher Education Program has been approved by Government on April 29, 2016.
19
   The MOET is currently developing a complementary program to reorganize and rationalize the network of TTIs.
Once MOET finalizes and approves this program, it will take the lead in ensuring that it is closely coordinated with
ETEP and NTEP. LTTUs can already collaborate with other TTIs and should be encouraged to include such
partnerships in their Performance Agreement as appropriate.
                                                          13

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
                  Figure 3: National Teacher Education Program in context




29.    Vietnam possesses a keen advantage as it enters a new generation of education sector
development. It is building from the base of a well-functioning education system that has
provided exceptional results. Despite “unfinished business?, the system has produ ced learned
children distributed quite equitably across Vietnam. Many better-endowed countries would be
envious of this result. However, the challenges of such an ambitious shift in educational
expectations should not be underestimated and the National Teacher Education Program
constitutes a promising strategy in that regard.

                                III.   STRATEGIC RELEVANCE

30.    Vietnam has impressive teachers and managers. This speaks to the robust and flexible
teacher education system it established over the last two decades. To keep up with changing
demands and challenges, MOET enacted several reforms over the last fifteen years to improve
the effectiveness of general education teachers, such as new professional standards used to
both evaluate teachers and determine their professional development needs. To help teacher
meet these standards, MOET developed new teacher training approaches, as well as a menu of
continuous professional development opportunities. Furthermore, MOET introduced several
innovations, such as the collective development of lessons plans at the school level, peer
support programs, and use of mentors for new teachers.
31.    During the same period, MOET put in place a new regulatory framework for Teacher
Training Institutions (TTI) to improve management of teacher education and introduced a new
career structure. Consequently, TTI lecturers and managers, as well staff from Departments of

                                              14

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
Education and Training (DOET) and Bureaus of Education and Training (BOETs) 20 tend to be well
qualified reflecting the success of the existing incentive structure. Furthermore, a relatively
equitable deployment of teachers speaks to good planning.
32. However, changes in learning objectives necessarily mean changes in what teachers need
to know and do. Thus, it is time for the teacher education system to adapt once again to new
circumstances, expectations and aspirations.
33. Teachers tend to rely on rote and
                                                      Box 2:
“chalk and talk? methodologies.21 To date,
this has apparently served most students               Master new integrated subjects;
                                                       Use facts as a starting point, not an end point for
well. However, much research and                        teaching;
experience indicate that these approaches              Encourage learning by doing;
are often less effective when the objective            Make changes to lessons, activities or
is to meet complex learning goals. This plus            methodology on the spot when needed;
the diverse character of different                     Have high expectations of all their students;
                                                       Continuously evaluate their own practice;
communities (often changing rapidly                    Seek new evidence-based international and
because of internal migration) and the                  national knowledge to inform their teaching;
range of learning challenges within a single           Work collaboratively with other teachers - sharing
classroom, requires teachers to take on a               knowledge, providing feedback and serving as
                                                        mentors and coaches; and
more sophisticated set of teaching                     Form strong relationships with students, as well
methodologies.                                          as their families and communities.
34.     Essentially, the FCER will require       1.
teachers to become increasingly professional, i.e., to adapt methodologies and knowledge to
                                                 2. Compiled from the FCER and other sources
real-time problems as they arise in his or her classroom and school. This is similar to the
professional models of medical doctors, researchers, policy analysts and other knowledge-
based fields. Training and supporting such teachers requires greater interaction between
professionals, reciprocity, hands-on mentorship and coaching and on-time advice to solve
identified problems. In sum, a key factor for helping teachers during this new phase is the
quality of continuous professional development (CPD).
35.    Continuous professional development in the best education systems often has three
basic qualities.22
        Training and support services are provided at the school level, without diluting the
         quality of that support;



20
    DOET are education authorities answerable to provincial governments and BOETs authorities to district
governments.
21
   Such as recitation, lecturing, and seat work, with a considerable focus on discipline.
22
   Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 2014. Teachers Know Best: Teachers’ views on professional development.
http://collegeready.gatesfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/Gates-PDMarketResearch-Dec5.pdf.
Department of Education and Training, Victoria, Australia, 2005. Professional Learning in Effective Schools: The
seven Principles of Highly Effective Professional Learning .
http://www.education.vic.gov.au/Documents/school/teachers/profdev/proflearningeffectivesch.pdf.
                                                        15

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
        Knowledge about innovations and best practice needs to be more freely available to all
         teachers and in forms that can help teachers meet real-time challenges; and
        A more comprehensive assessment and feedback mechanism for training needs should be
         in place to drive the development of support and training for teacher in the school and
         classroom.
36.     Teacher CPD in Vietnam has elements of the above features, but it is not organized
along these lines. CPD is not systematic, although the potential is there. Teacher CPD has been
of good quality and value. However, it should now ensure that CPD is evidence-based, demand-
driven, and responsive to feedback. Below are some challenges education authorities will need
to take into consideration as they develop the kind of CPD that would best respond to the
challenges that teachers will face.
37.     Teacher training and support does not focus on the needs of teachers in the classroom,
adapting to actual conditions, and providing real time advice and support. Little teacher training
and support in Vietnam is school-based. Rather, pre-service and in-service teacher training is
done in lecture halls, classrooms or one-way electronic and paper communications (textbooks,
videos).23 Rather than providing teacher preparation in real classrooms, Vietnamese teacher
trainees only spend 15 percent of their time in schools. Effective in situ training for sitting and
new teachers requires considerable coordination, management, planning, supervision, and
specialized technical support, which TTIs and regional educational authorities are not able to
provide.
38.     Teachers do not have access to up to date and relevant knowledge to inform their
practice: The rapidly changing state of education sciences requires teachers and managers to be
continuously connected to knowledge resources. This allows teachers to learn new approaches
and obtain help on specific issues. Consequently, teachers and managers must have free and
readily available access to knowledge provided in a responsive and customized manner. As
importantly, teachers and managers should be able to contribute to the knowledge base, so
that all teachers can learn from individual and group experiences. Vietnam does not have in
place a comprehensive and interactive knowledge information system that can serve teachers
and managers on an ongoing and just-in-time basis.
39.    Intermediary level education departments do not have the expertise to provide guidance
for school-based training and support: Intermediary level actors24 are important because they
are the nearest “port of call? for teachers, schools and communities. However, they presently
serve as links to the education hierarchy (communicating information upward and orders
downward), rather than vehicles for providing support to teachers at the classroom and school
level. Schools are left to their own devices as to how to conduct peer-to-peer support,

23
   Most Teacher Training Institutions conduct practicums in schools located on or near their premises.
24
   The Vietnamese education system has both decentralized and centralized characteristics. The MOET sets norms,
pay scales, and targets (in terms of access and quality) at the national level. DOETs control the education budgets
and human resource deployment decisions and thus can set priorities and develop specific strategies for meeting
targets. BOETs and local political organizations provide support to schools, mobilize community contribution, and
monitor school and teacher compliance with policy, regulations and targets.
                                                         16

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
classroom observation, and collaborative teaching because DOETs and BOETs are ill equipped
to provide this type of guidance.
40.     DOETs and BOETs do not have ability to evaluate training and support needs and cannot
translate such assessments into appropriate interventions. Most importantly, however, they do
not have the capability or motivation to create and maintain conduits for knowledge transfer
either horizontally (between teachers and schools within their catchment area) or vertically
(with institutions providing teacher and school manager education.
41.    The teacher and management education system in Vietnam functions in a disjointed
manner. Teacher education institutions tend to work in isolation and have little or no contact
with new or currently serving teachers in schools. DOETs and BOETs identify and select
professional development programs with little oversight or follow up; and schools receive no
external guidance that takes into consideration their specific needs. Furthermore, there is
minimal strategic management of teacher education. Quality assurance systems of the content
and implementation of training programs are non-existent. Furthermore, even the most
prominent TTIs lack the human resources and facilities necessary to meet the new demands of
the education system.
42.     Professional standards have ceased to serve as a benchmark for teacher effectiveness or
as a vehicle to motivate teachers. Over 98% of teachers meet all the teacher standards
established in the mid-2000s for primary school teachers and in 2010 for secondary school
teachers. The MOET intends to modify teacher standards to reflect the pedagogical skills
required for competency-based teaching. However, the assessment process may be overly
subjective. Teachers conduct a self-assessment that the school principal subsequently reviews
and confirms. No external actor is involved in the process and principals receive no special
training to conduct assessments.
43.     Systematic evaluation systems are not in place to identify challenges facing teachers.
Existing personnel information systems do not record teacher performance strengths and
weaknesses, evaluate the impact of training on practice or ensure the quality and coherence of
training programs. Such feedback mechanisms are increasingly important as Vietnam expects
more from its teachers, as well as from the institutions that provide training and professional
development.
44.     Surplus capacity presents an opportunity for teacher and manager professional
development. Vietnam has experienced a substantial fall in birth rates and now that there is
universal basic education and a young teacher corps, the need for new teachers is dwindling.
Of course, because of expanding secondary education and growing interest in teaching for
specific needs (e.g., special education, foreign languages), there will still be need for additional
teachers. However, there is an evident mismatch between the present capacity and future
demand, particularly if TTIs remained focused on in house pre-service training. There are
presently 132 teacher and educational manager training institutions that can graduate more
than 50,000 teachers per year. However, more optimistic projections expect the education
system to need no more than another 15,000. However, this surplus capacity constitutes an

                                                  17

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
opportunity, if these resources can be reoriented towards providing school-based support to
new and serving teachers.
45.     The network of Teacher Training Institutions (TTI) will soon be undergoing a significant
reorganization. This because of the dwindling need for new teachers, the transformation of
many into multi-disciplinary universities and colleges, and the government’s decision to close
others. In addition, the FCER has mandated this reorganization. However, this reorganization
remains unspecified with no clear objectives or strategies. Any reorganization of the network of
TTIs will need to take into consideration future coordination with the DOETs and the MOET.
Putting these elements in place will require fundamental changes in the way teacher education
and support system are organized and delivered. This is essentially the objective of the NTEP,


                      Box 3: School-based teacher education shows results in Palestine:
                                 The Teacher Education Improvement Project
 An increasing amount of research shows that teacher quality is one of the most significant determinants of
 student learning.1 This has been particularly exemplified by the West Bank and Gaza Teacher Education
 Strategy, which has been supported by the Bank-financed Teacher Education Improvement Project. TEIP
 comprises two components: (i) expanding Practicums for preservice teacher trainees; and (ii) providing in-
 service training to under-qualified teachers to help them transition from ‘subject teachers’ into ‘class
 teachers’.

 The World Bank and others have studied this experience intently, using both qualitative and quantitative
 approaches. Some of this research focused specifically on the TEIP, whereas other work examined similar
 initiatives addressing the education needs of Palestinian children. Here are some selected findings:

     Higher performing schools tend to have more teachers who had benefited from more professional
      development.
  Successful schools tend to have teachers who are confident, have high levels of job satisfaction, and
      benefit from on-going professional development and training.
  Beneficiaries of the in-service component adopted a more open and searching (i.e., professional)
      attitude, as evidenced by the establishment of ‘communities of practice’ that used ICT chat room
      facilities to allow for discussions with peers and faculty/trainers.
  Student teachers who benefited from more Practicums tended to: (i) maintain a flexible, creative and
      motivating classroom environment; (ii) use ICT more regularly and (iii) employ different teaching
      strategies.
  Teachers receiving school-based in-service support tended to encourage students to engage in
      experimentation and collaborative work projects; and (ii) employed methods that met the needs of
      different types of students.
 The experience of the Kufor Quod Girls’ Secondary School is particularly telling. The director employed
 school-based teacher supervisors who assessed teacher performance and implemented customized
 training programs. They successfully served to transfer effective, adaptive and innovative teaching
 approaches.3

 As a last point, TIEP supported the development of the Readiness to Teach Index (RTTI) comprising 21
 competencies based on 21 professional standards. Participating institutions in WBG used the RTTI to
 evaluate student teachers and as a framework for developing teacher education programs.

 The design of ETEP is significantly informed by programs18such as TEIP. ETEP emphasizes hands-on school-
 based training and professional development. It intends to use ICT to connect teachers to each other and
 toETEP – Technical
    the world         Assessment
              of education  research and practice. And it adopts rigorous measure of teacher professionalism
 to guide the development of teacher education that is more adapted and adaptable to the needs of
 teachers in the classroom. All proven methods to further professionalize teachers and improvement the
 learning experience.
with the support of the ETEP, which focuses on CPD.



            IV.      RELATIONSHIP TO THE CPS AND RATIONALE FOR CHOICE OF
                                         INSTRUMENT

       A. Relationship to the CPS

46.     The World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy for Vietnam (FY2012-2016) (Report
85986) consists of three pillars: (i) strengthening Vietnam’s competitiveness in the regional and
global economy; (ii) increasing the sustainability of its development; and (iii) broadening access
to economic and social opportunity. Vietnam’s Fundamental and Comprehensive Education
Reform (FCER) shares the objectives of the first and third pillars of the CPS. The FCER aims to
prepare Vietnam for greater integration into the global economy, by providing students with
new and necessary skills and competencies that are increasingly driven and required by
changes in the global economy. In addition, the FCER emphasizes that the opportunities to
attain these higher order skills must be available to all; Government’s National Teacher
Education Program, which is a key part of the FCER, places the reform of the teacher education
system at the heart of its reform strategy. The Bank-Financed ETEP supports a catalytic
component of the NTEP – teacher continuous professional development provided onsite.
47.    In consequence, by supporting a critical aspect of FCER, ETEP contributes to achieving
the World Bank Group’s Twin Goals to end extreme poverty and promote shared prosperity .
Improving access to and quality of education has proven to have considerable impact on
eliminating extreme poverty. In addition, high quality education that is made available in an
equitable manner can increase economic growth and provide every citizen with a pathway to
prosperity.25 However, this can only be achieved if the education system functions effectively.
Teacher effectiveness is at the heart of that challenge. ETEP helps the Government develop
new mechanisms to equip teachers on an ongoing basis with new skills and pedagogical
approaches that are tailored to the changing economic and social requirements of Vietnam and
the specific learning conditions facing students. In this manner, ETEP directly and sustainably
contributes to achieving the Twin Goals.
48.    Gender equality and access to quality education among ethnic minorities will be
mainstreamed in the proposed Program, thus furthering its contributions to the CPS.
Concrete measures have been identified to ensure that both male and female staff and
teachers have equal access to continuous professional development opportunities and that
timely and adequate gender-specific support to teachers is provided. Likewise, specific
interventions are designed so that continuous professional development is tailored to the
needs and culture of ethnic minority teachers. Beyond that, all teachers working with ethnic
minority students will be provided with relevant knowledge and skills through the Program.


25
     UNICEF, 2013. Sustainable development starts with safe, healthy and well-educated children.
                                                           19

      ETEP – Technical Assessment
49.    The Bank’s education engagement in Vietnam has increasingly focused on higher
order skills and competencies, while privileging the needs of disadvantaged students. The
current portfolio of K-12 education operations consists of:
   (i) The School Readiness Promotion Project (SRPP - P117393) seeks to improve early childhood
       education by promoting school readiness for disadvantaged children through Vietnam’s existing
       Early Childhood Education (ECE) program. In addition to strengthening the ECE program, the
       SRPP expands full-day preschool enrollment, improves preschool quality assurance mechanisms,
       and develops preschool teachers’ and education managers’ professional expertise.
   (ii) The Intergenerational Deaf Education Outreach Project (IDEO – P125581) pilots, on a small
        scale, three simple innovations that global experience suggests would make deaf preschoolers
        better prepared for the formal education system: (i) the use of sign language as the primary
        mode of communication; (ii) the involvement of the whole family in the learning experience of
        the deaf child; and (iii) "family support teams" that provide the deaf child and his/her family
        with early and intensive support from a trained young deaf adult and a trained sign-language
        interpreter.
   (iii) The School Education Quality Assurance Project (SEQAP - P091747) supports the Vietnam’s full-
         day schooling reform program by upgrading educational infrastructure and facilities, developing
         human resources, and reinforcing policy frameworks. It has aimed to improve educational
         outcomes and completion rates for disadvantaged primary education students.
   (iv) The Vietnam Global Partnership for Education - Escuela Nueva Project (VNEN - P120867)
        introduces new teaching and learning practices that promote active learning and de-emphasize
        rote memorization. The VNEN is especially notable for inaugurating and advancing this new
        pedagogical approach and providing high quality and innovative school-based teacher support.
   (v) The Reform of General Education (RGE – P150058) will facilitate the curriculum revision and
       expanded national assessment system to measure results. It is the first project that is designed
       on the basis of the FCER.
50.     All of these projects are designed with teacher training as an integral part and important
component to ensure delivery of results, which again emphasizes the importance of the role of
teachers in any reforms and/or change efforts. However, teacher training has never been the
primary focus of a Bank-financed operation. The fact that teacher training is always embedded
in different operations and serves as an ad-hoc solution rather than systemic support for
teachers has made it difficult to track results and evaluate impact. A systemic teacher education
system to support teachers more effectively is therefore needed--to garner successful lessons,
ensure a systemic and comprehensive approach is put in place, and to bring benefits to all
teachers (and hence students).

   B. Rationale for choice of instrument

51.    This ETEP is a PforR that will support NTEP with an International Development
Association (IDA) credit in the amount of US$95 million (equivalent). Specifically, ETEP will
support implementation of the government’s teacher continuous professional development
strategy (one dimension of the NTEP).

                                                   20

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
52.    Why a PforR? Vietnam has implemented ten World Bank-funded education operations
since the 1990s, most of which have supported government strategies to improve equitable
access to and quality of general education. These operations have accompanied the
Government’s major education reform programs and have made a clear contribution to their
achievements. However, as sector objectives have become more complex, reviews have found
that individual investment projects focus too narrowly on particular aspects of education
systems, without keeping the overall government strategy in view from a sector-wide
perspective. This has led to operations implemented in silos and thus with insufficient
coordination and synergy.
53.      The team considers PforR the most appropriate financial lending instrument for ETEP.
First, a PforR focusses on specific results that are catalytic and can leverage an entire reform
process, such as the FCER. This encourages government authorities to focus on results rather
than inputs.
54.    Second, Vietnam’s systems of implementing its own programs provide an acceptable
level of controls and assurances. The implementation of past education operations has
increased the ability of education sector authorities to deliver large programs. The overlay of
additional controls to existing country systems has become less necessary over time.
55.    Third, in addition to providing strategic financing for key sector results, a PforR
instrument will bolster the capacity of MOET to implement and manage the entire education
reform through its own systems and procedures. Assessments have concluded that country
systems used by the education sector are acceptable for the implementation of ETEP but that
Vietnamese authorities can further improve them. The PforR approach can support these
improvements to ensure that relevant government offices can internalize and sustain them well
beyond the Program.
56.    By privileging country systems, a PforR simplifies disbursement, financial management
and procurement. Consequently, less energy, resources and time need to be mobilized to
ensure proper due diligence. This has the additional advantage of allowing the education sector
to benefit more fully from World Bank expertise.
57.     Lastly, the Vietnam Office of Government (OOG), Ministry of Planning and Investment
(MPI), and the Ministry of Finance (MOF) have indicated that the PforR approach is a preferred
financing instrument for Programs supported by the Bank. From the point of view of these
agencies, a PforR obliges technical agencies to justify the effectiveness of overseas
development assistance based on unified and coherent programmatic frameworks.
Furthermore, because PforR Operations use country systems, they tend to have lower
transaction costs, more regular and timely disbursements, and fewer implementation issues
overall. These characteristics are particularly salient as Vietnam graduates to IBRD. There is also
prior and current experience in Vietnam with World Bank-financed PforR operations.




                                                 21

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
                                       V. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

     A. Program Scope

58.     The National Teacher Education Program (NTEP) establishes a new framework for the
provision of training, retraining and continuous professional development to schoolteachers
and principals so that they may build and maintain the professional profile necessary to meet
the requirements of the FCER. The Government will implemented NTEP from 2016 to 2022. The
NTEP aims to achieve the following objectives by that date:
    For general education and continuing education teachers and management staff:

         -   100 percent of teachers and principals meet qualification requirements pursuant to
             Amended Law on Education in 2009 and Higher Education Law 2012,
         -   100 percent of teachers and principals are trained and capable of implementing the
             new curriculum and using the new textbooks;
         -   Over 70 percent of teachers and principals achieve higher levels of the professional
             standards;
         -   Over 80 percent of principals are trained and awarded certificates in education
             management;
    For teacher training institutions:

         -   100 percent of teacher training institutions update their training programs and
             curricula, build the capacity of their human resources, improve physical conditions,
             and restructure to provide high quality training and CPD services;
         -   100 percent of teacher training institutions work closely together and with other
             actors in teacher education, and contribute to shared resources to meet the need for
             teacher education of all provinces.
    For education management at all levels:
         -   100 percent of education management authorities at all levels have enhanced planning
             and management capacity to implement, monitor and evaluate the implementation of
             teacher education policies; and
         -   100 percent of policy and legal documents in teacher training are amended and
             updated to response to the new context of general education.
    For schools:

         -   100 percent of schools have enhanced capacity to effectively implement and manage
             CPD at the school level.
59.   NTEP is structured around six “solutions areas?. 26 Each presents a set of strategies
grouped either by functional category or by type of teacher education:

26
  Some of these actions will follow the finalization and approval of the program to reorganize and rationalize the
network of TTIs. However, it is expected that LTTUs will establish relationships with other TTIs as part of their
Performance Agreements.
                                                         22

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
    Strengthen teacher education management and planning by i) updating and further
     developing the regulatory framework and related policies in support of teacher education; ii)
     enhancing the capacity of national and local teacher education departments; and iii)
     establishing a ICT based teacher education information management system;
    Renovate pre-service teacher education by (i) helping teacher training institutions prepare
     new curricula, training content, delivery mechanisms, support systems for student teachers;
     (ii) establishing outcome standards for all training programs, (iii) developing assessment tool
     kits for student-teachers, and (iv) implementing relevant research projects;
    Establish and deliver Continuous Professional Development programs for teachers and
     school managers by: (i) developing new types of e-learning programs for the delivery of
     CPD, (ii) training national general education experts who can support efforts to improve
     CPD, (iii) establishing a cadre of Core Teachers and Principal Advisors at local levels, (iv)
     providing support programs for Core Teachers and Principal Advisors once deployed to
     schools; (v) developing materials and support tools for Core Teachers and Principal Advisors
     to implement CPD at the school level; and (vi) developing more systematic mechanisms to
     assess the quality and impact of CPD programs;
     Build capacity of key lecturers and managerial staff of teacher training institutions by: (i)
     providing relevant training programs and courses, (ii) holding national and international
     conferences and/or workshops; (iii) engaging in scholar and academic exchanges, and (iv)
     reviewing and renovating regulations on recruitment, work position and other human
     resource related procedures;
    Enhance physical environment and facilities/equipment of teacher training institutions: (i)
     upgrading and conducting minor rehabilitation of classrooms, IT centers, teaching practice
     centers, laboratories, and IT facilities for distance and e-learning at the eight LTTUs, (ii)
     supporting the development of e-libraries for the eight LTTUs and (ii) enhancing the physical
     conditions of other teacher training institutions;
    Promote socialization and international cooperation in teacher education by means of
     workshops, conferences, exchanges and fora.

60.    Of the above solution areas, ETEP will focus primarily on efforts to improve continuous
professional development (CPD) provided to teachers and principals in schools. In essence, the
enhanced CPD system will provide more training and support that is of high quality, relevant,
and timely -- directly to teachers and principals at the school level. Internationally, this is
considered best practice for teacher training and support.27

61.    The National Teacher Education Program aims to reinforce the provision of CPD through
two main vehicles: (i) Core Teachers and Principal Advisors, who will be assigned to schools and
school clusters to provide face-to-face training and support and (ii) an online platform that can
provide needs-based, interactive training and support directly to teachers and principals. A
rigorous training and support needs assessment system, based on professional standards and

27
 Francesca Caena, 2011. Quality in Teachers’ Continuing Professional Development. Education and Training 2020: Thematic
Working Group ‘Professional Development of Teachers’, European Commission, Directorate -General for Education and culture.
                                                             23

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
context-specific needs define by teachers and principals, will inform the development of
tailored training programs and applications. To ensure the dynamism and quality of the
enhanced CPD system, eight Lead Teacher Training Universities (LTTUs) in respective catchment
areas (corresponding approximately to regions) will train and provide support to Core Teachers
and Principal Advisors; develop the online services and applications; and help develop the
needs assessment systems. These LTTUs will provide technical leadership and guidance for this
school-based CPD system.

62. The ETEP emphasizes four key interrelated strategies for the improvement of CPD. First,
it introduces a professional cadre of Core Teachers who education authorities deploy in every
school to provide school-based training, coaching, mentoring, and just-in-time support to
individual teachers and teams of teachers at the school level. It also develops Principal Advisors
to support pedagogic managers from a cluster of schools.
63. Second, it establishes a multi-purpose and integrated online platform for CPD that
provide access to e-learning, individualized e-support, knowledge, and interactions with peers
and experts. Thus, training and support are brought to the teacher through on-site expertise
and through expertise provided at a distance, but customized to the needs of the teachers.
64. Third, the program reinforces assessment systems for teacher performance so that
training and support can target teacher needs and ensure greater accountability for the quality
of training. MOET intends to modify teacher professional standards to align them with the new
curriculum and teaching methodology. The standards, feedback from Core Teachers, and self-
assessment will be the basis of teacher training plans. A Learning Management System (LMS),
which will be located on the online platform, will record these will serve to help teachers and
others track the implementation of annual CPD plans, provide training institutions and
authorities with a basis for developing training programs, and enable training programs to be
assessed.28
65. Finally, the program intends for a select group of teacher training universities to provide
the necessary technical support for improved teacher education. They will train the Core
Teachers and Principal Advisors and provide them continuous professional support after they
return to their schools; provide content, innovative approaches and interactive support to
teachers deployed in schools through the online platform. They will also conduct research and
evaluations to improve the effectiveness and quality of training. They will be the principal user
of the improved assessment systems.
66. These different strategies do not constitute hermetically sealed packages. For example,
the training and support provided by Core Teachers and Principal Advisors, as well as through
the online platform will to be complementary. Core Teachers will help other staff use the online
platform more effectively. They will also use the online platform themselves to access

28
 The education authorities will not use the online platform to assess teacher performance or training needs directly.
Rather, it provides a database for recording training needs and the quality of training. In addition, teachers, trainers,
and other key stakeholders will be able to use the database to conduct analyses for the purposes of accountability
and to improve the quality of services provided.
                                                             24

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
knowledge, interact with other Core Teachers and stay linked to LTTUs. In addition, Core
Teachers will serve as mentors for teacher interns. Core Teachers will use training needs
assessment system to help shape CPD programs. The online platform will serve multiple
purposes for all aspects of teacher education.

   B. Program for Results

67. The ETEP will support the Government’s proposed NTEP with an IDA credit in the amount
of US$95 million to support implementation of the Government’s teacher continuous
professional development strategy (one dimension of the NTEP) The PforR will disburse against
results that support the enhancements of teacher continuous professional development.
68. This PforR consists of two parts. The first part is defined by four results areas, which are
part of the NTEP, that together contribute to meeting the overall goals of ETEP over the period
between 2016-2021. These four results areas constitute the principal strategies for establishing
an effective and well-functioning CPD system that can provide school-based support and
training to teachers and principals. These strategies or results areas consist of (i) improving
capacity of Lead Teacher Training Universities and central teacher management units to
enhance teacher and principal education effectiveness; (ii) developing a teacher and principal
training needs assessment system to inform CPD program development; (iii) providing school-
based and continuous professional development for teachers and principals; and (iv) ensuring
that teachers and principals have access to CPD programs and resources through an
Information and Communication Technologies-based system.
69. The second part will mobilize world-class expertise to help develop and operationalize
the strategies for improving school-based CPD for teachers and principals. This technical
assistance (TA) will allow MOET and LTTUs to: (i) elaborate and operationalize policies and
directives, (ii) inform and improve the technical quality of the expected results and (iii)
reinforce the implementation capacity, including monitoring and evaluation, of the Program.
Figure 4 below presents the results chain for the overall PforR.
               Figure 4: Results chain for the Enhancing Teacher Education Program




                                                25

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
Part I: Results Areas
70.     Result Area 1: Improved capacity of Lead Teacher Training Universities and central
teacher management units to enhance teacher education effectiveness. MOET has selected
eight Lead Teacher Training Universities (LLTUs)29 to provide technical guidance for the
development and the implementation of the enhanced CPD for teachers and principals. The
LTTUs will train and support Core Teachers, (one selected from each of 28,000 schools
countrywide), and Principal Advisors (one selected per seven school principals) who will
subsequently return to their respective schools and school clusters to provide CPD to fellow
teachers and principals. Second, the LLTUs will help develop instruments that measure the CPD
needs of teacher and principals. Third, the LTTUs will develop content for CPD programs that
address global teacher and principal needs (e.g., preparing for the rollout of the new
curriculum), teacher and principal professional needs (e.g., programs to help meet new
professional standards); and programs that address specific issues or needs identified by
teachers and principals. For example, for regions where there is a significant population of

29
 Hanoi National University of Education, Hanoi Pedagogical University 2, Thai Nguyen University of Education,
Department of Teacher Education – Vinh University, Hue University of Education, University of Education – Da
Nang University, Ho Chi Minh Pedagogical University, and the National Institute of Education Management
                                                       26

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
ethnic minorities, a LTTU could design programs and delivery methods that target the specific
needs of Ethnic Minority teachers who may have less access to the internet or who may be less
receptive to peer support.
71.     The LTTUs do not currently have the qualities necessary to play their role as technical
leaders of the school-based CPD system. Consequently, each will prepare a Performance
Agreement (PA) to develop their institutional capacity and take on actions that will contribute
to meeting DLIs. Each LTTU will conduct a survey to determine Teacher Education Institutional
Development Index (TEIDI) scores, which essentially measures the institutional capacity of such
establishments (see Box 1). The performance agreement (PA) is a contract signed between the
LTTUs, MOET and the Ministry of Finance (MOF) where the universities commit to particular
results in order to receive the resources necessary to implement the PAs. Signing and
implementing the PA and reporting progress on the TEIDI scores of individual LTTUs are DLIs for
the PforR.
72.     The Bank-financed Bihar Enhancing Teacher Effectiveness Operation30 in India currently
uses the TEIDI. TEIDI is a tool to assess the readiness of teacher education institutions to deliver
quality teacher education programs and monitor their accountability. The TEIDI will have a
quantified and weighted checklist of indicators to measure institutional performance. The TEIDI
aims to inform planning for effective decision-making at the national and provincial institutional
levels. MOET will adapt the TEIDI to the Vietnam context.




30
  The Bihar project was approved in May 2015 and is the first PforR in the education sector. It aims to improve the
effectiveness of primary school teachers. Teacher training colleges will play a central role in providing support to
teachers and thus their capacity is critical. So far, TEIDI has proven to be easy to use and baseline scores were easily
established during the first year of the project. The straightforward and relatively “low tech? data collection and
analysis systems have contributed to its relatively easy implementation.
                                                            27

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
                    Box 4: Framework for Teacher Education Institution Development Index (TEIDI)
       TEIDI is a tool to measure TTU’s efficiency and effectiveness in providing high quality teacher training
       and professional development.
       The tool includes indexes used to assess the quality and institutional effectiveness teacher training
       institutions comprehensively. Each index comprises of relevant indicators and once the data is
       collected, the TEIDI can be calculated on their basis.

                Pedagogy in preservice training programs: Ensure teachers be trained in organizing leaner-
                 centered, activity based and participatory learning experiences;
                Professional development programs: Ensure teachers be trained in organizing leaner-
                 centered, activity based and participatory learning experiences;
                Academic staff: Ensure profile of TTU faculty developed;
                Activities and direct support with schools: Ensure TTU practices are not isolated from the
                 classroom practice;
                ICT preparedness: Ensure TTUs maximize the use of ICT in providing regular school-based
                 training and support for teachers;
                Governance, Partnership and Performance: Ensure institutional organization and
                 governance strengthened.

       ETEP will adapt the Teacher Education Institutional Development Index (TEIDI), used in the Bihar
       project to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of teacher education institutions, for the LTTUs. TEIDI
       uses a comprehensive approach for the planning, management and governance of teacher education
       institutions and diagnosing institutional strengths and weaknesses. The index (derived from an
       aggregation of institutional functioning scores based on some key pre-identified parameters) would
       help in mapping the progress of each institution through regular flow of information. It will help
       identify the needs for teacher education provisioning, institutional requirements, pedagogical
       readiness levels, efficient service delivery mechanism, including sensitivity to the needs of the
       disadvantaged and minority groups so as to provide CPD and improve teacher performance.


73. Results Area 2: Development of teachers’ training needs assessment systems to inform
CPD program development. Teacher Education Management Information System (TEMIS) is
part of the online platform dedicated to teacher education. Teachers and principals will record
their learning and support needs and their evaluations of online CPD interventions into the
TEMIS. It will also house data on the new Teacher Professional Standards that MOET is
developing to be better align with the requirements of the FCER. 31 Teachers and other teacher
education actors can use the professional standards and their own self-assessments (and those
of other actors, such as the Core Teachers) to identify and prioritize teacher CPD needs. In
consequence, the TEMIS would provide an important input for teachers to develop training
plans to meet the new professional standards. Furthermore, the TEMIS can easily compile
results in different ways to help LTTUs and others prepare specific interventions. The TEMIS will
constitute a key resource for CPD decision-making, program development, and determining the
responsiveness and impact of programs. The PforR tracks the development and deployment of
the TEMIS to monitor and meet teacher and principal CPD needs as DLIs. The PforR also
rewards the practice of sharing data generated from the TEMIS to different stakeholders
through annual DLIs.

31
     MOET established teacher professional standards in the 2000s, corresponding to the reform program introduced at that time.
                                                                  28

      ETEP – Technical Assessment
74. Result Areas 3: School-based and continuous professional development for teachers
and principals. Core Teachers are senior or well-regarded teachers who will provide face-to-
face CPD in the schools where they are deployed (e.g., classroom observation, organization of
peer-to-peer training; and individual coaching and mentoring). They will receive special training
from the LTTUs and then return to their schools of origin to implement an annual work plan of
support and training for other teachers. Similarly, Principal Advisors support principals of a
cluster of six or seven schools. The Core Teachers and Principal Advisors will receive support
from LTTUs throughout the year. The Core Teachers and Principal Advisors will develop annual
plans detailing the training and support services they will carry out over the school year. The
training and support provided to the Core Teachers and Principal Advisors by the LTTUs and the
implementation of the Core Teachers and Principal Advisors annual plans constitute DLIs.

75. Core Teachers and Principal Advisors will not be new categories of civil servants. They
retain their status as regular teachers and principals who are given modified work program with
the same compensation, benefits, work conditions and responsibilities as before. Cascade
trainers have played similar roles (teachers selected to be trainers for a limited period), but in
an ad hoc manner.

76. Teachers often see their assignment as cascade trainers to be a sign of status. Becoming
a Core Teacher and Principal Advisor should also be considered as an appealing opportunity. In
addition, Core Teachers and Principal Advisors should have few teaching hours, receive
specialized training and CPD programs. It will be nevertheless be necessary to establish a set of
regulations for selection, deployment, training requirements, etc. DLI 1 for the first period will
be met when MOET puts in place the regulatory framework for Core Teachers and Principal
Advisors.

77.     Results Areas 4: Teachers and principals have access to CPD programs and resources
through an Information & Communication Technology-based system. The MOET aims to put in
place a comprehensive Learning Management System that can make available four basic CPD
services to teachers and principals: (i) on-demand, interactive e-learning courses for an
assortment of continuous professional development needs; (ii) tailored knowledge (e.g.,
digitized and customizable lesson plans, videos of best practice) personalized support (e.g., help
desks); and (iii) opportunities to collaborate with peers and experts online (e.g., A social media
platform with mobile interface uniquely designed for teachers) and (iv) mechanisms to allow
beneficiaries to evaluate CPD services received.

78. Teachers and principals are familiar with using ICT for training and other purposes. The
MOET has an incipient Learning Management System that will provide the basis for further
development. Teachers already have access to e-learning courses through the LMS. In addition,
the MOET’s Connecting Schools Initiative has been in place for two y ears and provides e-
learning to secondary schools. Both the VNEN and SEQAP projects are planning to use this as a
platform for the transfer of their training programs. VNEN has recently launched a video
competition that produced several thousand videos made by teachers on their teaching

                                                 29

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
practice. Once curated, these can eventually be made available to a wider audience through the
LMS.

79. Measures are included throughout the Results Areas to encourage the teacher education
system to equip teachers and principals, particularly those who are ethnic minority and female,
with the skills, competencies and support necessary to ensure the academic success of ethnic
minority children. Some examples of possible initiatives are as follows:

         Results Area 1: As part of their institutional capacity building initiatives, LTTUs will
          acquire the expertise to develop CPD programs, content, delivery methods and
          assessment systems that help all teachers and principals teach ethnic minority children
          more effectively. In addition, the LTTUs will conduct research projects, invest in
          capacity building for educational specialists in ethnic minority issues and prioritize ethnic
          minority and woman lecturers in their human resource development plans.
         Results Area 2: New teacher and principal professional standards will include the
          mastery of methods and approaches to address culturally sensitive issues, especially those
          related to teaching ethnic minority children and girls. CPD needs assessment tools and
          systems will take into consideration the capacity of teachers and principals to work with
          ethnic minority students and girls. Special care will be taken to evaluate the CPD needs
          of ethnic minority teachers and principals to inform the development of programs that
          effectively respond to their professional needs.
         Results Area 3: The training and support programs for Core Teachers and Principal
          Advisors will bolster their capacity to provide CPD to teachers and principals
          (particularly those who are ethnic minority) that specifically responds to the needs of
          ethnic minority and female students. The DOETs will be strongly encouraged to select
          ethnic minority and female teachers and principals to become Core Teachers and
          Principal Advisors.
         Results Area 4: A specific support mechanism will be designed throughout program
          implementation to ensure that ethnic minority teachers are equipped with adequate
          computer skills before the commencement of e-learning courses and that they will
          continued to receive IT supports in not only access to devices but also technical problems
          during and after e-learning courses.
Part II: Technical Assistance

80.       ETEP includes technical assistance in the following areas:

         Program management capacity and relevant country systems. These include financial
          management and environmental management.
         Expertise in specific technical areas to ensure satisfactory achievement of expected
          results. These will include, inter alia, developing and implementing effective school-
          based CPD; IT infrastructure and architecture for the online platform that will host the
          LMS (Learning and Management System) and TEMIS (Teacher Education Management
          Information System); professional profile of Core Teachers and Principal Advisors and
          relevant regulations and selection and appointment procedures, teacher professional

                                                    30

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
        standards, training needs assessment methods, and training programs in selected subject
        areas.
       Institutional reinforcement of training institutions. TEIDI will measure the
        effectiveness of LTTUs to provide quality and relevant services in a timely manner.
        Similar measures exist in certain OECD countries, but few developing countries.
        Consequently, the MOET will need to mobilize expertise in this area as well.
       Third party validation. The MOET will need to identify an independent entity to
        undertake performance audits and confirm DLI achievement. Third party studies will
        provide external validation for key performance data and implementation activities. The
        MOET may wish to hire a firm or institution with strong educational expertise and
        country system understanding to provide this service.

   C. Program Financing

81. The estimated funding envelop for the NTEP is US$255 million over a period of five years
(2017 – 2022). Table 2 shows that this includes a commitment from the Government of Vietnam
of US$160 million (63 percent of the total cost) and the ODA source of US$95 million (or 37
percent of the total cost). The ETEP contributes US$95 million.
82. There will be a separate account for ETEP funding to monitor the implementation of ETEP
– funded activities. Government recurrent and capital expenditures to implement the NTEP will
be within the corresponding recurrent and capital envelopes that are approved by the
government and allocated by MOF.


                         Source                       Amount (US$ m)        % of Total

       GOV                                                   160                63

       Enhancing Teacher Education Program                   95                 37

       Total Program Financing                               255               100.0

   D. Program Development Objective

83. The Program Development Objective of ETEP is: to strengthen teacher education
institutions to enhance teacher effectiveness through improved continuous professional
development.

   E. Program Beneficiaries

84. The direct beneficiaries of ETEP will include: (i) more than 600,000 teachers and
principals, which account for nearly 80 percent of the total number of general education
teachers and principals; (ii) 28,000 core teachers and 4,000 principal advisors; (iii) 3,200
                                                31

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
lecturers, researchers and staff from the LTTUs; and (iv) MOET staff. Indirect beneficiaries of
ETEP will be general education students; pre-service teachers; and Departments of Education
and Training (DOETs) and Bureaus of Education and Training (BOETs) staff.

   F. Program Key Results and Disbursement Linked Indicators

Program Developments Indicators are:

           PDO Indicator 1: Improved performance of the eight Lead Teacher Training
            Universities to provide CPD, as measured by the Teacher Education Institutional
            Development Index.
           PDO Indicator 2: Number of teachers and principals satisfied with school-based
            continuous professional development.

Intermediate Level Indicators are:

      Intermediate Indicator 1: Number of LTTUs that sign Performance Agreements with
       MOET and MOF (cumulative).
      Intermediate Indicator 2: Number of TEMIS-generated annual reports on CPD needs
       by DOET
      Intermediate Indicator 3: Number of deployed Core Teachers and/or Principal Advisors
       having completed six or more priority training modules.
      Intermediate Indicator 4: Number of teachers completing all mandatory modules of the
       CPD program through the Learning Management System.

Disbursement Linked Indicators

85.     The ETEP DLIs will disburse against achievement of outputs and outcomes derived from
the results chain (see above) and Results Framework. The disbursement model proposes five
DLIs, linked to the four results areas. There will be five annual disbursement periods. The DLIs
are outlined in Table 3, with details presented in Annex 3. DLIs have been prioritized from the
indicators described above, based upon their importance for successful implementation and the
need to incentivize outputs necessary for the program’s success.




                                                32

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
          Results Area                 Disbursement-Linked                       PDO indicators
                                            Indicators
Results Area 1: Improved        DLI 1: Institutional capacity of      PDO 1: Improved performance of
capacity of Lead Teacher        LTTUs to support the new              the eight Lead Teacher Training
Training Universities and       Continuous Professional               Universities (LTTUs) to provide CPD
central teacher management      Development system for teachers       as measured by the Teacher
units to enhance teacher        and principals enhanced               Education Institutional Development
education effectiveness.                                              Index (TEIDI)
                                DLI 2: Systems are in place to: (i)
                                measure whether teachers and
Results Area 2: Development
                                principals meet new professional
of teachers’ training needs
                                standards; (ii) track and record
assessment systems to inform
                                evaluations of CPD programs; and
CPD program development.
                                (iii) record assessments CPD needs
                                of teachers and principals.
Results Area 3: School-based    DLI 3: Number of Core Teachers
and continuous professional     and Principals Advisors selected
development for teachers and    and trained to provide face-to-
principals.                     face school-based continuous
                                professional development to
                                teachers and principals.
                                DLI 4: Core Teachers and Principal
                                Advisors provide school-based
                                continuous professional
                                development to teachers and
                                principals.
Results Area 4: Teachers and    DLI 5: Up to 480,000 teachers and        PDO 2: Number of teachers and
principals have access to CPD   principals are satisfied with ICT-       principals satisfied with the new
programs and resources          based interactive CPD services.          school-based continuous
through an Information &                                                 professional development.
Communication Technology-
based system.

86.     Verification Protocols: Achievement of these DLIs will be verified annually and
verification results will be used as basis for disbursement. For scalable DLIs, payment will be
made in proportion to the achieved results for each period after they have been verified. For non-
scalable DLIs, the whole target must be achieved for each period to trigger the corresponding
payment. Verification protocols are briefly described below:
   Data source/agency: The Program Management Unit (PMU) will be the main data provider.
    All data about achievement of results for each DLI in each period should be collected by
    MOET before verification of results. Implementing agencies (LTTUs and MOET
    departments) are responsible for submitting reports to MOET regarding their implementation
    results against DLIs. MOET will then aggregate information for results verification.




                                                       33

    ETEP – Technical Assessment
   Capacity building for LTTUs in the areas of CPD program development and pedagogy
    including ICT preparedness and institutional governance in order to ensure high quality and
    relevant school-based CPD for teachers. A related action is included in the Program Action
    Plan and its results will be measured by TEIDI.
   Verification Entity: An Independent Verification Agency (IVA) will be selected to verify
    certain results, for example, the number of core teachers and principal advisors receiving
    face-to-face training from Lead TTUs.
   Verification Procedures: In order to validate disbursement requests submitted by MOET, the
    IVA will verify all DLIs. The results reported by MOET as achieved under the Operation
    will be verified through a paper audit and physical inspection that tests the accuracy and
    quality of results claimed. In accordance with good audit practice, physical verification will
    take place against a sampling framework and frequency. On the basis of this, the IVA will
    prepare a results verification report which will be shared with MOET and the World Bank. A
    key use of the Results Verification Report will be to determine the amount of the eligible
    disbursement to be made on the results achieved. If the Bank finds that the disbursement
    request meets the terms of the credit, the Bank will disburse the corresponding funds to the
    MOF. Further details on the verification process for each DLI are included in Annex 3.
   Scalable vs. Non-scalable DLIs: In the first year/period of ETEP, most DLIs will be non-
    scalable because preparation steps must be taken before further results can be achieved for
    the following periods. For example, rules regarding the selection and deployment of Core
    Teachers and Principal Advisors need to be developed before they are trained; or an ICT-
    based system needs to be built before e-courses can be delivered to teachers and principals.
    From the second year onward, most DLIs will become scalable, i.e. payments will be made
    in proportion to achievement of DLIs. This will allow implementing agencies to have both
    incentives and flexibility in planning for and achieving results. Definitions and description of
    DLI achievement are specified in Annex 3 of the Program Appraisal Document.

    G. Institutional and Implementation Arrangement

87. The MOET is responsible for the strategic management of the ETEP and, by extension,
the improvement school-based teacher continuous professional development. This includes: (i)
issuing and enforcing relevant teacher professional development policies and regulations; (ii)
establishing and monitoring new teacher professional standards; (iii) identifying teacher- and
school-level demand for school-based CPD; (iv) assessing the effectiveness of CPD
interventions; and (v) using assessments and evaluations to shape CPD programs and initiatives.
Through its Program Management Unit, MOET will also track and report on ETEP DLIs and
transmit requests for disbursements to the World Bank. In addition, the MOET will operate the
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system that will enable the government to report on progress
toward achieving the development objective indicators and intermediate indicators of the
results framework. MOET will also manage the implementation of the LTTU Performance
Agreements.



                                                  34

    ETEP – Technical Assessment
88. The DOETs are the provincial authorities for general education. They are responsible for
managing teacher deployment and service within their respective catchment areas, including
in-service teacher training and CPD. DOET will coordinate efforts to improve CPD. This will
include administrative oversight of Core Teacher and Principal Advisors and ensuring all CPD
stakeholders at local level implement the CPD policies. The DOET will also track training needs
assessments through the TEMIS, as well as training programs taken by teachers and principals,
oversee evaluations of teacher standards, and undertake quality control of the CPD apparatus
and process taking a province-wide perspective.

89. The LTTUs are responsible for facilitating the improvements to CPD envisaged by the
NTEP through training, research, online services, and support to Core Teachers and Principal
Advisors, as well other interventions. Successfully accomplishing this mandate will help the
MOET meet DLIs. However, the ETEP technical assessment concluded that the LTTUs will need
to build their capacity to undertake many of these new responsibilities. Each LTTU will prepare
a Performance Agreement to be sign with MOET and MOF. The Performance Agreements will
specify the needed institutional, human and technical resources to improve their capacity. The
performance agreements will indicate how any given input will help the LTTU meet its new
mandate. LTTU-specific TEIDI targets will inform the development of the performance
agreement.

90. The LTTUs will: (i) create innovative training content and delivery mechanisms,
maximizing the use of ICT solutions; (ii) provide training and support for Core Teachers and
Principal Advisors; (iii) coordinate with DOETs in the in assessing teacher training and support
needs; and (iv) develop and manage demand-driven knowledge management tools.

91. The network of Teacher Training Institutions (TTI) will soon undergo a major
reorganization and rationalization. This Program constitutes a response to the dwindling need
for new teachers, the transformation of many into multi-disciplinary universities and colleges,
and the government’s decision to close others. The reorganization is also mandated by the
FCER and is currently under development. It will take the ETEP and the NTEP as points of
departure. Until its finalization and approval, the MOET prefers not to consider them as key
actors in the ETEP, although individual LTTUs may decide to collaborate with other TTIs and
include relevant actions in their Performance Agreements. The government may use some of
the Technical Assistance to support analytical work (policy analysis, strategy development),
technical support (planning, feasibility studies) and other technical inputs necessary for
developing or implementing a TTI reorganization plan. However, LTTUs should already partner
with other TTIs either through the Program Agreements or other mechanisms. Any
reorganization of the network of TTIs would need to be closely coordination with the DOETs
and the MOET.

92. The MOF, through the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV), will receive the funds disbursed by
the World Bank as per the terms of the IDA credit financing agreement. It will be responsible for
making the appropriate resources available to the relevant institutions (e.g., the MOET and the

                                                35

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
LTTUs through their Performance Agreements) so that LTTUs can undertake key interventions
necessary for meeting the DLIs in a timely, efficient and effective manner.

93. Independent Verification Agency32 will provide independent confirmations of the results
reported by LTTUs and the MOET. The MOET will select an IVA within six months of Program
effectiveness as indicated in the Program Action Plan.

                     Figure 5: ETEP Institutional Implementation Arrangement 33




32
  The government has not yet selected an agency to verify ETEP results.
33
   The network of Teacher Training Colleges have not been included in the ETEP implementation arrangements
because of the government’s choice to conduct a reorganization of the network beforehand. However, it is expected
that the LTTUs will involve other TTIs in actions listed in their Program Agreements.
                                                        36

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
   H. Results Monitoring and Evaluation

94.    ETEP will use government’s own systems to do monitoring and evaluation of indicators.
The TEMIS will generate reports regarding teacher management and performance standards.
Evaluation of LTTUs will be undertaken using the TEIDI system.
95.    Implementation Support Missions (ISMs): Two joint support missions will be carried out
each year consisting of representatives of the Bank and the government. The joint ISMs will
assess ETEP implementation, the achievement of key performance indicators and progress on
DLIs. These reviews will aim to provide early identification of potential problems in the
achievement of DLIs and propose solutions. There will also be a midterm review of the
Program. Progress reviews of the Program are expected to be produced every calendar year.
96.     Because of the potential risks associated with using country systems for technical
assistance, it was agreed with the Recipient that the Operations Manual would include
instructions for IDA to provide systematic guidance for the execution of technical assistance.
This would consist of prior agreements with IDA on key milestones in the execution of Technical
Assistance such as terms of reference, selection of experts, and reception of interim and final
outputs. Such measures would ensure that TA can be mobilized in a timely and effective
manner with minor disruptions to the implementation of the proposed Program. The ISM is
expected to monitor the implementation of these arrangements.
97.     A Program Action Plan (PAP) will cover key actions Government will undertake to ensure
due diligence (e.g., fiduciary and social and environmental safeguards).

                       VI.      PROGRAM TECHNICAL SOUNDNESS

98. The technical assessment finds that the NTEP in general, and the CPD program supported
by ETEP in particular, to be well-designed and technically sound with a high probability of
delivering quality and sustained training and support to general education teachers. Technical
experts and key Vietnam stakeholders consulted during the assessment agreed that achieving
the objectives of the FCER would require modifications to the existing teacher education
system. The technical assessment also concludes that the NTEP’s strategies for improving CPD
for general education teachers and principals are appropriate for achieving this objective .
99. However, the assessment team warns that the proposed changes to teacher education
might represent too radical modification. Implementing teacher education reform is rarely an
easy exercise because it can challenge well-ingrained cultures of teacher practice. However,
ETEP builds on existing characteristics of the teacher education system that have proven to be
successful and will introduce changes in an incremental manner. For example, schools and
education authorities regularly assign mentoring, training and oversight roles to seasoned
teachers recognized for their expertise. The development of a cadre of Core Teachers and
Principal Advisors builds on this experience. Vietnam already provides e-learning to teachers.
MOET has used standards (which they have regularly updated) for several decades to measure
teacher performance and to design training programs. Finally, teacher-training institutions

                                               37

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
already develop materials for teacher self-study, in-service teacher training programs and e-
learning programs.
100. Furthermore, several programs exist throughout Vietnam that provide similar types of
teacher support. For example, the Vietnam Escuela Nueva Project, with financial support from
the Global Partnership of Education (GPE), includes teacher networks in local clusters that are
supported by trainers from teacher training institutes. The program also introduced innovations
such as prior delivery of training materials so that teachers arrive at training events ready to
discuss material they have already read. Several programs have piloted interactive online
teacher training. The School Education Quality Assurance Program (SEQAP) has conducted
systematic evaluations of training and training needs. SEQAP has benefited from financial
support from the World Bank, Belgium and the United Kingdom.
101. However, the teacher education system conducts most of these initiatives in an ad hoc
manner, without a strategic and integrated vision to ensure long-term effectiveness or
sustainability. With the efforts support by ETEP, the teacher education system will be able to
delivers continuous professional development in a systematic and sustainable fashion and
tailored to the specific needs of teachers.
102. Finally, the evident quality of Vietnam general education and the existing levels of
teacher professionalism should facilitate the implementation of FCER overall and the NTEP
more specifically. Building on a successful education system has some advantages.

     A. Evaluation of Technical Risks

103. Each result area supported by ETEP constitutes one facet of the overall strategy to
enhance teacher continuous professional development. CTs and PAs, with online interactive
training are complementary; a rigorous assessment system allows training providers to take
into account local context and priorities; and using LTTUs as the leaders of continuous
professional development can link teachers in classrooms to the world of education innovation.
LTTUs as drivers for change
104. The MOET has selected eight national Teacher Training Universities34 to facilitate an
enhanced teacher continuous professional development provided face-to-face and online. As
such, these LTTUs will provide the necessary technical and institutional guidance to ensure that
teachers receive continuous professional development aligned with both their specific needs
and FCER requirements. They will train Core Teachers and Principal Advisors to ensure that
“cascade training? does not dilute once it arrives at the school level. Supporting Cor e Teachers
will allow for greater interaction between teachers within the same school; the teacher
education online platform will promote interaction nationwide. The online platform should also
facilitate knowledge transfer, access to innovative training programs, and evidence-based


34
 Approximately 110 institutions nation-wide provide pre-service and in-service teacher training: National Teacher
Training Universities, education departments within other universities, regional teacher training colleges, education
departments within colleges and specialized training institutes for education managers.
                                                           38

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
program development. The LTTUs will be the primary clients of the improved assessment
systems.
105. The government has chosen these eight institutions for three reasons. First, the MOET
only choose amongst National Teacher Training Universities (of which there are fourteen)
because these have considerably more technical, logistical, academic and institutional capacity
than the other 110 teacher training institutions in Vietnam.35 Furthermore, MOET decided that
working with all fourteen National LTTUs from the start of the Program would be unwieldy.
Finally, MOET selected these TTUs because of their geographic location. These eight institutions
are located such as to serve the seven regions of Vietnam in an equitable manner.36
106. One concern raised by the technical assessment team was that the Teacher Training
Universities might be reluctant to change their mandate. Most have focused on pre-service
training of secondary school teachers and teacher retraining. MOET and several DOETs have
contracted individual faculty members to design or provide training, but rarely at an
institutional level. The MOET responds to this concern in two ways. First, the Performance
Agreements signed with the LTTUs will leverage these institutions to focus on the meeting the
results defined by ETEP. The Performance Agreements stipulate that the institutional
improvement plans prepared and implemented by the LTTUs must meet certain criteria if the
institutions are to receive funding.
107. Second, the MOET intends to establish a TEIDI that measures the capacity of these
institutions to perform certain key functions. Progress along this index will represent one of the
Disbursement-linked Indicators of ETEP, and a determining aspect of the Performance
Agreement. These elements constitute satisfactory responses to this risk.

Core Teachers as change agents at school level37

108. The notion of Core Teachers is not new to Vietnam. Typically, DOETs identify senior
teachers with proven records of accomplishment to receive training that MOET or they
organize. These teachers then become trainers in their own right. The selection tends to be ad
hoc (although projects financed by development partners may require them to meet
particularly standards) and there is no guarantee that they would be chosen to perform the
function again. Under the model that will be supported by ETEP, the CTs will take on a more
formal and permanent role and will be responsible for coordinating, organizing and delivering
school-based professional development activities at schools. They will also help teachers do
their training needs assessments. Being a Core Teachers will be a long-term assignment.



35
   These aspects of the NTEP are addressing the future role and development of other teacher training institutions.
36
   The eighth institution, the National Institute of Education Managers trains, supports and undertakes research on
school principals and other education system administrators. It will be responsible for training and supporting
Principal Advisors.
37
   Principal Advisors do not work at the school level but rather support principals from six or seven schools (usually
a school cluster). They play a slightly different role, as they are not part of a school team. However, they are
available to assigned principals as a coach, trainer and conduit to services and knowledge.
                                                           39

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
109. Essentially, the Core Teachers and Principal Advisors will constitute the “glue? of the
enhanced CPD system, providing a bridge between teacher training universities, regional
authorities, and teachers and principals. The LTTUs will provide them with training and – more
importantly - ongoing support after they return to their schools. School and DOET authorities
will be responsible for selecting and managing the Core Teachers (DOETs more generally and
school authorities on a daily basis). In addition, Core Teachers can help innovations, training,
and support services developed by LTTUs, other TTIs, the MOET/DTEM, DOETs, and other
partners to have the greatest impact.38
110. The technical assessment team expressed concern as to whether the selection and
management of the CTs and PAs would be transparent and merit based. During discussions,
most stakeholders indicated that teachers selected to be trainers or specialists were usually
respected, apt and accountable. Education authorities will select CTs and PAs on a set of criteria
developed by MOET in coordination with provincial DOETs and LTTUs. Education authorities will
carried out the selection process in such a manner to ensure that EM teachers will not face any
discrimination concerning their nomination as CTs and PAs.
111. The technical assessment team questioned with whether there were sufficient
incentives for a teacher or principal to want to become a Core Teacher or Principal Advisor. CTs
and PAs will not constitute new categories of civil servants. Considering they retain their status
as regular teachers and principals with the same compensation, benefits, work conditions and
responsibilities as before, why would they want to become Core Teachers or Principal Advisors?
Cascade trainers, however, have provided these services on top of their other teaching
responsibilities. Teachers and principals tended to consider this role as a sign of status.
Similarly, teachers and principals should also consider the role of Core Teachers or Principal
Advisors as appealing opportunities. They will likely have few teaching hours, have access to
specialized training and CPD programs, and benefit from priority access to online services. It will
be nevertheless be necessary to put in place a special set of regulations for selection,
deployment, training requirements, etc. Putting in place the regulatory framework for Core
Teachers and Principal Advisors constitutes a DLI for the first year.
ICT-based support for teaching and learning
112. For MOET, the development of an online platform to support teacher education is a high
priority. Authorities point to other countries that leverage technology to address teachers’ need
for more collaborative and customized learning opportunities. In Vietnam, there have also been
efforts to apply ICT solutions to improve professional development at scale. Some LTTUs have
started to provide e-learning training programs. However, design and quality of e-learning
programs/modules need substantial improvements.
113. ETEP will support the development of an online platform dedicated to teacher education
that can provide the basis for several tools and applications to the benefit of teachers and
principals. A TEMIS will track teachers’ profiles as defined by new teacher performance. The

38
  With the reorganization of all TTIs, it will be important for the MOET to consider how the Core Teachers and the
Principal Advisors can also constitute a bridge with these teacher education actors as well.
                                                         40

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
online platform will house just-in-time help desks; applications that help prepare lesson plans,
innovative and easily accessible classroom materials, data analysis tools and other resources. A
LMS will enable teachers to develop training plans and provide access to self-paced and guided
e-learning courses. Video capabilities will allow for interactive learning and classroom
observation. Social Network applications will facilitate teacher exchange, sharing, and peer
networking.39
114. The technical assessment team warned that ICT is not a panacea. MOET recognizes this,
which is why education authorities conceptualize the online platform to enhance the teacher
education system, not replace any particular component. The Core Teachers and Principal
Advisors, the LTTUs, and school management will be able to augment their capabilities by
harnessing ICT applications. However, more importantly, local CPD actors can help teachers get
the most out of online applications. Providing two complementary types of school-based
support can be attractive: teachers and principals will be get help through the online platform
and through Core Teachers and Principal Advisors (both supported by the LTTUs). Furthermore,
the online system will also serve as a resource for Core Teachers and Principal Advisors who will
have a challenging job to do.
115. Teachers and principals are familiar with using ICT for training and other purposes. The
MOET has an incipient Learning Management System that will provide the basis for further
development. Teachers already have access to e-learning courses through the LMS. In addition,
the MOET’s Connecting Schools Initiative has been in pla ce for two years and provides e-
learning to secondary schools. Both the VNEN and SEQAP projects are planning to use this as a
platform for the transfer of their training programs
Assessment of teachers’ professional development needs
116. MOET hopes to improve considerably the training needs assessment system for CPD. The
strategy is to develop a system that both helps teachers mobilize the support necessary to
meet new professional standards, as well as to respond to more individual needs, priorities and
the specific school context.
117. The assessment team expressed concerns that the government’s program will rely too
much on the online platform to conduct teacher needs assessment. However, the purpose of
the online platform is not to determine training needs, but is rather an instrument to help track
training needs and provide access to information that could help teachers better articulate their
training needs. Teachers will develop their annual CPD plans with the help and support of the
Core Teachers, the school principals and their peers (those in the school and those they “meet?
online). Subsequently, the school principal will approve the plans and record them in the LMS.
118. The team was impressed by the quality of the initial set of new professional standards
that have developed by the MOET (see Box 4: New Teacher Professional Standards to enhance

39
  One barrier to effective professional learning is teacher s’ lack of time to participate in and/or finish a course
because they are already too busy with teaching. Summer vacation is the only time when they can put teaching aside
and spend time on professional learning. A mobile application that allows teachers to follow a course at anytime and
anywhere would significantly address this barrier.
                                                          41

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
                                                                                     but they
professional effectiveness of Vietnamese School Teachers and improve learning outcomes Box 4),
remarked that their application could pose three challenges. First, the MOET will need to
develop objective criteria for measuring whether (and to what degree) a teacher meets any
particular standard. Second, the use of teacher professional standards should not be the only
tool used to capture teachers’ CPD needs – the use of the TEMIS should allow for multiple
sources of information to establish training and support needs (including, self-assessment).
Finally, previous performance evaluations based on standards have proven to be of limited use
because assessment processes were not rigorous. The technical assessment team advised that
the most important factor will the means by which standards are measured – and how this
information will be used -- not the standards per se.

        Box 5: New Teacher Professional Standards to enhance professional effectiveness of Vietnamese
                             School Teachers and improve learning outcomes
         Personal Value Development Competencies
          1. Develop qualities and ethics of a teacher by complying with teachers’ regulations
          2. Develop and implement self-learning and professional development plan, share knowledge
              and inspire life-long learning
          3. Use language and other media for effective communication in teaching and social relations
              with students, parents, colleagues and communities
          4. Identify problems and actively find solutions in teaching and in schools
         Teaching and Educational Competencies
          5. Collect and analyze information to develop student profiles for improvement of learning
              environment
          6. Collect and analyze information on school resources and local socio-economic contexts to
              improve learning environment
          7. Make teaching plans relevant to education fields, student characteristics and education
              environment and conduct necessary assessment and adjustments
          8. Select relevant contents, methods and assessment to encourage students’ interest and
              engagement in learning and educational activities
          9. Use educational assessment techniques and tools for improvement of teaching and education
         Social relations Competencies
          10. Establish social relations with students and parents to support student’s learning and
              education
          11. Develop friendly relationships with colleagues, helping and sharing knowledge for effective
              teaching
          12. Participate actively in socio-political activities for school development, learning society and
              community development

                                                                Ministry of Education and Training, Vietnam


    B. Evaluation of institutional and managerial risks

119. The teacher education system consists of four principal actors: teacher-training
institutions, the Ministry of Education and Training, the Departments of Education and Training
and the schools. Whereas the roles and responsibilities of the general education schools will
not change significantly, those of these other actors will.
120. MOET will be responsible for the strategic management of enhanced continuous
professional development. This includes issuing and enforcing relevant teacher professional
                                                           42

   ETEP – Technical Assessment
development policies and regulations; establishing and monitoring new teacher professional
standards; identifying teacher-level demand for CPD; tracking the effectiveness of CPD
interventions; using assessments and evaluations to shape CPD programs and initiatives; and
piloting the NTEP, including the enhancements to CPD system. The DOETs will continue to
manage and provide CPD at the district and provincial level, but with increasing emphasis on
oversight, coordination and quality assurance.
121. The technical team observed that the national Teacher Training Universities have
typically not had much interaction with the other actors of the teacher education system. This
has contributed to the “disconnect? many teachers feel when participating in training and CPD.
In response, MOET will use the Performance Agreements as a basic motivating instrument
(criteria will include activities that require collaboration with the DOETs).
122. The NTEP is an ambitious program with many pieces that should function in a
coordinated manner. The technical assessment team expressed concerns regarding the
capability of the MOET, the LTTUs and other actors to implement in this regard.
123. Recognizing institutional and managerial shortcomings, the MOET has emphasized the
importance of sequencing program implementation. The first year will be devoted to putting in
place the regulatory and institutional frameworks necessary for key parts of the program to
function (e.g., Core Teachers and Principals, role of LTTUs, new professional standards, formats
for LTTU Performance Agreements, and the TEIDI). MOET will elaborate many of the details for
rolling out the innovations described above during the first year. MOET intends to do with
international technical support.
124. In addition, the program will start with simple targets and focus on priority areas. For
instance, supporting the roll out of the new curriculum will likely constitute the defining
objective of the NTEP during the first years. Core Teachers and Principal Advisors will focus on
helping teachers and principals adopt the new curriculum. In addition, MOET intends to
develop the new standards in phases, with the first defined by the new curriculum. At first, the
online platform will focus more on helping teachers master the curriculum and new teaching
methodologies through help desks and interactive learning.
125. Finally, the key to the success of the NTEP will be the technical and institutional capacity
of all actors to take on their new responsibilities, particularly the LTTUs who must guarantee
the quality and relevance of CPD materials and approaches. Although the LTTUs represent the
best of teacher education in Vietnam, their organizational, technical, and managerial capacity
will need significant reinforcement. MOET will also require considerable support as it assumes
its role as the strategic managers of teacher education reform. Here is a summary of the
principal institutional and managerial constraints:
      Weak management capacity of the Direction of Teachers and Education Managers :
       DTEM’s mandate has been to manage the teaching force of Vietnam and ensure that
       they are provided with sufficient professional support. As part of its mandate, DTEM has
       been coordinating a number of teacher training programs and activities to keep them
       up-to-date. However, these programs are mostly ad-hoc in nature and thus not effective

                                                43

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
       enough to generate a visible change in quality of the teaching staff although certain
       efforts did produce encouraging results.
      Structural limitations of the LTTUs: Presently, most LTTUs are organized based on
       subject areas (Maths, Literature, Biology, Chemistry, Geography, etc.). The FCER now
       requires that subjects be more integrated at lower levels of general education. LTTUs
       will need to undergo a reorganization to response to this new requirement. In addition,
       their lecturers will also have to be equipped with new capabilities to deliver new
       teacher education programs.
      Low ICT preparedness and inadequate ICT infrastructure: Although some LTTUs have
       had experience in delivering online training programs, their design has not been
       attractive and facilitative to teachers, especially those who have low computer skills.
       This would be a big challenge in this Program in that online professional development
       courses/modules will have to be attractive and user-friendly enough to motivate
       teachers’ professional learning. At the same time, the capabilities of current ICT
       infrastructure at LTTUs and MOET level is too modest to meet the demand of the
       Program design
126. To address these constraints, ETEP combines considerable design support during
preparation, results-based disbursements to incentivize performance, and high quality technical
assistance during implementation. The results of the assessments necessary to prepare a
Program for Results operation have identified the most important institutional constraints. The
proposed actions will enhance the capacity of the LTTUs and national and provincial
departments responsible for teacher education to take on their new responsibilities.
127. The following activities have been jointly identified with the Government for capacity
building and system strengthening:
      Modernized teacher education management through the development and use of: (i) a
       Teacher Education Management Information System for effective teacher education
       planning and management; (ii) a Teacher Education Institution Development Index to
       measure teacher education institutional effectiveness; and (iii) teacher professional
       standards to assess teacher CPD needs.
      Capacity building for LTTUs in the areas of program development and pedagogy
       including ICT preparedness, institutional governance and school engagement to ensure its
       high quality and relevant CPD support for teachers. An action is included in the Program
       Action Plan and its results will be measured by TEIDI.
      An online platform for teacher education: The platform will serve several purposes,
       including the provision of interactive eLearning and support services; a LMS for tracking
       teacher training and support needs, completion of training programs; and evaluation of
       services, etc.
      Teacher professional standards: The MOET has revised and updated secondary
       education teacher professional standards with support from the ADB. However, a set of
       professional standards for general education teachers including those at primary education


                                                44

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
         level and strengthened assessment techniques and external review should be developed to
         ensure greater integrity and accuracy.
        E-learning and online teacher support services for teachers and Core Teachers (e.g.,
         program design, multi-media content development, contact program structuring, and
         assessment techniques for effective curriculum supplementation).
        Implementing agency capabilities for result-based monitoring, fiduciary,
         environmental, and social management (particularly concerning the needs of ethnic
         groups).
        Coordination between LTTUs, other TTIs and teacher education management
         departments at national and provincial levels and schools. The network of Teacher
         Training Institutions will soon be undergoing a significant reorganization because of the
         dwindling need for new teachers, the transformation of many into multi-disciplinary
         universities and colleges, and the government’s decision to close others. The
         reorganization of the network of Teacher Training Institutions is also mandated by the
         FCER. Any reorganization of the network of TTIs would also need to take into
         consideration future coordination with the DOETs and the MOET. LTTUs should enter
         into partnerships with TTIs as part of their Performance Agreements, as appropriate.

                             VII.      PROGRAM EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK

     A. Budget Structure for Teacher Training

128. The budget for teacher continuous professional development comes from two sources:
(i) Ministry of Education and Training (MOET) via projects directly managed by the Ministry and
(ii) provincial Departments of Finance in accordance with budget allocation plan proposed by
provincial Departments of Education and Training (DOET). Regular professional meetings at
schools and self-learning activities are at the cost of schools and teachers. Meanwhile MOET
and DOETs cover budget for the organization of training courses for cascade teacher trainers. 40
The costs of usually co-shared by MOET and provinces. Specifically, MOET will pay for the
organization of training events, while provinces will cover travel and accommodation
expenditures of participants and costs for replication training at their provinces. In certain
circumstances, MOET only provides the training materials or instruction, while provinces will
organize all training activities. Training budget under MOET management mainly comes from
various ODA projects. The training cost norms of these projects tend to be higher than those set
forth by Ministry of Finance (MOF). Their contents and targeted trainees may also vary.
129. CPD allocations are integrated into the provincial budgets for socio – economic
development plans. Every year, schools, BOETs and DOETs prepare their CPD budget estimates
and submit to DOETs who consolidate and send on to Departments of Finance (DOF) for budget
preparation. In general, the majority of provincial training budget will be kept at DOET to
organize provincial - level training events for cascade teacher trainers who will then provide
training to other teachers at their localities.

40
  Cascade teacher trainers are teachers selected at the school level because of their expertise or seniority to attend three-to-five
day workshops or seminars and return to their school to then train their peers.
                                                                  45

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
 130. The ETEP preparation team prepared a study on the costs of cascade teacher training in
 ten regionally-representative provinces. On average, three teachers per primary school, 13
 teachers per lower secondary schools and 45 teachers per upper secondary school were sent
 for training to become cascade teacher trainers. While DOET covers the training organization
 costs, schools have to pay for the participation of their teachers, including per diem, travel and
 accommodation expenses. The table below summarizes the results. Total CPD cost at provinces
 in 2014 is estimated at VN$ 510 billion (or US$23.7 million).


                                                    2012-2013     2013-2014         2014-2015
   Number of primary and secondary teachers           847,752       855,478            856,730
   Number of primary and secondary schools             28,076        28,031             27,530
   Estimated number of cascade teacher
   trainers trained at provinces                        288,978      287,961           273,134
   Proportion of cascade teacher trainers/total
   number of teachers (%)                                  34.1          33.7             31.8
   Estimated budget for training organization
   for cascade teacher trainers at provinces
   (VND million)                                        121,024      120,598           114,389
   Estimated budget for participation of
   cascade teacher trainers (per diem, travel,
   accommodation) (VN$ million)                         419,018      417,543           396,044
   Estimated total cost for training of cascade
   teacher trainers at provinces (VN$ million)          540,042      538,142           510,433
   Estimated budget for training organization
   for cascade teacher trainers at provinces
   (US$ million)                                            5.6           5.6              5.3

    B. Program Budget Structure

 131. The NTEP is financed by the Government budget and ETEP PforR. The total Program
 value is US$255 million to be disbursed over five years (2017 – 2021). The ETEP will support the
 government’s proposed NTEP with an IDA credit for US$95 million (equivalent). The PforR will
 disburse against results that support the enhancements of teacher continuous professional
 development. (see Table 5).



                                                                                       % of
                                      Program
                                                    Recurrent     Incremental        program
                                       budget
                                                                                      budget
Pre-service teacher training,
                                             112           110                  2         43.8
retraining and related curriculum
                                                   46

   ETEP – Technical Assessment
                                                                                                      % of
                                              Program
                                                              Recurrent         Incremental         program
                                               budget
                                                                                                     budget
development
In-service teacher training and
                                                        48                8                  40               18.9
related curriculum development
Infrastructure development for
                                                        83                 -                 83               32.6
teacher training institutions
Other                                                 12                 3                   9                4.7
Total                                                255               120                 135                100
% total                                             100%               47%                 53%
Of which:
Government of Vietnam                                 160              120                   40                63
Enhancing Teacher Education                                              -
                                                        95                                   95                37
Program
Total program budget                                  255                                                100%
* The table regroups expenditures of the six NTEP Solution Areas into four categories to simplify analysis.

 132. Two-thirds of the Government contribution to NTEP is for recurrent expenditures. This is
 approximately equal to the annual non-salary allocations for teacher continuous professional
 development and in-service teacher training made by the DOETs and the MOET.41 The sixty-
 three provincial governments allocate resource to their respective DOETs. MOET considers that
 all teacher training and support is part of the NTEP, and thus includes these recurrent
 expenditures as part of the program.

 133. ETEP essentially supports part of the LTTUs and MOET incremental expenditures
 necessary to implement the NTEP and to meet the DLIs. For example, ETEP supports increasing
 the capacity of LTTUs to: (i) train and support the Core Teachers and Principal Advisors and (ii)
 develop and use the online teacher CPD platform. These in turn will require faculty training, the
 development of CPD programs, new CPD delivery mechanism, software applications, and minor
 civil works.

 134. There will be a separate account for ETEP funds to monitor the implementation of ETEP
 – financed activities. Government recurrent and capital expenditures to implementation NTEP
 will be within the corresponding recurrent and capital envelopes that the Government
 approves and MOF allocates. However, sub-budget lines will record actual expenditures for the
 implementation of NTEP.




 41
      The MOF channels the budgets of the National Teacher Training Universities through MOET.
                                                             47

       ETEP – Technical Assessment
     C. Financial sustainability

135. The technical assessment considers that the changes to the teacher education system
introduced by NTEP to be sustainable, particularly if the Government continues to allocate at
least 20 percent of public resources to the education sector42 (see Table 6).

136. The technical assessment concludes that improvements to CPD that result from the
implementation of the ETEP will have a minimal impact on overall government expenditures.
The TEMIS will modernize and render more efficient the collection and analysis of CPD data; the
LMS will do the same for online CDP services. This increased efficiency is expected to offset any
need for additional resource allocations to finance, for example, maintenance and repairs or
specialized technical staff). Almost all activities that LTTUs and MOET will undertake for the




                                              2000      2002         2009     2010       2011       2012

                  GDP            Current      476.6     579.8    1,809.1     2,157.8   2,779.9     3,245.4

                               2000 prices    476.6     538.1        849.1   903.6      960.0      1,010.4
                  TGE            Current      103.2     133.4        508.0   586.3      706.4      913.6

                               2000 prices    103.2     123.8        238.4   245.5      244.0      284.4

                Education        Current       15.6     22.6         93.0    118.5      143.5      192.1

                               2000 prices     15.6     21.2         62.7     72.4       71.2       80.8
               as % of GDP                     3.3       3.9          5.1      5.5       5.2         5.9
               as % of TGE                     15.1     16.9         18.3     20.2       20.3       21.0
        Sources: MOF for 2009-12; Vietnam & the World Bank (2005) for 2000 and 2002.

        Note: GDP figures were updated from the 2004 PER for 2000 and 2002, resulting in a slight change in the
        education expenditure as a percentage of GDP for 2000 and 2002.


purposes of improving CPD will be one-off interventions.

137. The MOET and DOETs will select Core Teachers and Principal Advisors from the current
cohort of teachers and principals. Thus, the government will not need to recruit any new
personnel for this initiative. Furthermore, the government does not intend to create a new
category of civil servant, with an additional set of benefits, for teachers or principals who serve
this function. The Core Teachers and the Principal Advisors will retain their status with the same
rights, duties and accountabilities. Education personnel will likely consider these positions to be

42
  As required by the Circular No 127/2009/TT-BTC dated June 19, 2009. To achieve the overall education budget
target at 20 percent of the total state budget, central government requires provinces to allocate at least 20 percent of
their respective budgets for education. It also requires provinces to allocate at a minimum the amount determined by
the formula and other budget lines, as discussed below, to education. In this sense, the centrally defined education
budget is earmarked.
                                                                48

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
prestigious and sought-after positions. However, MOET and the DOETs may need to consider
other incentives, such as reduced workloads and special training opportunities. The decline in
primary education enrollments has led to a surplus of teachers have a relatively low number of
teaching hours compared to other countries.43

138. Furthermore, because there will be little demand to recruit new teachers for many years
to come, Teacher Training Institutions that have essentially provided preservice training may
need to consider reallocating their resources to other ends.44 Some TTIs now provide programs
for teachers to attain higher credentials (and thus opportunities for promotions and higher
salaries (for a fee). Others have converted some of their facilities for teaching in other
disciplines altogether. Savings could also be used to support new CPD programs or conducting
relevant research.

     D. Financial predictability

139. The technical assessment concluded that the government has put in place budget and
expenditure management systems and practices that will allow ETEP to reach its expected
results. However, there are two sources of difficulty. The first the budget cycle is often
inconsistent resulting in very late budget decisions and fund transfers, which are disruptive to
investment programs. Second, the government develops medium term plans and annual plans
against notional resource availability, an important part of which is outside of central
government control. Thus, the key issue is to address delays in budget approval, and better
linking annual budgeting and planning process to multi-year plans.

     VIII. ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS

140. This economic analysis follows ETEP’s value chain wherein more effective teacher
continuous professional development leads to higher quality teaching and learning. Those who
benefit from this better quality instruction will in turn be able to earn a higher level of income.

141. The MOET intends to enhance the quality and quantity of both face-to-face and online
teacher CPD, reflecting similar trends worldwide to bring training closer to teachers. In this
analysis, we label these improvements “Enhanced CPD?. The economic analysis will calculate
the net present values of the Program investments for two scenarios: with and without the
enhanced CPD. This will help assess the cost – benefit ratios of these two options and the
feasibility of a continuation of the program using the government’s own budget i n the future.




43
   According to the Public Expenditure Review (currently being finalized), Vietnamese teachers spend many fewer
hours in the classroom than their peers in other countries. Ironically, academic results are significantly higher than
found in countries where the number of official hours is significantly higher.
44
   This is one reason why the government plans to reorganize and rationalize the network of TTIs.
                                                           49

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
     A. Overall economic benefit estimation

142. The main benefit stream arising from the program is attributable to the improvement in
the wages that students can expect to earn after completing their formal schooling. The great
majority of children entering primary school today (at age six) will join the work force twelve
years from now (age 18). Most will work until the age of 65 and therefore, reap any benefits
from enhanced CPD for approximately 47 years. The modeling adopted here use conservative
and empirically based estimates to the extent possible.

143. The Program should contribute to higher student completion rates at primary, lower
secondary and upper secondary levels. Better-trained teachers should also help improve the
quality of learning, and thus students will be more likely to complete the level in which they are
enrolled. With higher levels of education, these students will have more opportunities to find
jobs with better pay. This is the key reasoning used for this economic analysis.

144. A Mincer regression based on the Vietnam Household Living Standard Survey (VHLSS)
2012 data helped determine income levels for different levels of formal schooling. Accordingly
the income of primary school completers is expected to increase by US$ 0.8 per annum (over
those who have not completed primary schooling), the income of lower secondary school
completers is expected to increase by US$ 0.9 per annum and the income of upper secondary
school completers is expected to increase by US$ 1.4 per annum.

145. In order to identify the number of Program beneficiaries, differences in completion
rates were calculated for before and after the Program. These were calculated as the difference
of the projected completion rate without the Program and the decrease in dropout rate thanks
to the Program intervention. As the teachers will receive CPD over three consecutive years, the
change in completion rate is assumed to start in the third year of the Program, i.e. 2019.

146. The change in dropout rate is calculated as the multiplication of change in score due to
teacher training by the correlation between learning outcome and dropout rate. In this case,
the PISA scores are used for calculation, because it a comprehensive and reliable source of
information.

147.     The improvement in scores due to teacher training is calculated as below:

     A = B*C*D*E, whereby

     A: Improvement in scores due to teacher training

     B: Impact of teacher training on quality of education. According to Douglas N. Harris and
     Tim R. Sass (2008)45, in-service learning hours are expected to impact learning outcomes by


45
  Douglas N. Harris and Tim R. Sass (2008), “Teacher Training, Teacher Quality, and Student Achievement?. This
paper uses data of the State of Florida (US). The team decides to choose this data because it is difficult to identify
                                                           50

     ETEP – Technical Assessment
   factor weight of 0.0034 timed the standard deviation of learning outcomes (2.33)=0.007922.
   Since the Program only cover the training for about 600,000 teachers out of the total of
   855,000 teachers nationwide, it is estimated that the impact ratio is about 70%.

   C: Number of years of teacher training. Teachers are expected to obtain about 5 days face-
   to-face training and certain number of days for online training every year. To make the
   estimation conservative, only the face-to-face training time is counted. Hence, the number
   of years is estimated as 0.02.

   D: Standard deviation of PISA score, estimated at 16.4 percent.

    B. Overall economic cost estimation

148.    The economic cost estimates of enhancing CPD uses the following assumptions:

          a) Costs include total program expenditures as well as estimated future costs estimated
             by year.
          b) After the completion of ETEP, the government budgets will continue to finance
             teacher CPD. The future costs after ETEP closes include maintenance of assets
             created during program implementation, as well as any recurrent expenditures

    C. Combining cost and benefit calculation

149. The model indicates a conservative estimate of program value of benefits minus costs
being US$ 409 million using the lower scenario. The combined use of face-to-face and online
CPD may lower some operational costs and raise maintenance costs. The benefit-to-cost ratio
of this scenario is 3.4.

150. To calculate the NPV of ETEP, the team estimated the stream of benefits and costs over
the period of 2017 – 2036. Below are the parameters used:

        a) The impact of the program on the increase in completion rate only start from year
           three.
        b) All financial stream forecasts have been made after duly accounting for and adjusting
           for the expected rate of inflation; long-term inflation is calculated to be roughly 5.35
           percent based on historical data.
        c) Using data from the 2015 Labor Force and Employment Survey, the assessment team
           estimates the future unemployment rate to be 2.42 percent for school completers. The
           calculations undertaken factors out the unemployment rate form the economic
           benefits before computing net cash flow.
        d) The analysis assumes that work force participation rate for school completers to be
           90.5 percent in accordance with the 2011 Labor Force and Employment Survey. The

similar studies of countries with similar level of education achievement to Vietnam. This paper is based on a good
data source and the PISA scores of the US are quite similar to Vietnam.
                                                         51

   ETEP – Technical Assessment
          team has factored in the anticipated participation rate has to adjust the economic
          benefits before computing net cash flow.
       e) The discount rate used for this analysis is 12 percent.

151. Three key parameters are modeled with a Monte Carlo simulation with 100,000 runs to
allow a range of possible values: the earnings premium at different levels of education; the
responsiveness of earnings to improvements in school quality and the discount rate. Running
the estimates with these parameters generates mean value of US$494,819,330.




                                              52

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
                                         Figure 6: NPV Forecast




                               Statistics:                  Forecast values
                               Trials                       100,000
                               Base Case                    359,463,214.1
                               Mean                         494,819,330.2
                               Standard Deviation           4,172,843.5
      The ICT scenario forecasts a mean NPV of US$494,819,330.2; negative NPV’s are in the 0 percentile.

152. The sensitivity of the NPV calculations in the Monte Carlo simulation shows that the
uncertainty regarding program benefits comes from the wage premium for upper secondary
education, as shown in the figure below. The program intervention affects mainly the quality
correlation and the sensitivity analysis shows that the variability in the quality correlation would
not influence the benefit calculation. This is an important finding because it indicates the
economic value of the program even under lower than expected outcomes regarding the
magnitude of program impact.




                                                       53

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
                            Figure 7: NPV Sensitivity Calculations




153. In summary, enhanced CPD that introduced by the ETEP will have a positive benefit/cost
ratio and thus makes the investment worthy.




                                               54

  ETEP – Technical Assessment
