FIRST PASET REGIONAL BENCHMARKING CAPACITY
             BUILDING WORKSHOP
                                            14	–	16	June,	2016	
                                                             	

                                               Abuja,	Nigeria

   Communiqué and Framework for Priority Action
Overview

The World Bank Education team for sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), under the Partnership for Skills in Applied
Sciences, Engineering and Technology (PASET), in collaboration with the Association of African Universities
(AAU) and Nigeria’s National Universities Commission (NUC), hosted the first regional benchmarking
capacity building workshop in Abuja, Nigeria, from June 14 – 16, 2016. The Workshop was organised to
analyse, discuss and disseminate the results of the pilot benchmarking exercise that kicked off in February,
2016, and to also encourage the participation of industry and partner countries that are not yet involved.

The Benchmarking Initiative is one of several initiatives under PASET, in line with PASET’s objective of
investing in the creation of a skilled workforce in SSA to maximise returns on domestic and foreign investment
in key economic sectors; and to increase the capacity of universities and research centres to generate
knowledge relevant to Africa’s development challenges. PASET is tapping the experiences of fast-growing
economies such as Korea, China and India to learn how to build Africa’s capability in applied sciences,
engineering and technology.

Background
As economies move up the technology ladder, seeking to reduce the gap with the leading industrial economies,
their need for education and skills at all levels grows, particularly at the tertiary level. In SSA, most countries
are at the stage of evolving from low productivity agricultural economies to more diversified economies with
a higher share of manufacturing and services. As a result, they are increasingly focusing on developing their
human capital to face the unmet demand for highly skilled technicians, engineers, medical workers,
agricultural scientists and researchers, particularly in the rapidly growing sectors of extractive industries,
energy, water, environment, and infrastructure, as well as in service sectors such as hospitality, banking, and
Information and Communications Technology (ICT). For that purpose, they must rely on their universities’
activities in the fields of applied science, engineering and technology (ASET) as key drivers of development.

Measuring the performance of their ASET institutions has therefore become a high priority for all African
economies keen on improving the national capacity to produce advanced human capital and undertake leading
cutting-edge research. Comparisons of tertiary education systems and institutions around the world have
indeed revealed wide variations in their results, even between those with similar funding levels and common
country characteristics.

To continue improving the quality and relevance of learning, research and technology transfer in institutions
offering ASET programs in the SSA Region, the World Bank (under the PASET initiative) has supported a
second phase of the benchmarking exercise, building on the pilot conducted in 2014, by extending it to a
significantly larger number of African institutions. This second phase was initiated following a successful
launch of the PASET Regional Benchmarking Initiative last November.


                                                 First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                    1
On November 9-10, 2015, in Accra, Ghana, PASET launched the PASET Regional Benchmarking Initiative
in collaboration with the AAU. Under the initiative, an internationally recognised methodology developed in
partnership with the Shanghai Jiao Tong University Centre for World-Class Universities is being adapted to
the African context, in close consultations with relevant national and regional stakeholders.

The benchmarking initiative will be closely integrated with other national and regional level initiatives in
support of higher education capacity building across Africa, such as the Africa Centres of Excellence project
and various national quality assurance schemes, all complementing each other to achieve the same goal:
strengthening the quality and relevance of African institutions. The initiative will also encourage institutions
and national agencies to improve data collection, and management and analysis.

Objectives of the Workshop

The main objectives of the Workshop were achieved and included:
1. Dissemination and application of results:
   • Participants shared the main results of the test benchmarking exercise with all participating
      universities, (i) considered how the data generated were analysed and interpreted, and (ii) explored
      how the results could be utilised for quality improvement purposes.
2. Knowledge sharing with partner countries and interaction with industry:
   • Participants discussed (i) relevant best practices from emerging economies (Korea, China) and (ii)
      university-industry linkages and university graduate employability with the appropriate industry
      stakeholders, including companies that were the top employers of university graduates in the region.
3. Plan for benchmarking capacity building in the region for the next 2-3 years:
    • Participants discussed (i) plans for the Regional Centre that would become responsible for
       benchmarking in the region; and (ii) details of the next benchmarking exercise.


Participants
The Workshop was attended by more than 130 participants, from 18 SSA countries, Korea and China.
Participants included representatives from about 50 universities; 11 national Agencies and Ministries from 9
SSA countries; 2 Chambers of Commerce (Chambre de Commerce & d’Industrie de Cote d’Ivoire - CCI and
Federation of West African Chambers of Commerce & Industry - FEWACCI) and 5 international
Corporations (Intel West Africa, TOTAL, IBM, Huawei Technologies and HP). There was representation
from sub-Regional/Regional Agencies, including the Association of African Universities (AAU), African
Development Bank (AfDB), Inter-University Council of East Africa (IUCEA), Association for the
Development of Education in Africa (ADEA), Conseil Africain et Malagache pour l'enseignement Supérieur
(CAMES), Agence universitaire de la Francophonie (AUF) and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). There were several World Bank Education global practice staff members, as well as global
higher education experts. PASET was represented by the chair of its Technical Executive Committee and
members of its Secretariat. Please see Annex A for the list of participants.

Highlights of Opening Ceremony Speeches

Please see Annex B for the Opening Ceremony agenda.
The Workshop was declared open by Nigeria’s Honourable Minister of Education, Malam Adamu Adamu,
represented by the Director, Tertiary Education of the Federal Ministry of Education (FME), Hajia Hindatu
Umar Abdullahi. In her remarks, she noted that the benchmarking initiative was most needed in African Higher
Education Institutions (HEIs) to ensure that minimum standards were set and observed in order to improve
the quality and employability of graduates. She informed participants that the Federal Government of Nigeria
was committed to ensuring that the nation’s education sector became the actual cornerstone of Nigeria’s
                                               First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                  2
national development. This, the Government had demonstrated by earmarking the largest share of the 2016
national budget to education with the hope that the challenges in the sector would be transformed into
opportunities through increased investment.

The Honourable Minister advised participants not to lose sight of the objectives of the Workshop, which laid
emphasis on investment to create a skilled workforce in SSA that would maximise returns on domestic and
foreign investments in key economic sectors and build capacity of universities and research centres to generate
knowledge relevant to Africa’s development challenges. Acknowledging that Nigeria must take the lead in
providing quality education on the continent, the Honourable Minister charged participants, particularly those
of Nigerian origin, to ensure the success of the Workshop as well as take steps to allow the resultant benefits
to rub off on the nation’s HEIs.

In his goodwill message, the Honourable Minister of Science and Technology, Dr. Ogbonnaya Onu, who was
represented by the Deputy Director, Planning and Research in the Federal Ministry of Science and
Technology, Mr. Augustine Ezode, expressed gratitude to the organisers of the Workshop for the choice of
the Workshop’s theme. He welcomed visiting participants to Nigeria and wished them successful
deliberations.

The Executive Secretary of the NUC, Professor Julius A. Okojie, in his welcome address, observed that the
Workshop was a significant step in further improving the quality of HEIs in Africa. He noted that the African
continent, which had numerous natural resources that could take its citizens out of poverty, still lagged behind
in the utilisation of some of these resources. Professor Okojie therefore encouraged participants to share the
knowledge gained from the Workshop with other universities that could not participate, as this would ensure
that all African universities meet up with the benchmark requirements for healthy development and
competition amongst institutions.

The NUC leader informed participants that Nigerian universities won 10 out of the 22 Africa Centres of
Excellence (ACE), a World Bank supported regional project for higher education in seven African countries.
He indicated that Nigeria’s Tertiary Education Trust Fund (TETFund) had taken up some of the ACE
proposals that met the requirements for the Project but failed to make the final 10 as a result of inadequate
funds. The Executive Secretary highlighted some of the efforts of the Nigerian Government and the NUC
designed to improve the quality of education, particularly HEIs in the country. He expressed gratitude to all
participants for attending the Workshop, while wishing them a fruitful deliberation.
The World Bank Country Director, Dr Rachid Benmessaoud, informed participants that the PASET Initiative
took a regional approach in pooling public and private resources to build capacity on the continent since
African grown public-private partnerships were key to growing a critical mass of highly skilled scientists and
technologists. He said that time had come to harness the potential of the 11 million new graduates who enter
the African job market annually in order to propel the continent’s economic transformation. He observed the
critical demand for skilled graduates in the areas of science, technology, mathematics, and engineering, which
needed to be addressed urgently.
In her remarks, the World Bank Practice Manager, Dr Sajitha Bashir, welcomed participants to the Workshop.
She expressed thanks to the collaborators, including the NUC and AAU. Dr Bashir explained that the purpose
of the Workshop was to discuss the methodology and results for benchmarking, which she noted would lead
to organisational change and put African HEIs on the path to self-development. Observing that the PASET
benchmarking exercise was unique, Dr Bashir stated that the process had brought together more than 43
institutions from several SSA countries to use the same yardstick to assess their programmes. She expressed
the hope that the Workshop would take steps to build capacity in Africa in order to further develop
methodologies on benchmarking.

Professor Aminata Sall Diallo, the Chair of the PASET Technical Executive Committee and Advisor to the
Minister of Higher Education and Research, Government of Senegal, in her message of goodwill, remarked

                                               First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                  3
that PASET had enjoyed partnerships with emerging economies such as Korea, China, India and Brazil as
well as some world class universities that could inspire development in the African continent. She expressed
the hope that by the end of 2016, the Partnership would garner the membership of over 20 countries. Professor
Diallo also took the opportunity to give advance notice of the upcoming request for proposal for the PASET
Regional Scholarship and Innovation Fund (RSIF). The RSIIF will contribute towards training 10,000 PhD
students in the fields of Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology for priority sectors in 10 years, and
build the capacity of PhD programs in a core of African universities. The first round RSIF will be implemented
through competitively selected ACEs, which have the capacity to offer PhD programs in the selected thematic
areas of energy, ICT, food security and mining/minerals & materials engineering.

The Secretary General of the AAU, Professor Etienne Ehile, who was represented by AAU’s Director,
Research and Academic Planning, Professor Jonathan Mba, expressed delight at the initiation and objectives
of the Workshop. He said that the AAU was happy to partner the World Bank to address the needs of African
higher education. He added that his Association, which had been at the forefront of providing solutions to
improving the quality of education in Africa through workshops and seminars, had in 1997, established the
African Quality Assurance Network (AfriQAN) to ensure quality service delivery in education across the
African higher education space. Declaring his Association’s support for PASET, the Secretary-General noted
that the Workshop was in line with the mission of the AAU, as it was designed to provide a forum for
stakeholders to share ideas on benchmarking exercises as well as engage with industry.

The Executive Director, Federation of West African Chamber of Commerce and Industry (FEWACCI), Mr.
Aminou Akadiri, in his goodwill address, called the PASET Initiative an excellent enterprise that would help
African universities to address the issues of unemployment and employability of graduates. He observed that
unemployment had already dealt a serious blow to the development of several African countries and said that
his Chamber was excited to associate with PASET to develop protocols that could help improve the
employability of university graduates. He hoped that the Initiative would further provide solutions that would
ensure that training in African HEIs met the needs of industry and imbibed the spirit of entrepreneurship in
the students.

Dr Yeonhee Gu, Director in Korea’s Ministry of Education, disclosed that Korea had been part of PASET
since the Initiative was introduced. She stated that the Initiative had collaborated with non-traditional
education partners, including China, Korea, India and Brazil, to learn from their experiences and improve on
the quality of education in Africa, since the quality of skilled workers was determined by the quality of higher
education.

NUC’s Director of Quality Assurance, Dr Noel Saliu, who made the closing remarks on the last day of the
Workshop, expressed the hope that the benchmarking capacity building workshop would help strengthen the
various quality assurance mechanisms in African HEIs. He encouraged participants to focus on strengthening
their internal quality assurance mechanisms as it would further guarantee quality in the system. Dr Saliu
thanked all the stakeholders, participants and especially, the facilitators and presenters, for ensuring the
success of the benchmarking Workshop.

Summary of Technical Proceedings
The workshop over the 2.5 days consisted of 4 presentations, 7 country group sessions and 3 panel discussions.
Please see Annex C for the Technical Proceedings agenda.

Dr Ying Cheng presented an overview of the initial benchmarking results, which included analysis of data
received from the 28 SSA universities that participated in the benchmarking exercise. He highlighted the main
trends and discussed challenges in the analysis due to low compliance rate for certain indicators and
inconsistencies in the data provided by the institutions.


                                               First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                  4
During the group sessions, participants got the opportunity to discuss and understand how to use the
benchmarking results in developing strategies in the areas of talent development, financing, governance and
accountability, policy making and improving teaching and learning strategies in universities. Dr Jamil Salmi
(higher education expert, World Bank), Dr Ying Cheng (benchmarking expert, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University) and Dr Manja Klemencic (Higher Education Expert, Harvard/Cambridge University) led the
discussions during the group sessions. Participants from universities that were part of the benchmarking
exercise examined and shared their individual institutional results, addressing challenges and factors
influencing their performance. During each session, the facilitators shared global good practices from their
experiences and also solicited ideas from participants on what had worked well in their institutions.

Participants also benefitted from panel discussions on (i) Labour Market Surveys and University-Industry
Linkages; (ii) Using the benchmarking results for national policy-making in the higher education sector; and
(iii) Good Practices in Developing and Implementing Management Information Systems (MIS). Panellists
consisted of a diverse group of individuals from several countries and representing industry, academia, quality
assurance agencies/ministries responsible for higher education and global higher education experts.

Professor So Young Kim of Korea briefly explained how labour market surveys are conducted in Korea and
highlighted best practices in university-industry linkages in her institution, Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology (KAIST).

As part of the panel discussion on MIS, Mrs Kalyani Putty-Rogbeer of the Tertiary Education Commission
(TEC) of Mauritius presented on the experience and good practices of the TEC in the data collection and
maintenance of its MIS. She also provided insights on the autonomy of TEC and how they incentivize
universities under their purview to provide the needed data.

Dr Baguma Abdallah, Ag. Director of Academic Quality, Higher Education Council (HEC), Rwanda, briefly
presented on the outcome of the HEC’s National Benchmarking workshop which was held in March 2016. He
shared the policies/resolutions that have been put in place to improve quality and relevance of higher education
in Rwanda.

Please see the Communiqué below which details lessons learnt by participants, their recommendations and
agreed next steps.

                                             Communiqué
We participants of the First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop held in Barcelona
Hotel, Abuja, from 14 – 16 June, 2016:

Main Benchmarking Results

Participants note:
   • The objectives and benefits of benchmarking and comparing results and performance among HEIs;
   • The effective use of benchmarking results to assess and improve performance;
   • The need to identify institutional strengths and areas for improvement in order to take remedial action
       on weak areas.
Recommend that:
   • Benchmarking exercises should be extended to a larger number of HEIs across more countries using a
     relevant set of benchmarking indicators;
   • National tertiary education agencies and HEIs must carry out benchmarking on a regular basis to
     ensure quality and efficiency;
   • More corporations and industries should be involved in the benchmarking initiative;
                                               First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                  5
   •   All HEIs interested in participating in the benchmarking initiative, particularly in future capacity
       building workshops, should provide notes of commitment that they will be willing to cause all units of
       their universities to maximally cooperate in the exercise.

Labour Market Surveys and Linkages to Industry
	
Participants note:
   • Labour market surveys are vital to improving the quality and relevance of HEIs;
   • The obvious need for close linkages between HEIs and industry;
   • African HEIs have not had enough interface with industry in order to capture the needs of industry in
       their curriculum;
   • Some African graduates are unemployable because they are trained to acquire knowledge and not
       skills;
   • The unemployability of new graduates has forced industry to retrain new graduates immediately after
       they are recruited;
   • Some employers have introduced initiatives to help HEIs train employable graduates.
Recommend that:
   • Labour market surveys should be conducted regularly to systematically improve the quality and
     relevance of HEIs;
   • African universities should reach out to employers and establish linkages to effectively groom
     industry-ready graduates. Perhaps the benchmarking initiative can help facilitate these linkages.
   • African HEIs should embrace industrial training (through some form of internship programme) for
     students to enable them acquire some skills upon graduation;
   • The content of education delivery should take into consideration the needs of industry just as the
     curriculum must be revised to bridge the gap between graduates’ knowledge and industry requirements
     in order to prepare graduates for employment upon graduation;
   • Students must be exposed to technological advances early in their academic life to improve their
     problem-solving skills.

Understanding and Applying the Results
	
(a) Talent Development

Participants note:
   • The importance of developing the talent of both institutional staff and students
   • Factors that must change to improve talent development and retention in HEIs;
   • More males enrol to study ASET programmes than females in SSA;
   • Stereotypes against females in ASET programmes by their parents and the society have been a key
       barrier to female enrolment in ASET fields;
   • Examinations by professional bodies provide a good yardstick to check the quality of programmes in
       HEIs;
   • The age of HEIs may determine the postgraduate enrolment, for instance, younger universities tend to
       have lower postgraduate enrolment than undergraduate;
Recommend that:
   • Countries in SSA should establish deliberate national policies to work with high schools and other
     levels to attract females to enroll in ASET programmes;
   • Policies should be geared towards making the girl-child develop an affinity toward successful female
     role models in ASET professions;
   • African countries should discourage stereotyping the mind-set of females by their parents and the
     general society;
                                              First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                 6
   •   HEIs should introduce initiatives to continuously engage their Alumni and track their professional
       activities;
   •   Universities should involve members of their Alumni in the process of interviewing new students for
       enrolment;
   •   HEIs should organise annual Alumni events to celebrate distinguished members as a way of inspiring
       other members and current students.

(b) Financing

Participants note:
   • Finance is an important indicator of governance;
   • Several strategies that could improve resource mobilisation and allocation to HEIs;
   • Appropriate remuneration and incentives encourage academic staff and make them concentrate on the
       core of their jobs;
   • Internally Generated Revenue (IGR) income is vital to the development and sustenance of HEIs;
   • ‘Matching Grant’ from Alumni and philanthropist is viable strategy for raising funds;
Recommend that:
   • Academics should be well paid to be able to concentrate on their jobs and be creative;
   • HEIs must be innovative and seek alternative ways to increase IGR;
   • IGR must be part of HEI’s development strategy;
   • Fund raising strategy must drive HEI’s research and education strategy;
   • Internal income generation should be institutionalised within the University system;
   • Mechanisms to generate revenue within the University system should not be entirely focused on
     making money as education is key.
   • Research should be focused on its humanitarian value rather than monetary, even though the financial
     aspects are important.
   • HEIs should engage their students right from their early stages of enrolment in helping them
     understand the importance of alumni to the financial health of the HEI and help them develop a sense
     of pride in the HEI throughout their education
(c) Governance

Participants note:
   • Political appointments of leaders of HEIs affect the institutions negatively because the leader is usually
       not selected based on professional competence and also tends to be influenced by a political agenda;
   • Well-constituted Governing Boards/Councils lead to favourable ranking;
   • The independence of Governing Boards/Councils ensures effectiveness and best practices;
Recommend that:
   • Universities must be flexible in their approach to research and administration;
   • There should be institutional autonomy in HEIs;
   • Proprietors of HEIs must ensure that their Governing Boards/Councils are well constituted with the
     right mix of government representatives, academics, student representatives, alumni, members of
     industry, etc. to effectively transform and lead the institution.
(d) Policy Making

Participants note:
   • The policy implications of benchmarking results at national level;
   • Evidence-based policies cannot be realised unless data collection and maintenance is seen as a priority
       in higher education in Africa.

                                               First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                  7
   •   Appropriate laws and policies sustain university autonomy and ensure a rancour free system;
   •   National and institutional laws guide administrative matters in each university system as it determines
       who or what arm or the institution performs specific roles;
   •   Student representation in university governance in various HEIs, particularly Student Councils.
Recommend that:
   • National Policies on education should reflect the changing times and compare with good policies of
     surrounding neighbouring countries and also globally;

   •   Students must participate in HEI’s governance, particularly through the Student Union/Council.

Data Collection, Choice of Indicators and Management Information Systems
	
Participants Note:
   • Good practices in developing and implementing MIS;
   • Challenges countries face in implementing MIS;
   • The importance of developing a culture of conducting effective self-assessments regularly;
   • The difficulties in collecting data;
   • The flow of communication from the Benchmarking team was effective during the data collection
       phase;
   • No HEI responded to all the questions in the data collection process;
   • The problems encountered in most HEIs included the absence of data, ambiguity in questionnaire and
       the resistance in getting these data from data sources within the HEIs;
   • The communication gap within the University structure impeded the process of data collection;
   • Areas of the data collection processes that required modification;
   • Strategies and methodologies of presenting data.
Recommend that:
   • HEIs and national agencies should have a unified MIS as well as a Unit responsible for data collection
     and maintaining the MIS;
   • HEIs must possess data and know how to use it in order to be able to plan and develop efficiently;
   • Expenditure on education related activities as stated in the methodology should be categorised into
     STEM and non-STEM programs/universities and differentiated accordingly;
   • All HEIs should have student feedback questionnaires;
   • HEIs that failed to provide adequate data should go back and do the needful to obtain more data going
     forward, especially for indicators that are relevant for the HEI’s own self-assessment.


Student Engagement Surveys

Participants Note:
   • Students’ responded brilliantly to the survey;
   • The time allocated to collecting responses from student respondents was insufficient and posed some
       difficulty to the survey;
   • The significant difference between student satisfaction and engagement;
   • Strategies of applying survey results to improve teaching and learning;
   • Strategies for improving teacher-student relationship to improve course delivery and academic
       integrity.
Recommend that:

   •   HEIs should encourage student-centred teaching and learning
                                              First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                 8
   •   Student Unions should be independent (without political or the university administration’s influence),
       particularly in the selection of their leaders;
   •   Diverse opinions (plurality of views) and increased participation rates in student engagement should
       be encouraged;
   •   Questionnaires should be administered in native/commonly spoken languages to get the best responses
       from respondents;
   •   Students should be engaged in the processes of drawing-up their curriculum and extra-curricular
       activities;
   •   Students should be involved through a feedback system in the assessment and appraisal of their
       lecturers;
   •   Lecturers should be accessible to their students and avoid being hostile to them;
   •   All HEIs should encourage cultural and attitudinal changes within their system to improve teacher-
       student relationship;
   •   Academic malpractices, including plagiarism and buying of marks and grades should be utterly
       discouraged in the HEI system, including sanctioning culprits accordingly;
   •   Lecturers with unfavourable feedbacks from students should be paired with lecturers who have
       favourable feedbacks in order to improve their standing;
   •   Peer pressure techniques should be employed to allow hardworking lecturers to influence other
       lecturers who may not be doing so well;
   •   Student questionnaires should include an extra space for students to make ‘any other comments which
       would help obtain from them further responses that could be useful to the survey.
   •   A group of student leaders should be invited to the next capacity building workshop.

Next Steps

Participants agreed on the following next steps:
(a) Data collection- re-opening current round for additional data
   • This last round of benchmarking exercise will be reopened to:
          o Allow universities that participated in the last round but could not provide all their data on time
              to send in the missing data
          o Give an opportunity to universities that did not participate in the last round but would like to
              send in their data to do so
   • The deadline to submit the data is July 31, 2016
   • The report on the analysis of the benchmarking exercise will be completed on August 31, 2016 and
      then disseminated
   • The benchmarking team will design a simple web-tool to display the data.

(b) Preparation for next round of data collection
   • The benchmarking team will modify/revise the methodology including the student survey
   • A call will be sent out to universities interested in the next round of data collection

(c) Capacity Building
   • HEIs and national agencies interested in participating in the capacity building workshops in the future
      will have to submit commitment letters from their institutional leaders, which will include the name
      of a high-level focal point and willingness to submit data.
   • The benchmarking team will reach out to agency heads, vice chancellors, university presidents and
      rectors to obtain the commitment letters.
   • At the next meeting, HEIs and national agencies will have the opportunity to show actions taken to
      improve their current performance, building on lessons learnt at this workshop.
   • National agencies and HEIs should start adapting the benchmarking methodology (including the
      student survey) to their own needs and missions
                                               First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                  9
   •   2-3 National agencies that are interested and committed will be assisted by the benchmarking team (on
       a first come-first serve basis) to build capacity within their agencies and carry out in-country training.

(d) Industry & Regional/sub-regional bodies
   • The benchmarking team will assess the best strategy to have a more structured engagement with
      industry and how to facilitate their interactions with universities
   • The benchmarking team will also assess the best way to engage the regional and sub-regional bodies
      that have a mandate to improve quality of higher education in Sub-Saharan Africa and are interested
      in playing a more significant role in the benchmarking initiative.

(e) Data Centre
   • The Benchmarking team will continue developing the framework for a data centre that will be based
      at an institution/organization in sub-Saharan Africa and will have the capacity to provide
      benchmarking technical assistance to interested universities and relevant national agencies in the
      future.

Appreciation

Finally, participants’ express gratitude to PASET, the World Bank Education Team (Africa region), Nigeria’s
National Universities Commission and the Association of African Universities for organizing the First PASET
Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop. The technical content of the workshop, was
challenging, informative, practical, inspiring, engaging and very useful. We also express appreciation to the
panelists from Korea and China and other participants who came from about 50 universities, 11 national
Agencies and Ministries, the CCI – Cote d’Ivoire, FEWACCI, the Association of African Universities (AAU),
African Development Bank (AfDB), Inter-University Council of East Africa (IUCEA), Association for the
Development of Education in Africa (ADEA), Conseil Africain et Malagache pour l'enseignement Supérieur
(CAMES), Agence universitaire de la Francophonie (AUF) and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). We are grateful to participants from the industry, including Intel West Africa, TOTAL,
IBM, Huawei Technologies and HP. To the facilitators – Dr Jamil Salmi, Dr Ying Cheng and Dr Manja
Klemencic and of course, respective panellists and presenters who all contributed tremendously to the success
of this benchmarking Workshop, we thank you.

                                       RAPPORTEUR GENERAL




                                               First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                          Annex A
                                             REGIONAL	BENCHMARKING	CAPACITY	BUILDING	WORKSHOP	PARTICIPANTS	
      		                        INSTITUTION	                                             DELEGATE		                                                                TITLE	
    BENIN		     University	of	Abomey-Calavi	                             Prof.	Souaïbou	FAROUGOU	                                      Vice	-Rector,	Inter-University	Cooperation,	External	
                                                                                                                                       Relations	and	Workforce	Development	
               University	of	Abomey-Calavi	                              Prof.	Brice	A.	SINSIN	                                        Rector	
               University	of	Abomey-Calavi	                              Dr	Gervais	KISSEZOUNON		                                      Coordinator	of	Quality	Assurance		
BURKINO	FASO		 Université	AUBE	Nouvelle	                                 Mr	Karim	SAMOURA	                                             Directeur	des	Relations	International	
                                                                                                                                       Chargé	des	relations	avec	les	entreprises	et	de	la	formation	
                                                                                                                                       continue	
                Université	Polytechnique	de	Fada	/	ENSI-F	    Prof.	Martin	LOMPO		                                                     Président	
                Université	Polytechnique	de	Bobo-Dioulasso	/	 Mr	Mamadou	TRAORE		                                                      Research	Professor	and	Director	of	Academic	Cooperation	
                Institut	de	Développement	Rural	(IDR)	
                International	Institute	of	Water	and	                    Mr.	Abdourazackou	SANOUSSI		                                  Conseiller	du	Directeur	Général	Chargé	des	
                Environmental	Engineering	(2iE)		                                                                                      Investissements;	Coordonnateur	des	projets	BAD	et	
                                                                                                                                       Banque	Mondiale	de	2iE	
COTE	d'IVOIRE		 Chambre	de	Commerce	&	d’Industrie	(CCI)	                 M.	Julien	KOUABENAN		                                         Directeur	des	Resources	Humaines	
                Institut	National	Polytechnique	Félix	                   Professor	Joseph	KOUASSI	                                     Lecturer	
                HOUPHOUËT-BOIGNY	(INP-HB)	

                University	Félix	Houphouët-Boigny	-                      Professeur	Koné	DAOUDA	                                       Responsable	du	Centre	d'Excellence	sur	les	Changements	
                Center	of	Excellence	on	Climate	Change,	                                                                               Climatiques,	la	Biodiversité	et	l'Agriculture	Durable	
                Biodiversity	and	Sustainable	Agriculture	
                École	National	Supérieure	de	Statistique	et	             Miss	Rosine	MOSSO	                                            Directeur	des	Etudes	DESS-ASAD	(Enseignement)	
                d’Économie	(ENSEA)	
     DRC		      Ministère	de	l'Enseignement	Supérieur	et	                Mr		Dominique	KABUYA		                                        Coordonnateur	principal	à	la	Direction	d'Etudes	et	
                Universitaire	                                                                                                         Planification	
                l'Université	de	Kinshasa		                               Prof	Seraphin	MATINGU	                                        membre	de	la	Cellule	stratégique		

                                               First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                  11
                                 INSTITUTION	                                                     DELEGATE	                                                        TITLE	
                l'Université	de	Kinshasa		                                	Prof	Pascal	KAPAGAMA	IKANDO	                                 membre	de	la	Cellule	stratégique		
                l'Université	de	Lubumbashi	                               	Prof	Georges	MULUMBWA	MUTAMBWA		                             Coordonnateur	du	Bureau	d'études	stratégiques		
                l'Institut	National	du	Bâtiment	et	des	Travaux	           Prof	Nicolas	AZAMA		                                          Directeur	Général		
                Publics	
                l'Institut	National	des	Techniques	Appliquées	            Mr	Jean	Pierre	KABANGU	KOMBA		                                Deputy	Head	of	Institution	
  ETHIOPIA		    Addis	Ababa	University	                                   Dr.	Melaku	Wakuma	DUGUMA	                                     Director	of	Graduate	Programs		
                Dilla	University	                                         Dr	Henok	Tadese	AYELE	                                        President,	Academic	Affairs		

                Ethiopian	Education	Strategy	Centre		                     Dr	Admasu	Shibru	KERAGA		                                     Deputy	Director	General	
                HERQA		                                                   Mr	Tamirat	Motta	BAKALO	                                      Deputy	Director	General	of	HERQA		
                Jimma	University	                                         Dr.	Adula	Bekele	HUNDE	                                       Academic	Programing	&	Quality	Assurance	Director	
                Mekelle	University	                                       Dr	Hagos	Woldeghebriel	ZEWELEDI		                             Director	for	the	Academic	Program	Office	
   GHANA		      KNUST		                                                   Professor	Eric	WOODE		                                        Head,	Quality	Assurance	&	Planning	Unit		
                KNUST		                                                   Felicia	AMANKWAH	                                             Senior	Assistant	Registrar	
                                                                                                                                        Quality	Assurance	and	Planning	Unit	
                University	of	Cape	Coast	                                 Prof.	Kwaku	BOAKYE	                                           Directorate	of	Academic	Planning	&	Quality	Assurance	
                                                                                                                                        (DAPQA)	
                University	of	Ghana		                                     Professor	Andrew	ADJEI	                                       Director	of	Research		
                University	of	Ghana		                                     Mr	John	ANOKU	                                                Research	Development	Officer		
                University	of	Mines	and	Technology,	Tarkwa	               Dr	Bernard	Kumi	BOATENG	                                      Vicc-Dean	of	international	Programming	
   KENYA		      Commission	for	University	Education		                     Mr	Joseph	MUSENGYA	                                           Snr	Assistant	commission	Secretary	-	Institutional	
                                                                                                                                        Accreditation	
                Ministry	of	Education,	Science	&	Technology	              Prof	David	K.	SOME	                                           Secretary/CEO,	Commission	for	University	Education		
  MALAWI		      National	Council	for	Higher	Education	(NCHE)	             Dr	Golden	MSILIMA	                                            Deputy	Chief	Executive	Officer		
                National	Council	for	Higher	Education	(NCHE)	             Mrs	Susan	MANYETERA	                                          Quality	Assurance	Operations	Specialist		
                University	of	Agriculture	and	Natural	                    Prof	Weston	MWASE	                                            Director	of	Quality	Assurance		
                Resources		(LUANAR)	
             Universty	of	Malawi	(UNIWA)	                                 Mr	Smith	MASUSO	                                              Internal	Auditor	
 MAURITIUS		 Tertiary	Education	Commission	(TEC)	                         Mrs	Kalyani	PUTTY-ROGBEER	                                    Quality	Assurance	and	Accreditation	Officer	
MOZAMBIQUE		 National	Commission	for	Quality	Assurance	                   Professor	Jefy	MUKORA	                                        Executive	Director,	External	Evaluation	
                                                First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                   12
                            INSTITUTION	                                                     DELEGATE	                                                         TITLE	
            University	Eduardo	Mondlane	                             Prof	Manuel	Jose	MACIA	                                       Prof	&	Rector's	Advisor		
NIGER		     Université	deTahoua	/	Institut	Universitaire	            Mr	Albeidou	Ibrahim	IBOUNE	                                   Lecturer	
            de	Technologie		
            Université	Dan	Dicko	Dankoulodo	de	                      Mr	Aghali	EREMEBE		                                           Teacher	Technologist		
            Maradi/Institut	Universitaire	de	Technologie	
            Université	Abdou	Moumouni	de	Niamey	                     Pr	Abdoul	Aziz	ISSA	DAOUDA	                                   Vice-Président	de	la	Cellule	d'Assurance	Qualité	
NIGERIA		   National	Universities	Commission	(NUC)	                  Professor	Julius	OKOJIE,	OON		                                The	Executive	Secretary	
            National	Universities	Commission	(NUC)	                  Dr	Lawrence	OGUGUA		                                          Deputy	Director	Quality	Assurance	
            National	Universities	Commission	(NUC)	                  Dr	Noel	SALIU	                                                Director	Quality	Assurance		
            National	Universities	Commission	(NUC)	                  Mallam	Mohammad	NDANUSA		                                     Deputy	Director	Research	and	Innovation	
            National	Universities	Commission	(NUC)	                  Mallam	Lawal	M.	FARUK	                                        Deputy	Director	Research	and	Innovation	
            National	Universities	Commission	(NUC)	                  Mr	Henry	ANAZIAH	                                             Deputy	Director	Quality	Assurance	
            National	Universities	Commission	(NUC)	                  Dr	Chinelo	NWOSU	(Mrs)	                                       Deputy	Director	Research	and	Innovation	
            The	Federal	University	of	Agriculture	                   Prof.	Olukayode	AKINYEMI	                                     Director	of	Academic	Planning	
            (FUNAAB)	
            University	of	Jos		                                      Prof	Musa	UMAR	                                               Director	of	Planning		
            University	of	Jos		                                      Dr	E.O.	EKWERE	                                               		
            Ahmadu	Bello	University,	Zaria	                          Prof.	Ibrahim	SULE	                                           Director	Academic	Planning		
            Ahmadu	Bello	University,	Zaria	                          Dr	Idowu	AIMOLA		                                             Benchmarking	Coordinator	
            Federal	University	Dutse	                                Dr	Ahmed	B.	GARKO	                                            Director,	Information	and	Communication	Technology	
            Bayero	University,	Kano	                                 Professor	Bala	Sidi	ALIYU	                                    Director,	Academic	Planning	Directorate	
            Bayero	University,	Kano	                                 Professor	Sagir	Adamu	ABBAS	                                  Deputy	Vice	Chancellor	(	Academics	)	
                                                                                                                                   Head	of	the	Strategic	planning	committee	
            Benue	State	University,	Makurdi	                         Dr	Simon	UBWA	                                                Director	of	Academic	Planning	
            Redeemer's	University,	Ede	                              Prof.	Kayode	ADEKEYE	                                         Deputy	Vice-Chancellor		
            Redeemer's	University,	Ede	                              Mr	Bernard	NJOR		                                             Principal	Academic	Planning	Officer		
            University	of	Benin,	Benin	City		                        Dr	Wilfred	IGUODALA	                                          Director	of	Academic	Planning		
            University	of	Benin,	Benin	City		                        Mr.	Francis	IGBERASE	                                         Planning	officer		
            University	of	Benin,	Benin	City		                        Mr	Osasuyi	EDOHEN		                                           Academic	Planning	officer		

                                           First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                              13
                              INSTITUTION	                                                     DELEGATE	                                                         TITLE	
             University	of	Medical	Sciences,	in	Ondo	State		 Prof	Akhere	OMONKHUA	                                                   Professor,	Dept.	of	Medical	Biochemistry	
             Obafemi	Awolowo	University,	Ile	Ife	                      Sameul	ADEYEFA	                                               Director	Academic	Planning		
             Obafemi	Awolowo	University,	Ile	Ife	                      Prof	Ayombi	SALAMI		                                          Deputy	Vice-Chancellor	(Academic)	
             African	University	of	Science	and	Technology	             Professor	Peter	Azikiwe	ONWUALU		                             Head	of	Department	-	Materials	Science	&	Eng.	
             (AUST)	
             African	University	of	Science	and	Technology	             Inegbenose	OSOBA	                                             Acting	Registrar	
             (AUST)	
             University	of	Port	Harcourt	                              Dr	Olufemi	ADESOPE		                                          Assistant	Director	Centre	for	Research	Management	&	
                                                                                                                                     Development	

             University	of	Port	Harcourt	                              Joel	OGBONNA		                                                Director,	Centre	for	Petroleum	Research	&	Training	
             Federal	Ministry	of	Education		                           Hajia	Hindatu	Umar	Abdullahi	                                 Director,	Tertiary	Education		
             Federal	Ministry	of	Finance,	Nigeria	                     Paul	DALOBA	                                                  		
             Federal	Ministry	of	Finance,	Nigeria	                     Opeyemi	TOGUNDE	                                              		
             Federal	Ministry	of	Science	&	Technology		                Mr.	Augustine	EZODE	                                          Deputy	Director,	Planning	and	Research	
             Federal	Ministry	of	Science	&	Technology		                David	OKOUFU	                                                 		
             		                                                        Dr	Shoba	ODUSSANYE	                                           		
RWANDA		     University	of	Rwanda	                                     Ms	Florence	KANEZA		                                          Registrar		
             Higher	Education	Council	                                 Abdallah	BAGUMA		                                             Acting	Director,	Academic	Planning	
SENEGAL		    Cheikh	Anta	Diop	University	                              Prof	Mamadou	SARR	                                            Director	of	Quality	Assurance		
             University	of	Gaston	Berger	                              M.	Tayib	FALL		                                               Centre	d'Excellence	Africain	en	Mathématiques,	
                                                                                                                                     Informatique	&	TIC	
             University	of	Gaston	Berger	                              M.	Cire	Sall	BA		                                             		
             National	Authority	of	Quality	Assurance		                 M.	Boubacar	NDIAYE		                                          Chef	de	Division	des	Institutions	
             (ANAQ-Sup)	                                                                                                             		
TANZANIA		   St.	Augustine	University		                                Mr	Schwaibu	Abdillah	SELLA	                                   		
             Ardhi	University		                                        Prof	Charles	LUCIAN	                                          Director	of	Quality	Assurance		
             The	Nelson	Mandela,	African	Institution	of	               Dr	Emmanuel	MPOLYA	                                           Lecturer	
             Science	and	Technology	

                                             First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                14
                                INSTITUTION	                                            DELEGATE	                                                                     TITLE	
                 Muhimbili	University	of	Health	and	Allied	               Dr	Emmanuel	BALANDYA	                                         Deputy	Director	
                 Science	                                                                                                               Directorate	of	Postgraduate	Studies		
                 University	of	Dar	es	Salaam	                             Dr.	Pancras	M.S.	BUJULU	                                      Director,	Planning	and	Development		
                 University	of	Dar	es	Salaam	                             Dr.	Pendo	Salu	MALANGWA	                                      Snr	Lecturer	&	Actg	Director,	Quality	Assurance	
    TOGO		       University	of	Lomé		                                     Prof.	Gado	TCHANGBEDJI		                                      Doyen	de	la	Faculte	des	Sciences		
                                                                                                                                        Personne	chargee	du	Beznchmarking		
                 University	of	Lomé		                                     Minontikpo	Yaovi	AWUSSI		                                     Responsable	assurance	qualité	interne	de	l'Université	
   UGANDA		    Makerere	University	                                       Dr.	Florence	NAKAYIWA	                                        Director,	Planning	and	Development	
               Mbarara	University	of	Science	and	                         Dr.	Casim	Umba	TOLO	                                          Senior	Lecturer	
               Technology	
               (MUST)	
               Uganda	Martyrs	University	                                 Prof	Julius	MWINE	                                            Principal	Investigator	-	ACE	II	Project		
   ZAMBIA		    University	of	Zambia	                                      Dr.	Edward	LUSAMBO	                                           Director	of	Quality	Assurance		
 REGIONAL/	    Agence	universitaire	de	la	Francophonie	                   Prof.	Pierre-Francois	DJOCGOUE	                               Coordonnateur	régional	des	projets	
SUB-REGIONAL		 (AUF)	
               Inter-University	Council	of	East	Africa	(IUCEA)	           Mr.	Philip	AYOO	                                              Principal	Innovations	and	Research	Officer	
                 Association	for	the	Development	of	                      Mr	Makha	NDAO	                                                		
                 Education		
                 in	Africa	(ADEA)		
                 African	Development	Bank	(AfDB)	                         Dr	Patience	EKOH		                                            Snr	Education	Analyst	
                 Association	of	African	Universities	(AAU)	               Prof	Jonathan	MBA		                                           Director,	Research	&	Academic	Planning	
                 Economic	Community	Of	West	African	States	               Dr	Hassan	NJAI	                                               Principal	Programme	Officer,	Higher	Education		
                 (ECOWAS)		                                                                                                             Dept.	of	Education,	Science	and	Culture	
                 Conseil	Africain	et	Malgache	pour	                       Zakari	LIRE	                                                  Program	Manager	-	Quality	Assurance		
                 l'enseignement	supérieur	(CAMES)		
  INDUSTRY		     Intel	West	Africa		                                      Stanley	MUONEKE		                                             Business	Development	Director	-	Public	Sector/Education	
                 Total	E&P	                                               Mr	Vincent	NNADI	                                             Executive	General	Manager,	Manager	(Corporate	Social	
                                                                                                                                        Responsibility	&	Medical	Services)	

                 IBM	                                                     Mr	Charles	Moyela	                                            External	Relations	Leader	
                 Huawei	Technologies		                                    Mr	Eason	DONG		                                               Director	-	UC	&	C	Solution	
                 Huawei	Technologies		                                    Mr	Abayomi	OLURISHE	                                          UC	&	C	Solution	Manager		
                                                First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                   15
                                INSTITUTION	                                          DELEGATE	                                                                  TITLE	
                HP		                                                     Mr	Emmanuel	EZE	                                              Manager,	Public	Sector	&	Education	
                Federation	of	West	African	Chamber	of	                   Aminou	AKADIRI	                                               CEO	
                Commerce	(FEWACCI)		
                Federation	of	West	African	Chamber	of	                   Toyin	AYINDE		                                                		
                Commerce	(FEWACCI)		
   PASET	       PASET	&	the	Ministry	of	Higher	Education	and	 Professor	Aminata	SALL	DIALLO	                                           Chair	of	the	PASET	Technical	Executive	Committee;	
                Research,	Government	of	Senegal	                                                                                       Advisor	to	the	Minister	of	Higher	Education	&		
                                                                                                                                       Research	
WORLD	BANK		 World	Bank	-	Washington	DC	                                 Dr	Ekua	BENTIL	                                               Education	Specialist,	Education	Global	Practice	
                World	Bank	-	Washington	DC	                              Dr	Sajitha	BASHIR	                                            Practice	Manager,	Education	Global	Practice		
                World	Bank	-	Washington	DC	                              Dr	Nobuyuki	TANAKA	                                           Economist,	Education	Global	Practice		
                World	Bank	-	Benin	                                      Hyacinthe	GBAYE		                                             Senior	Economist,	Education	Global	Practices		
                World	Bank	-	Malawi	                                     Innocent	MULINDWA		                                           Senior	Education	Specialist,	Education	Global	Practice	
                World	Bank	-	Washington	DC/DRC	                          Dung-Pham	KIM		                                               Senior	Operations	Analyst,	Education	Global	Practice		
                World	Bank	-	Washington	DC	                              Shobhana	SOSALE	                                              Senior	Education	Specialist,	Education	Global	Practice	
                World	Bank	-	Abuja	                                      Solomon	ADEBAYO	                                              Consultant,	Education	Global	Practice		
                World	Bank	-	Abuja	                                      Dr	Olatunde	ADEKOLA	                                          Senior	Education	Specialist,	Education	Global	Practice	
                World	Bank	-	Senegal	                                    Dr	Mohamadu	Moustapha	LO	                                     Education	Specialist,	Education	Global	Practice	
FACILITATORS	   Harvard	University/Cambridge	University	                 Dr	Manja	KLEMENCIC		                                          Higher	Education	Expert	
              Shanghai	Jiao	Tong	University	                             Dr	Ying	CHENG		                                               Ranking	&	Benchmarking	Expert	
              World	Bank-	Washington	                                    Dr	Jamil	SALMI		                                              Higher	Education	Expert	
SOUTH	KOREA		 Seoul	National	University	(SNU)		                          Ms	Sun	Ju	PARK			                                             Director,	International	Exchange	&	Education	
                Seoul	National	University	(SNU)	                         Prof	Tae	Kyoon	KIM	                                           Graduate	School	of	International	Studies	
                KAIST	                                                   Prof	So	Young	KIM		                                           Head,	Graduate	School	of	Science	and	Technology	Policy	
                Ministry	of	Education	                                   Ms	Yeonhee	GU	                                                Director,	Ministry	of	Education	
  LOGISTICS	    World	Bank	                                              Mrs	Rebecca	NAIDOO		                                          Consultant		
    TEAM	       World	Bank	                                              Mrs	Ann	SHUI'B	                                               Consultant	
                NUC	                                                     Dr	Obinna	OKWELUME	                                           Rapporteur	
                NUC	                                                     Dr	Ben	UGHEOKE	                                               Rapporteur	
                                               First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                  16
        INSTITUTION	                                            DELEGATE	                                                                 TITLE	
NUC		                                            Mr	Micheal	EJEGWA	                                            Senior	ICT	Officer	(Rapporteur)	
NUC		                                            Dr	Obi	UKWUAGU	                                               Chief	Research	&	Innovation	Officer		
NUC	                                             Mr	Peter	TOBRISE	                                             Asst	Chief	Research	&	Innovation	
                                                                                                               	Officer	
NUC	                                             Ms	Patricia	EROMOSELE	                                        Principal	ICT	officer		
NUC		                                            Mrs	Onyinye	AKUABA	                                           		
NUC		                                            Mrs	Lulu	UDOKA	                                               Senior	ICT	Officer		
NUC	                                             Mr	Peter	LEO	                                                 		
NUC		                                            Mr	Edward	JAMES	                                              		
NUC		                                            Mr	Joshua	ODUFU	                                              		
NUC		                                            Chinedu	OTUYA	                                                		
NUC		                                            Ms	Simi	ZANG	                                                 		
NUC		                                            Chioma	EZEMA	                                                 		




                       First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                          17
                                                 Annex B
                                       Opening	Ceremony	Agenda	
                            First	Regional	Benchmarking	Capacity	Workshop	
                                              14	-16	June,	2016	
                                                       	
8:00	am	–	8:45	am	     	   Arrival	and	Registration	of	Participants	
8:45	am	–	8:50	am	     	   Arrival	of	Special	Guests	
8:50	am	–	9:00	am	         Arrival	 of	 Honourable	 Minister	 of	 Education,	 Malam	 Adamu	 Adamu,	 Minister	 of	
                           Science	 and	 Technology,	 Dr.	 Ogbonnaya	 Onu	 and	 Minister	 of	 Labour	 and	
                           Employment,	Sen.	(Dr.)	Chris	Nwabueze	Ngige,	OON		
9:00	am	–	9:05	am	     	   National	Anthem/	Introduction	of	Guest	
9:05	am	–	9:15	am	         Remarks	by	Sajitha	Bashir,	Practice	manager,	World	Bank	
9:15	am	–	9:25	am	         Welcome	Address	by	the	Executive	Secretary,	NUC,	Professor	Julius	A.	Okojie,	OON	
9:25	am	–	9:35	am	         Remarks	 by	 Prof.	 Aminata	 Sall	 Diallo,	 Chair,	 PASET	 Technical	 Executive	 Committee;	
                           Advisor	to	the	Minister	of	Higher	Education	and	Research,	Government	of	Senegal	
9:35	am	–	9:45	am	         Remarks	by	Prof.	Jonathan	Mba,	Director,	Research	&	Academic	Planning,	Association	
                           of	African	Universities	(representing	the	Secretary	General,	AAU)	
9:45	am	–	9:55	am	         Goodwill	message	by	Mr	Aminou	Akadiri,	Executive	Director	for	Federation	of	West	
                           African	Chamber	of	Commerce	and	Industry	(FEWACCI)	
9:55	am	–	10:05	am	        Remarks	by	Ms.	Yeonhee	Gu,	Director,	Ministry	of	Education,	Korea	
10:05	am	–	10:15	am	       Remarks	by	Rachid	Benmessaoud,	Country	Director,	World	Bank	
10:15	am	–	10:25	am	       Goodwill	message	by	the	Minister	of	Labour	and	Employment,	 Sen.	                                (Dr.)	    Chris	
                           Nwabueze	Ngige,	OON	
10:25	am	–	10:35	am	       Goodwill	message	by	the	Minister	of	Science	and	Technology,	Dr.	Ogbonnaya	Onu	
10:35	am	–	10:45	am	       Address	by	the	Honourable	Minister	of	Education,	Mallam	Adamu	Adamu	and	Formal	
                           Opening	of	the	Workshop	
	
	




                                              First PASET Regional Benchmarking Capacity Building Workshop, 14 – 16 June, 2016
                                                                                                                                 18
                                                      Annex C:
                                            Technical Proceedings Agenda
    	
                                                                                                                             	
                                                                                                                             	
                                                                                                                             	
                                                                                                                             	
                                                                                                                             	
                                                                                                                         	
    	
                        First	PASET	Regional	Benchmarking	Capacity	Building	Workshop	
                                               14-16	June,	2016	
                                        Barcelona	Hotel,	Abuja	-Nigeria	

                                       DAY	1:	Tuesday,	June	14th	,	2016	
                        Venue:	The	Grand	Ballroom,	Barcelona	Hotel,	Abuja,	Nigeria	
                                       MC:	Dr	Ekua	Bentil,	World	Bank	
07:30	–	09:00	 Registration	
                             Opening	Ceremony:	Welcome	and	Introductions		
                           Chair:	Dr	Sajitha	Bashir,	Practice	manager,	World	Bank	
09:00	–	10:15	 Welcome	&	Opening	Remarks	
	
                    •       MC	
                            -     Mr	 Ibrahim	 Yakasai,	 Director	 of	 Information	 &	 Public	 Relations,	 National	 Universities	
                                  Commission	(NUC),	Nigeria	
                Hon.	Adamu	Adamu,	Minister	of	Education,	Federal	Ministry	of	Education,	Nigeria,	will	officially	open	
                the	workshop.	
                Please	refer	to	the	Opening	Ceremony	booklet	for	the	detailed	program				
                            	
10:15	–	10:30	 Coffee	Break	
                                        Presentation	of	Main	Benchmarking	Results	
                                   Chair:	Dr	Sajitha	Bashir,	Practice	Manager,	World	Bank	
10:30	–	12:00	 	Plenary	Discussion		
                    •       Presenter	
                        -      Dr	Ying	Cheng,	Benchmarking	expert,	Shanghai	Jiao	Tong	University,	
                	
12:00	–	13:15	 Lunch		
                            Labor	Market	Surveys	and		University	–	Industry	Linkages	
                         Chair:	Shobhana	Sosale,	Senior	Education	Specialist,	World	Bank	
13:15		-	15:15	 Panel	Discussions:	What	role	do	labor	market	surveys	play	in	improving	the	quality	and	relevance	of	
                higher	education	institutions?	What	best	practices	can	both	industry	and	university	leaders	employ	to	
                improve	 university-industry	 linkages?	 What	 are	 the	 key	 barriers	 to	 strengthening	 university-industry	
                relationships	in	SSA	and	how	do	we	remove	them?		
                             	
                    • Moderator	
                       - Dr	Sajitha	Bashir,	Practice	Manager,	World	Bank.	
                           	
                    • Panelists		

                                                                                                                             19
                         Professor	So	Young	Kim,	Head	of	Graduate	School	of	Science	and	Technology,	Korea	Advanced	
                         -
                         Institute	of	Science	and	Technology	(KAIST)		
                       - Professor	Brice	A.	Sinsin,	Rector,	University	of	Abomey-Calavi	
                       - Mr	Abou	Kouabenan.		Director	Human	Resources,	Chamber	of	Commerce,	Ivory	Coast	
                       - Mr	Stanley	Muoneke,	Business	Development	Director	(Public	Sector/Education	),	West	Africa,	
                         Intel		
                       - Mr	Vincent	Nnadi,	Executive	General	Manager	(Corporate	Social	Responsibility	&	Medical	
                         Services),	Total	E&P,	Nigeria	
                         	
                     • Comment	on	the	Korean	Experience	
                       - Professor	So	Young	Kim,	Head	of	Graduate	School	of	Science	and	Technology,	Korea	
                         Advanced	Institute	of	Science	and	Technology	(KAIST)	
                       	
15:00	–	15:15	 Coffee	Break	(incorporated	into	previous	session)	
                                  Understanding	and	Applying	the	Results									
15:15	–	16:45	 Group	Work	1:	How	does	your	institution	perform	compared	to	the	benchmarked	universities?	What	
	                can	you	identify	as	the	main	determinants	of	your	results?	(Form	country	groups)	
                     • Facilitator	
                       - Dr	Jamil	Salmi,	Higher	Education	expert,	World	Bank	
                 	
                                   Understanding	and	Applying	the	Results:	Talent	Development	
16:45	–	18:15	   Group	 Work	 2:	 What	 do	 you	 need	 to	 change	 to	 improve	 talent	 development	 and	 retention	 in	 your	
	                institution?	How	do	you	take	inclusion/equity	dimensions	into	consideration?	(Form	country	groups)	
	                    • Facilitator	
	                        - Dr	Jamil	Salmi,	Higher	Education	expert,	World	Bank	
	
	
	                Break	
19:00	           Welcome	Dinner	Reception	
  	
                                       DAY	2:	Wednesday,	June	15th	,	2016	
                          Venue:	The	Grand	Ballroom,	Barcelona	Hotel,	Abuja,	Nigeria	
                                         MC:	Dr	Ekua	Bentil,	World	Bank	
                               Understanding	and	Applying	the	Results	:	Financing	
08:45	–	10:15	 Group	Work	3:   	 What	do	you	need	to	change	to	improve	resource	mobilization	and	allocation	in	your	
	              institution?	(Form	country	groups)	
	                  • Facilitator	
	                      - Dr	Jamil	Salmi,	Higher	Education	expert,	World	Bank	
	
10:15	–	10:30	 Coffee	Break	
	                  Understanding	and	Applying	the	Results	:Governance	
10:30	–	12:00	 Group	Work	4:	What	do	you	need	to	change	in	the	governance	set	up	and	management	practices	
	              in	your	institution?	(Form	country	groups)	
                     •    Facilitator	
                         - Dr	Jamil	Salmi,	Higher	Education	expert,	World	Bank	
12:00	–	13:30	 Lunch	
                           Understanding	and	Applying	the	Results	:	Policy	Making	
               Chair:	Dr	Olatunde	Adetoyese	Adekola,	Senior	Education	Specialist,	World	Bank	
13:30	–	15:00	 Panel	Discussion:	What	are	the	Policy	Implications	of	these	results	at	the	National	Level?	
                     •       Moderator	

                                                                                                                       20
                        -Dr	Jamil	Salmi,	World	Bank	(Higher	Education	expert)	
                       	
                    • Panelists		
                      - Prof.	Aminata	Diallo,	Chair,	PASET	Technical	Executive	Committee;	Advisor	to	the	Minister	of	
                         Higher	Education	and	Research,	Government	of	Senegal		
                      - Prof.	David	K.	Some,	Secretary/CEO,	Commission	for	University	Education,	Kenya		
                      - Dr	Florence	Nakayiwa,	Director,	Planning	and	Development,	Makerere	University,	Uganda		
                      - Prof.	Tayekyoon	Kim,	Professor	at	the	Graduate	School	of	International	Studies,	Seoul	
                         National	University,	Korea	
                      - Dr	Yeonhee	Gu,	Director,	Ministry	of	Education,	Korea	
                            	
15:00-	15:15	   Presentation:		Outcome	of	Rwanda’s	National	Higher	Education	Benchmarking	Workshop	(resolutions	
                and	policy	implication)	
                    • Presenter	
                      - 	Dr	Baguma	Abdallah,	Ag.	Director	of	Academic	Quality,	Higher	Education	Council,	Rwanda	
                           	
                                          Data	Collection	&	Choice	of	Indicators		
15:15	–	16:30	 Group	Work	5:	What	difficulties	did	you	encounter	and	how	did	you	deal	with	them?	Any	feedback	on	
                modifications,	additions	or	deletions	to	the	list	of	indicators	in	the	current	methodology?	(Form	mixed	
                country	groups)	
                   • Facilitator	
                        - Dr	Jamil	Salmi,	Higher	Education	Expert,	World	Bank		
                        - Dr	Ying	Cheng,	Benchmarking	Expert,	Shanghai	Jiao	Tong	University	
                           	
16:15	–	16:30	 Coffee	Break	(incorporated	into	previous	session)	
                                      Management	Information	Systems	
                 Chair:		 Prof.	Jonathan	Mba,	Director,	Research	&	Academic	Planning,	AAU	
16:30	–	18:00	 Panel	Discussion:	Good	Practices	in	Developing	and	Implementing	Management	Information	Systems.	
                What	are	best	practices	in	MIS	systems	and	what	challenges	do	countries	face	in	implementing	such	
                systems?	
                    • Moderator	
                       - Prof.	David	Some,	Secretary/CEO,	Commission	for	University	Education,	Kenya	
                                	
                    •       Presentation	
                            - 	Mrs.	Kalyani	Putty-Rogbeer,	Quality	Assurance	and	Accreditation	Officer,	Tertiary	Education	
                                Commission,	Mauritius		
                                	
                    •       Panelists		
                            - Mrs.	Kalyani	Putty-Rogbeer,	Quality	Assurance	and	Accreditation	Officer,	Tertiary	Education	
                               Commission,	Mauritius		
                            - Professor	So	Young	Kim,	Head	of	Graduate	School	of	Science	and	Technology,	Korea		
                               Advanced	Institute	of	Science	and	Technology	(KAIST).	
                            - Dr	Ying	Cheng,	Shanghai	Jiao	Tong	University,	Benchmarking	expert		
                            - Dr	Noel	Saliu,	Director,	Quality	Assurance	National	Universities	Commission,	Nigeria	
                            - Dr	Abdourazackou	Sanoussi,	International	Institute	of	Water	and	Environmental	Engineering	
                               (2iE),	Burkina	Faso	
18:30	          Dinner	




                                                                                                                    21
                                 DAY	3:	Thursday,	June	16th	,	2016	
                     Venue:	The	Grand	Ballroom,	Barcelona	Hotel,	Abuja,	Nigeria	
                                  MC:	Dr	Ekua	Bentil,	World	Bank	
                                   Student	Engagement	Surveys	
08:45	–	10:15	   Group	Work	6:	What	did	you	learn	from	the	results	of	the	student	survey?	How	can	you	apply	
                 these	results	to	improving	your	teaching	and	learning	strategy?	(Form	country	groups)	
                     • Facilitator	
                        - Dr	Jamil	Salmi,	Higher	Education	Expert,	World	Bank	
                        - Dr	Manja	Klemencic,	Higher	Education	Expert,	Harvard/Cambridge	University	
                        	
10:15	–	10:30	   Coffee	Break	
10:30	–	12:00	   Group	Work	7:	Understanding	and	Applying	the	Results	of	the	Student	Survey	to	Improve	
                 Teaching	and	Learning.	(Form	country	groups)	
                    • Facilitator	
                       - Dr	Manja	Klemencic,	Higher	Education	Expert,	Harvard/Cambridge	University	
                                               Closing	Session	
12:00	–	13:00	   Main	 Conclusions	 and	 Next	 Steps	 (2-3	 years	 timeline	 including	 discussions	 on	 the	 regional	
                 benchmarking	center	under	development,	next	benchmarking	exercise)		
                    • Facilitator	
                       - Dr	Ekua	Bentil,	Senior	Education	Specialist,	World	Bank	
                       - Dr	Jamil	Salmi,	Higher	Education	Expert	World	Bank		
                           	
13:00	–	13:15	   Closing	Remarks	–	Dr	Noel	Saliu,	Director,	Quality	Assurance	National	Universities	Commission	
13:15	–	14:30	   Lunch	
	                Departure	
   	




                                                                                                                22
Annex D
Pictures




           23
24
