     Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
     Field Review of Case Study –Tanzania                                 i



UNLOCKING THE POTENTIAL OF INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY TO
               IMPROVE WATER AND SANITATION SERVICES



                                       TANZANIA CASE STUDY




                                                 By

                             Mouhamed Fadel Ndaw and Kristoffer Welsien

                                            November 2015
PREFACE

This report has been prepared for the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) Study on “Unlocking
the Potential of ICT Services in the Water and Sanitation Sector”. The study builds on and
complements the World Banks’ Africa Regional Strategy (2011) and the World Bank Group’s
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) strategy (2012). It further complements the E-
Transform Africa series, a collaboration between the African Development Bank, the World Bank
and the African Union, which captures the existing use of ICT in six sectors (agriculture, climate
change, education, health, financial services, government) and two cross-cutting themes (regional
trade and integration, ICT competitiveness).


WSP has spearheaded the use of ICT in many countries in particular with its contribution in
financing the use of the mWater pilot platform in countries such as Senegal, Mali, Niger and Benin,
Akvo Flow and Fulcrum in Liberia and Sierra Leone and Maji Voice in Kenya. As many sector
stakeholders are interested to learn from these pilot interventions, it is necessary to improve the
documentation on these experiences and propose practical modalities for scale-up.
There is also a very strong drive around the use of ICT in the WASH sector and a growing interest
among external partners. As such, there is a need to develop clearer partnership platforms with
both short- (i.e. project specific) and medium-term objectives, to understand the potential
information that can be generated through ICT, increase accessibility to and use of that information,
and ensure that ICT generated information is implemented more sustainably in support of WASH
objectives.
The study was carried out by the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) of the World Bank to fill a
gap in understanding how the potential of ICT can improve water and sanitation services globally
with a particular emphasis in Africa. It covers a global desk review and case studies in 7 African
countries (Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Senegal, Benin, Niger and Liberia), complemented by cases
from other regions (Latin America, North America, South Asia and East Asia) and analyses strengths
and weaknesses of existing ICT tools. It also provides evidence on how ICT can be used to leapfrog
the water and sanitation sector towards more sustainable service delivery.

As such, this study sought to not only document experiences of ICT use in the WASH sector but also
analyze them within a framework of enabling factors and barriers in terms of Vision, Process,
Customer/User, Service Delivery, Human Capacity, Governance and Finance.
Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
Field Review of Case Study –Tanzania                                                                                                              iii




TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.          INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................... 1
2.          LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS ...................................................................................................... 2
            2.1         Regulatory and Operating Environment .................................................................... 2
                     2.1.1       ICT policy........................................................................................... 3
                     2.1.2       ICT use in the WASH sector ............................................................. 3
            2.2         Selected ICT4WASH Applications in Tanzania ........................................................ 3
                     2.2.1       ICT in DAWASCO ............................................................................. 3
                     2.2.2 Management Information System for the Ministry of Water and
                     Irrigation .......................................................................................................... 5
3.          Case Study: MWATER ......................................................................................................... 8
            3.1         Description Of The mWater Platform ........................................................................ 8
                     3.1.1       Vision ................................................................................................. 8
                     3.1.2       Process............................................................................................ 10
                     3.1.3       Customers/Users ............................................................................. 12
                     3.1.4       Human Capacity .............................................................................. 12
                     3.1.5       Finance ............................................................................................ 12
            3.2         Data Analysis and Findings..................................................................................... 14
            3.3         Discussion ............................................................................................................... 16
                     3.3.1       Trends in the WASH indicators captured by the ICT tool ............... 16
                     3.3.2       Trends in the use and operation of the ICT application itself .......... 16
                     3.3.3       Gaps in data coverage .................................................................... 16
            3.4         Opportunities and Challenges ................................................................................. 17
4.          CONCLUSION ..................................................................................................................... 19
ANNEX A: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED .................................................................... 20
ANNEX B: PICTORIAL OF FIELD MISSION ................................................................................... 21
References .................................................................................................................................. Ref-1


List of Tables:
Table 1: Impact assessment of the Majidata tool using the Impact chain analysis .......................... 14

List of Figures:
Figure 1: Institutional Framework of the Water Sector in Tanzania ................................................... 2
Figure 2: On-spot billing and printing hardware .................................................................................. 5
Figure 3: Sample data collection on the mWater mobile phone application ....................................... 9
ACRONYMS
DAWASCO    Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Corporation
EWURA      Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory Authority
GoT        Government of Tanzania
ICT        Information and Communication Technology
LGA        Local Government Authority
LVBWO      Lake Victoria Basin Water Office
MOW        Ministry of Water (formerly Ministry of Water and Irrigation)
MWAUWASA   Mwanza Urban Water and Sewerage Authority
MCC        Mwanza City Council
MIS        Management Information System
O&M        Operation and Maintenance
TBS        Tanzania Bureau of Standards
WASH       Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WPM        Water Point Mapping
WQ         Water Quality
WSDP       Water Sector Development Program
USAID      United States Agency for International Development
Unlocking the Potential of ICT
Field Review of Case Studies – Tanzania                                                                 1




1. INTRODUCTION
The WASH sector in Tanzania faces various challenges including but not limited to inadequate
governance and management of water resources, inadequate regulatory structures to manage and
monitor ground water development, degradation of water sources and catchments and low levels of
public participation in water sector plans and developments. The National Water Policy of 2002
proposed the use of technical, economic, administrative, legal, regulatory and participatory
instruments to implement its policy objectives. This provided an opportunity for the use of ICT tools
that support operation of systems, integration of data and dissemination of information. The National
Water Policy has however not been fully operationalised, and therefore has not created the necessary
environment to stimulate the use of ICT in the sector. The development and implementation of ICT
tools and applications in the WASH sector has consequently been left in the hands of the individual
stakeholders, with no strategic direction or coordinated effort. For example, in Dar es Salaam, the
urban water subsector through DAWASCO has developed various tools to support its business
processes and the rural water subsector through the Ministry of Water has developed ICT
applications to collect data in quality and quantity of water points.

There is potential to improve the process of data collection and the use and dissemination of
information through mobile technologies that are affordable and user-friendly. This has been
evidenced by the growth of ICT mobile applications in other sectors, including the finance sector. In
the WASH sector, various ICT applications have been developed to support different functions such
as data collection, monitoring of water points, and improvement of communication between service
providers and communities. Furthermore the promotion of ICT is high on the agenda of the
Government of Tanzania, as evidenced by the focus on their planned e-government project, an
initiative that intends to use ICT to integrate data and promote inter-governmental coordination and
data sharing. In addition to providing the ICT tools needed to store and manage data, the e-
government initiative plans to provide a central direction for the application of ICT within the different
Ministries, Departments and Agencies.

This report presents findings of a field study in Tanzania that took place in September 2014. The first
section offers a landscape analysis, looking at the regulatory and operating environment, existing
ICT use in the WASH sector, the current state of ICT policy and then a more detailed look at ICT
applications currently in use in the Tanzanian WASH sector. The second section then looks
specifically at the case of the mWater application. As part of each country case study one to two ICT
initiatives were examined in detail using the dual framework analysis introduced and described in the
Analytical Report1.This allowed for an increased in-depth assessment of the barriers and enabling
factors of success faced by ICTs currently in play in the African WASH sector and supported the
highlighting of key principles upon which successful sustainability and scalability models can be
constructed. This case study report was prepared based on mWater reports and on interviews and
focus group discussions carried out among implementers and project participants in Mwanza. The
stakeholders that were consulted during the preparation of this report are presented in Annex A.




1
 All referenced study reports can be found on the Unlocking ICT Potential site in the Resources Folder.
Submitted Reports - Study on Unlocking ICT Potential
   2. LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS
   2.1 Regulatory and Operating Environment
   The responsibility for provision of water and sanitation in Tanzania lies with the Ministry of Water
   (formerly Ministry of Water and Irrigation). There are however several ministries and government
   departments that share the mandate for the provision of safe water and sanitation. Rural water
   services in the country are provided by the Local Government Authorities while urban water services
   are provided by regional water supply service authorities. The Ministry of Water exercises its mandate
   through a 20-year Water Sector Development Program (WSDP) that focuses on Water Resources
   Management; Rural Water Supply and Sanitation; Urban Water Supply and Sanitation and
   Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building. The different stakeholders in the provision of water
   and sanitation services implement their mandates through the WSDP. For example the Ministry of
   Health is responsible for the protection of public health through provision of adequate sanitation and
   hygiene education, while the Local Government Authorities (LGAs) are the accounting authorities,
   responsible for provision of licences for operation and maintenance of water, sanitation and
   stormwater drainage.

   Figure 1: Institutional Framework of the Water Sector in Tanzania (Source: MOWI, 2006)



                                                                                                      Minister
                                                                                                                               Energy and Water
    Ministry responsible for                   Prime Minister’s Office- regional
                                                                                                                               Utilities Regulatory
             health                          Administration and Local Government               Ministry responsible for
                                                                                                                                     Authority
                                                                                                        Water




                                                          Regional Secretariats




                                                                                                                   Water Supply and
                                      Municipal Councils                   District Councils                     Sewerage Authorities
                                                                                                                    (inc. Dawasa)

                                                                                   Village
                                                                                  Councils

Legend
Legend                                                                                                                         Service Providers
                                                                                                                          (public, private, NGOs CBOs
                   Decentralised
                   Decentralised Responsibility
                                 Responsibility
                                                                                                                                      WCAs)
                                                                             Community
                   Representation
                   Representation                                           Owned Water
                   Service
                   Service Responsibility
                           Responsibility                                      Supply
                                                                            Organisations
                   Regulation and
                   Regulation and Monitoring
                                  Monitoring

                   Technical Guidance
                   Technical          and Co-ordination
                             Guidance and Co-ordination

                   Support, Supervision
                   Support,             and Monitoring
                            Supervision and Monitoring

                   Performance
                   Performance Contracts
                               Contracts                                   Service Providers
                                                                            (private, NGO’s                         CONSUMERS
                   Statutory/ Autonomous
                   Statutory/ Autonomous Bodies
                                         Bodies
                                                                             CBOs, WCAs)




   Regulation of the water sector is implemented by the Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory Authority
   (EWURA), an autonomous regulatory authority created by the Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory
   Authority Act (2001) and responsible for regulation of the electricity, petroleum, natural gas and water
   sectors in the country. The regulatory functions of EWURA include, licensing, tariff review, monitoring
Unlocking the Potential of ICT
Field Review of Case Studies – Tanzania                                                              3



performance and standards, and consumer protection including small towns and low income, and
disadvantaged consumers (EWURA, 2014). In addition to the EWURA Act (2001), the sector is
governed by the Water Resources Management Act (2009), the National Water Policy of 2002 the
Water Supply and Sanitation Act (2001), and the Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Act (2001).

2.1.1   ICT policy
ICT development and implementation in Tanzania is driven by the National ICT policy of 2003. This
policy provides a national framework intended to create an enabling environment for ICT to contribute
to the economic development of the country (GoT, 2003). According to the Head of ICT in the Ministry
of Water, this policy, which was never fully operationalized, is considered outdated. The policy was
not accompanied by an implementation strategy and resulted in a lack of ownership and
accountability for its implementation (Panos, 2010). Furthermore, the policy was too general,
resulting in most institutions relying on circulars from the president’s office which are more specific
and provide better direction. As a result, planning and implementation of ICT interventions are carried
out by the different government departments or agencies according to their mandates and needs e.g.
the Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Corporation (DAWASCO) has recently drafted an IT policy
that aims to apply e-solutions to support the major business processes of the Corporation. The GoT
is also implementing an e-government strategy which intends to promote the coordinated
development and use of ICT in the government institutions.

2.1.2   ICT use in the WASH sector
The water sector in Tanzania faces several challenges including a lack of coordination among
stakeholders in service delivery, poor data and information management and low capacity to
implement the national policy (Eberhard & Kapika, 2013). In order to facilitate the operationalization
of the WSDP, the GoT through the Ministry of Water is instituting a Management Information System,
aimed at addressing financial and data management challenges of the implementing institutions. In
line with this, the following ICT applications are under development:
 An e-government system that aims at creating a database for management of the key business
     processes of financial management and procurement.
 A Water Point Mapping System to collect and monitor rural water points. This system is a web-
     based system that uses GIS technologies to collect and map the data on coverage, functionality,
     extraction type, quality, quantity, source type etc. This information is intended for investment
     planning and operational monitoring.


2.2 Selected ICT4WASH Applications in Tanzania
The water sector in East Africa has moved towards more advanced ICT facilitated data collection
due to technology advancement and reduced infrastructure costs. Several applications are now in
use in the sector to aid performance measurement, and improve business processes and governance
through availability of reliable information. This section discusses some of the applications in use in
Tanzania, focussing on Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Corporation (DAWASCO) and the
Ministry of Water.

2.2.1   ICT in DAWASCO
Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Corporation, the public utility company responsible for provision
of water and sewerage services in Dar es Salaam faces a number of challenges: low revenue
collection efficiency (only about 50,000 customers out of 130,000 pay their monthly water bills), water
theft and high non-revenue water (estimated at >50%) and water scarcity among others.

    a) Vision
The IT Department of DAWASCO is responsible for design and implementation of ICT solutions
aimed at increasing efficiency of the four main departments in the company i.e. Human Resources,
Operations, Commercial and Finance Departments. This includes customer services software, e-
payment, GIS and mapping and communication.

There are a number of ICT applications currently in use in DAWASCO, including those listed
below.

The IDAMS Customer and Water Utility Systems is software that is used by the Commercial
Department for customer service, customer validation, network asset management and Candidate
Daily Volumes (for meter validation). The software also provides customer details, bill processing
and printing.

e-payment: DAWASCO developed an e-payment system in collaboration with telecommunications
companies (MPesa, TiGo pesa) and banks to expand the DAWASCO points of sale and facilitate
easy and convenient payment of water bills. DAWASCO also sells scratch cards (small cards loaded
with a pre-paid volume of water) to vendors to pay at convenient locations.

The objective of the e-payment system was to increase revenue collection. This objective was
achieved and continues to improve: the number of paying customers increased from 27,000 to 50,000
per month, and 60% of the collections are made through the e-payment system.

MIS: DAWASCO is also developing an MIS that involves data collection of the water treatment plants
(water levels, maintenance levels). Where the key operational information is to be collected by plant
operators using Android phones and sent to a web application software.
Unlocking the Potential of ICT
Field Review of Case Studies – Tanzania                                                               5



Figure 2: On-spot billing and printing hardware




    b) Uptake and Lessons Learnt
DAWASCO has been actively implementing ICT systems into its business processes. Targeted
projects include meter reading, dataloggers, on-spot billing. Currently projects are being implemented
separately with no data integration. Potential areas for enhancing ICT implementation and use in
DAWASCO include:

       DAWASCO outsources various IT systems, usually at high commission costs e.g. the e-
        payment gateway system is outsourced at a high commission cost of 6%, the billing system
        and the call centre are also outsourced. Developing/procurement of in-house systems would
        reduce the commissions to between 2-3%, but would require training and capacity building
        in design and operation of the system.

       Convenient and easy to operate technologies are required to combat water theft, meter
        vandalism and improve billing efficiency. DAWASCO is planning a self-service meter reading
        project which will involve meter readings done by customers and communicated to
        DAWASCO. This project shall be implemented in partnership with the telecommunications
        companies to have points of sale where customers go to send the meter reading to
        DAWASCO.

However, financing limitations may hinder innovation. Limited budgets, and low budget utilization
could potentially retard the development of in-house IT solutions, a key enabler for sustainability. To
address these challenges would require advocacy for government policies to target and support use
of ICT in utilities. In addition, raising public awareness and obtaining management buy-in is needed
to improve the readiness of clients to use the technologies and of management to support further
development and investment in the technologies.

2.2.2   Management Information System for the Ministry of Water and Irrigation
The Ministry of Water and Irrigation is responsible for the development and monitoring of water
resources, and for coordinating activities in the water sector countrywide. The provision of rural water
supply, infrastructure, O&M, urban water supply (with specific Key Performance Indicators) is guided
by the Water Sector Development Plan (WSDP). Some of the challenges faced by the MOW in
executing its mandate are a lack of adequate data to guide the decisions on abstraction and
infrastructure development. This has resulted in over exploitation of both ground and surface water
resources, and in the over-design and under-design of infrastructure among others. The strategies
that have been adopted to address these challenges include establishment of baselines and
databases to strengthen the assessment and monitoring of water resources, and the promotion of
water users in data collection (MOWI, 2006).

       a) Vision
The ICT component of the WSDP aims to strengthen Management Information Systems to support
program management, financial management and physical reporting in the sector.

       b) Process
The Management Information System (MIS) includes collection of data on water systems, stored on
a Geographical Information System. At the time of the field visit, in September 2014, the mapping
component was not fully operational due to challenges associated with resistance to new technology,
acquiring new shapefiles2, changing boundaries and inputs to the system. In addition, the system
had not been updated since the initial data collection that was carried out as part of an infrastructure
project. This had been attributed to lack of funds to acquire GPS equipment, unavailability of software
systems and disaggregated data collection (e.g. water point mapping data is held by the various
stakeholders operating in the respective areas and is not incorporated into a central database). The
solution to these challenges is a well-integrated system that is functional, avoids duplication and
ensures targeted and prioritized data collection efforts. There were plans to update the Water Point
Mapping (WPM) system, starting with Manyara region and then roll out the system to the rest of the
country. Requirements for upgrade include creation of an interface that links the different components
of the WSDP e.g. the WQ monitoring, the locations of the water point etc.

       c) Impact and Lessons Learnt
In DAWASCO, the GIS component has been used to capture customer data and this has resulted in
an increase in revenue from Tshs 600M to Tshs 1.9 Bill in 6 months. This is attributed to the
efficiencies gained through the availability of customer information for purposes of revenue and
arrears collection and the ability to locate customers and thus reduce meter reading time.

Lessons from the MIS that can be applied to the e-government strategy include the need for
standards and a change management process that requires that ICT applications are used, and that
generation of government reports through an ICT application becomes the norm.

There is also a need to ensure that the human resource and technical capacity is available for
implementation of the e-government strategy. The MOW implements regular capacity building
programs that target MOW staff and staff from the Local Governments. The training programs
however need to be holistic and include all stakeholders in the decision tree of water resource
planning and development e.g. training of councillors and highlighting the benefits of ICT could
potentially create an appreciation of ICT and facilitate budget approvals.

Potential also exists for the forming of partnerships in software development and in data collection
for the WPM or any other water sector GIS and mapping; with the potential to incorporate the
information held by the various actors in the sector e.g. CSOs, GIS information companies to provide
shapefiles, aerial photos, create a think tank for innovation etc.




2
    A geospatial vector format for storing data for Geographical Information Systems.
Unlocking the Potential of ICT
Field Review of Case Studies – Tanzania   7
3. CASE STUDY: MWATER
mWater is an ICT application intended to empower communities in Mwanza – Tanzania to make safe
water choices through provision of information on the quality of water sources.

The mandate for provision of water and sewerage services in Mwanza Town (Tanzania) lies with the
Mwanza Urban Water and Sewerage Authority (MWAUWASA), an autonomous public authority that
operates water and sewerage services for over 770,000 people in Mwanza City and other designated
areas including Kisesa Township. Water is supplied by a combination of service levels including
house connections, public standpipes and kiosks. Within the service area, point water sources also
exist to cater for the unmet demand by MWAUWASA. According to MWAUWASA (2011) some of the
challenges faced by the water authority are:

   Low level of access to direct (piped) water supply, reported at 59%.
   Environmental pollution due to unplanned human settlements and increasing economic
    activities along the lakeshores and water catchments.
   Inadequate customer and public awareness of water and sewerage services.
   Unfavourable Quality Management Systems and Management Information system.


3.1 Description Of The mWater Platform
3.1.1   Vision
mWater is a smartphone application that was developed to serve a dual function: to update the
functionality status of water points and to monitor the water quality of the water point. The application
was piloted in Mwanza town in Tanzania. The choice for an ICT solution arose from the need to
complement the laboratory services offered by the MWAUWASA with a field testing solution to
monitor water points in areas beyond the coverage of the piped water network.

The lack of adequate sanitation in squatter areas on the hillsides of Mwanza city had been identified
as a challenge faced by the Mwanza City Council (MCC). The initial objective of the mWater project
was to support Mwanza City in improving sanitation through construction of a sewerage system that
would improve household sanitation and contribute to environmental protection of the Lake Victoria.
To supplement this objective, the mWater project then introduced the component of water quality
monitoring to measure the pollution of public wells in areas that were outside the piped water network.
The mWater project also aimed to create water quality awareness and behaviour change among the
communities through data collection and information sharing. Water quality test kits were procured
and distributed among the project participants who were then charged with testing the quality of their
community water point. The mWater test kit performs microbiological tests for both E.coli and Total
Coliform, tests for the presence of Chlorine (primarily for tap water), and tests for Nitrate and Nitrite
compounds (for surface water sources such as springs and dug wells). The water quality laboratory
of MWAUWASA performs additional tests on standard parameters such as conductivity, pH and Mg
levels. The project approach was to use a mobile application to record and send the information from
the field to the mWater project office. A mobile technology (to be used on smartphones) was chosen
because of the already high uptake of mobile phones in Mwanza.
Unlocking the Potential of ICT
Field Review of Case Studies – Tanzania                                                                 9



 Figure 3: Sample data collection on the mWater mobile phone application




The project has had a wide range of impacts:

i.   The project has triggered behavioural change among the communities. The project activities
     included explanation of the water quality tests and sample results and this has facilitated interest
     in water quality and the changes that are required to either improve the results or to safeguard
     against disease. The Mwanza City Council reported that communities that have monitored the
     quality of their water points (mainly the springs, boreholes and dug wells that are used as
     alternative sources) have triggered the implementation of health education programs.
ii. The project has also served as a stakeholder coordination unit. During the process of project
     implementation, other stakeholders and users of alternative sources (outside of MWAUWASA
     operational area) were incorporated and encouraged to monitor their water sources.
iii. The mWater project has been a catalyst to getting MCC to carry out inspections. Previous
     practice of MCC was limited to inspection of the sources, with no quantifiable outputs. The
     mWater project has enabled data collection and production of information and quantified water
     quality test.
iv. The use of a mobile technology solution has facilitated faster and real time testing of water quality.
v.   The project has also produced information that has influenced decision-making within the MCC.
     For example information taken from mWater was used to influence the decision to provide
     disinfection (in the form of Waterguard®) to a community whose water source was found to be
     contaminated with e-coli. In addition, following this information, the MCC had the basis for an
     application for funding for the design of an information and education campaign on disinfection
     of drinking water.

3.1.2    Process
The project was initiated by the Development Innovation Ventures Program with funding from USAID,
following the recommendations of a baseline study that was carried out by UN Habitat in collaboration
with MWAUWASA and MCC in 2012.

The baseline study found that due to the limited coverage of the piped water network, most
households depended on about three water sources. The project believed that community
preferences, affordability constraints and cultural practices were also contributors to the continued
use of unsafe sources. mWater thereafter approached MWAUWASA and MCC with a project to
stimulate behaviour change (towards safe water) through information on water quality. Other
activities covered during the baseline study included the collection of basic information such as
distance to water point, safety of water point; identification of the potential stakeholders and
beneficiaries; identification of the project participants; and stakeholder consultations on project
expectations.

The project development process was also expanded to include the operations of MWAUWASA and
MCC in a bid to solicit buy-in into the project to try to expand the applicability and use of the data.

The key stakeholders and their roles in the project include:

    Development Innovation Ventures Program: responsible for developing the application and
     implementing the mWater project.
    Mwanza Urban Water and Sewerage Authority: the water and sewerage services utility, whose
     interest was in monitoring the water quality along its distribution lines. MWAUWASA was
     involved as a user, and participated in sampling and testing along the piped network. A mobile
     phone and the app were provided to the water quality technician in MWAUWASA. The results of
     the data collection were entered into mWater through the app.
     The IT Department of MWAUWASA also provided additional support to the project in the form of
     customization of the survey questions; technical support to the stakeholders; technical advice
     with respect to storage of equipment, guidelines for storage and transportation of the samples
     and testing conditions. The authority also saw the potential to leverage the project activities and
     use mWater to collect GIS and water quality information for their database.
    Mwanza City Council: the local authority, responsible for sanitation and environmental health.
     Participation by the MCC involved a selection of staff that were working in the 2 wards (about 6
     staff plus 1 from the head office). These were involved in the mWater project from the inception
     stage and received training prior to the sampling and roll-out of the project.                   The
     institutionalization process which involves incorporating budget requirements is still a work in
     progress and will depend on design of the next phase of the project.
    Lake Victoria Basin Water Office: which monitors the water quality of MWAUWASA and whose
     purpose was to alert the population to the quality of their water source and make
     recommendations towards increased access to safe drinking water.
    Ministry of Water: mWater received coordination and information from the Ministry of Water
     (MOW). The MOW through its MIS project intends to create a database that will include
     information on location and quality of water points. This is important for the long-term applicability
     of the project outputs.
  Unlocking the Potential of ICT
  Field Review of Case Studies – Tanzania                                                                 11



  The project activities commenced in July 2013 in line with the following design process:

 i.    Software design: the design of the application was done by the mWater project office in the USA.
ii.    Testing and Upgrades: the beta-testing phase involved various upgrades and customizations as
       summarised below:
         In order to allow for data collection in areas that are outside the service coverage of the
           telecommunications network, the application was upgraded to include an offline function that
           allowed for temporary data storage on the mobile phone after collection that would then be
           uploaded once an internet connection was available.
         The survey was translated into Swahili to expand its applicability and ease of use.
         The application was upgraded:
                 to allow for inspection of the condition and functionality of the water sources.
                 to incorporate provisions for privacy of the data collected
                 to enhance data sharing among users.
                 to enable access from various platforms i.e. smartphones, tablets, android etc.
                 to facilitate addition of new fields to the survey without having to rewrite the
                   application.
                 to enable online (background) upgrading of the application.
                 to collect data at the post chlorination tanks.
iii.   Deployment/Roll-out: The implementation process involved the appointment of a stakeholder
       committee that was charged with measuring the quality of the water points close to their homes
       and workplaces.

  The roll-out has been considered successful, as evidenced by the plans to roll-out the initiative to
  Rwanda. This success is attributed to the use of a user-friendly technology and to the already high
  up-take of mobile technologies in the project area. In addition, the mWater test kit is user-friendly,
  providing instant information with ease in addition to providing tests for major water quality
  parameters such as e-coli, total coliforms, residual chlorine, nitrate and nitrite, and therefore able to
  provide significant information on the quality of the drinking water.

  Despite the successes in implementation there have also been some challenges faced:

      The accountability and reporting of the field testing is still weak. Not all parameters that are
       required by the survey are tested and reported. Moreover, the survey does not cover all the
       mandatory tests done by MWAUWASA. This poses a potential challenge to the long-term
       application and institutionalisation of the testing process in MWAUWASA beyond the life of the
       project.
      The equipment, software and data collected belong to mWater project, which is also responsible
       for the data storage and security. There is no structure for sharing or for integrating the data
       collected through mWater with MWAUWASA or MCC. There is also no plan yet to incorporate
       the financial implication of continued use of mWater into the annual budgets of the institutions.
      There is also still room for improvement of the application to facilitate multi-sectoral collaboration
       between the MCC & MWAUWASA, to promote the sharing of information and to simplify
       interpretation of the results, especially among the local communities.

  In spite of the challenges, the MCC and MWAUWASA are positive about the potential to scale-up
  mWater. The institutional structures already exist to increase coverage of the application to unserved
  areas and to expand its use to other sectors e.g. the MCC is also involved in other primary health
  care activities like immunization, family planning, and could benefit from an ICT solution in the
  generation and dissemination of health information. In addition, MWAUWASA have identified the
potential to apply the GIS function of the tool to expedite meter reading and to identify pipe leakages
and theft.

3.1.3   Customers/Users
The original intention of the project was to use the communities to participate in the data collection.
This approach was not successful due to mobilisation and capacity challenges among the
communities. The project then decided to use the existing institutions to perform the water quality
tests and operate the application. The users of the tool are the project committee comprised of
technicians from MWAUWASA, officials from the MCC and LVBWO and select members of the local
communities. The project provided the users with the water testing toolkit, mobile handsets and the
application required to collect the data. The users underwent training in the use of the application.
The IT Department of MWAUWASA also provided training and support in customization of the data
collection forms. This approach has been successful, as seen by the continued participation of the
institutions, and the project committee members that were trained at project inception.

According to DIV (2013), the population of the project area is 88,469 (56,350 for Igoma and 32,119
for Mkolani). This includes the customers in the service area of MWAUWASA and those in areas
beyond the reach of the piped water network. The total customers of the mWater project are 45,000,
of which the mapped customers are 30,000. The mWater application is used in both rural and urban
water systems. Feedback on the data collection and analysis process indicate that although the tool
has generally been well received by the community, their response to the WQ testing has been to
ask "what next?" .The project practice has been to explain the test results to the communities,
explaining the colour changes that indicate the presence or absence of microbial contamination and
the health implications of the test results. There is need to define roles and responsibilities for
remedial action on the findings of the water quality tests.

3.1.4   Human Capacity
The project participants (the users) were trained on the use of water test kits, and on use of the
application. The ICT Department in MWAUWASA provided technical support to the mWater users.

The project has also resulted in an improvement in capacity in the communities. Members of the
communities and village leaders were trained to assist in conducting water tests and in updating
functionality status of water points. However there is a need for further awareness and behaviour
change programs. Although most of the communities have been made aware of the need to regularly
test the water point, and to respond according to the test results, some community members report
that they prefer the water from traditional water points, especially spring water which some feel tastes
better than the piped water, and are reluctant to change their use in response to the test results.

3.1.5   Finance
WASH activities in Tanzania are primarily financed through the institutions responsible for the WASH
components. Urban water supply and sewerage services, which are the responsibility of
MWAUWASA are financed through a combination of public finance and development assistance.
Rural water supply and sanitation services are provided by the local authority and are financed
through public finance. Public health education and hygiene are the responsibility of the local
authority and as such are also financed through public funds. Non-Governmental Organisations also
play a significant role in supporting the local authorities in financing and implementing WASH
activities.

The mWater project was financed by the United States Development Aid Agency through the
Development Innovation Ventures Program. The project financed all the stages of the project
development and implementation. Sustainability considerations require that either one or all
stakeholder institutions continue to operate and expand the project activities after project closure. In
Unlocking the Potential of ICT
Field Review of Case Studies – Tanzania                                                  13



discussions with the Ag Managing Director of MWAUWASA, it was reported that MWAUWASA does
have plans to incorporate the mWater monitoring activities into its annual operating budget.
                                                                                                                              Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
14                                                                                                                    Field Review of Case Study – Tanzania



3.2 Data Analysis and Findings
The table below assesses various aspects of the development, implementation and application of the mWater tool. The ICT impact chain developed by
Gigler (2011) is used to assess the social and human impact of the ICT intervention. This involves an assessment of the information and communication
options that have been made available, and the ability of the communities to use these opportunities to improve the quality of their lives.

Table 1: Impact assessment of the mWater tool using the Impact chain analysis (Gigler, 2011)

            Condition                     Dimension                                                   Assessment
       Information Needs              Information needs        Information need, as evaluated during the baseline study revealed the need for water
      (existing information          Communication needs       quality information to influence the choice of safe water sources among the communities.
            ecologies)              Communication channels
                                                               The responsibility for provision of water, sanitation and public health services is held by
                                       Information gaps
                                                               different stakeholders (MWAUWASA, MCC). The need to improve coordination and
                                                               communication between the service providers and the communities was identified.

         Access to ICTs               Access to electricity    Access to mobile phones in Mwanza is high, which favoured the development and use of
       (ICT Infrastructure)             Access to ICT          the mWater app. The use of the ICT was however hindered by the technical nature of the
                                         infrastructure        information required. While the communities were able to use mobile phones (and
                                      Geographic location      therefore the mWater app), they were not able to carry out the water quality tests and to
                                                               interpret the water quality parameters tested.

                                                               The geographical location of the project area was also an enabling factor. The project area
                                                               consisted of a mix of piped water supply and point water sources. In addition, the
                                                               communities behavioural practice of using multiple water sources, created the need for
                                                               water quality information on the point sources. The choice of an ICT solution was borne
                                                               out of the need for real-time, low resource information.
        Basic Use of ICTs               Literacy rates         The application has been put to meaningful use, as evidenced by the upgrades to allow
        (Simple ICT use)              Level of education       for interpretation to the local language; inspection of the water source; increase privacy of
                                     Socio-cultural context    the data; enabling access form various platforms such as smartphones, android; allowing
                                      Basic ICT training       for updating of information that was collected in the absence of an internet connection etc.
                                         Poverty rates         These upgrades were intended to enhance relevance and uptake of the tool.
                                      Connectivity costs
Unlocking the Potential of ICT
Field Review of Case Studies –Tanzania                                                                                                                           15



             Condition                         Dimension                                                    Assessment
                                                                    The financial and social sustainability of the ICT intervention is still not clear. Although the
                                                                    institutions (MWAUWASA and MCC) have been involved at all stages of the project design
                                                                    and implementation, there is still no evidence that they are able to continue the project
                                                                    activities without development assistance. Although there has been capacity development
                                                                    (as evidenced by the participation of staff of MWAUWASA and MCC in project activities),
                                                                    the institutions have not yet incorporated the costs of the data collection and analysis into
                                                                    their annual budgets.
 Meaningful use of the ICT tool           ICT Capacity building     The capacity of the community members to participate in the data collection was low. The
   (Level of use of the tool)               Local and relevant      technical nature of water quality testing (e.g. testing of physio-chemical and biological
                                                 content            parameters) meant that the community members were not equipped to perform the field
                                             Technical local        tests. The project participants therefore consisted of staff of the mWater project, of
                                              appropriation         MWAUWASA, MCC, LVBWO who were then charged with explaining the test results to
                                              Sustainability        the communities. The use of the information was impeded by a lack of remedial action on
                                                                    water sources that were found to be contaminated i.e. the communities expected the
                                                                    project or the government to provide an alternative safe source. Some communities
                                                                    however took remedial steps and applied for connection to the piped water network.

     Enhanced Information                    ICT Capabilities       There has been a multiplier effect created by the availability of information collected by
   Capability (multiplier effect)          Information literacy     mWater:
                                             Communication          The MCC has increased the level of inspection of water sources.
                                               Capabilities         The MCC has used the water quality information collected to design hygiene and public
                                                                    health awareness programs and to implement household treatment/ disinfection of
                                          Content Capabilities
                                                                    drinking water.
                                         Local technical & social   Communities that have polluted water sources have requested for connection to the piped
                                              appropriation         water system.
                                                                    There is potential to increase the functions of the application to enhance operational
                                                                    efficiency of MWAUWASA. The project is considering expansion of the functionality of the
                                                                    application to include meter reading and identification of pipe leakages.
                                                                            Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
  16                                                                Field Review of Case Study – Tanzania



  3.3 Discussion
  3.3.1   Trends in the WASH indicators captured by the ICT tool
  The mWater tool was developed with the major objective of creating behaviour change in WASH-
  related activities through data collection and information sharing. This was to be achieved by
  encouraging the communities in the project area to test and monitor the water quality of their water
  sources.

  mWater was intended to provide information on water quality and coverage of water points as key
  WASH indicators. However, because the application has primarily been in development/ pilot phase,
  its use has not been fully integrated into performance monitoring data of MWAUWASA. What is
  apparent from the field consultations is that the information has improved knowledge on quality of
  water sources but the corresponding practice has not yet been well established. The WPM
  component has not yet been fully explored and is anticipated to be included in the scaling up phase.

  There has been a mixed result with respect to change in behaviour within the communities. Although
  most of the communities are within the range of MWAUWASA's piped network, some are reluctant
  to change from use of the traditional sources as they believe that water from traditional water points,
  especially springs, tastes better and holds higher health benefits.

  On the other hand, some communities e.g. the Kanindo village in Igoma ward have responded to the
  mWater test results on their water source and are applying for the extension of a water kiosk. At an
  institutional level, the MCC has responded to the mWater monitoring program and are designing
  health education programs based on the water quality test results.

  3.3.2   Trends in the use and operation of the ICT application itself
  The inclusion of MWAUWASA and MCC in the project has ensured that the project data is widely
  used and increased the interoperability of the data collected. MWAUWASA is using the data to
  monitor the water quality along its pipe network while the MCC is using the data to design health
  education programs and water safety interventions.

  There is also potential to expand the use of the application. The mWater project carried out a mid-
  term evaluation to assess the application and the possibility of incorporating other functions such as
  meter reading.

  There are however still some challenges faced:

 i.    The project participants have faced challenges in understanding the features of the application:
       the interface is limited and has had to undergo a number of upgrades, which creates delays,
       especially when the project partners do not respond quickly to the changes. On the other hand,
       the project members have also found the use of technical terms in the application to be limiting.
       The project is combatting these challenges through constant training.
ii.    Use of the application requires that the mobile phones are loaded with airtime, which is
       sometimes not available. This causes delays and gaps in the data collection.
iii.   Unreliable power supply means that the batteries of the mobile phones sometimes go without
       charge, thus hindering data collection. The mobile phones have also been found to have a short
       charge-life which hinders field activities.

  3.3.3   Gaps in data coverage
  The mWater test kits collect data on microbiological parameters ( E.coli and Total Coliform), residual
  chlorine and Nitrate and Nitrite compounds. Expansion of the parameters tested would be beneficial
  for planning and management of water resources and for the creation of a complete database on
  water quality.
Unlocking the Potential of ICT
Field Review of Case Studies – Tanzania                                                                17



There would also be benefit in improving the testing kits to meet the national standards. The standard
microbial test recommended by the Tanzania Bureau of Standards (TBS) is to use the membrane
filtration or MPN. mWater could incorporate this standard method. Additional accessories such as a
special bag to keep the test kit in and an incubator to protect the samples from changes in
temperature could be provided. The project could also incorporate a validation step to the field tests
and compare the mWater results with laboratory results. This would increase the credibility and
applicability of the data collected.

In addition, mWater uses the GIS function of the phone to collect data on location of the water points.
A GIS data logging component could be included in the application to improve accuracy of the
location data. According to the Project Director of mWater, the Ministry of Water is looking for a
mechanism to update functionality and water quality of water points. An accurate GIS data logger
would not only improve the quality and accuracy of the data collected for mWater, but would also
create potential for the upscaling of mWater’s functions.

3.4 Opportunities and Challenges
The city of Mwanza, through such initiatives as mWater, has already embraced ICT as a building
block to improving services to its populace. However the following challenges hinder the full
realisation of the intended objectives of the development and use of the application:

 i.    There is no policy that prohibits people from use of traditional water points in areas within
       coverage of the MWAUWASA piped water. This makes it difficult for MWAUWASA to compel
       communities to abandon use of sources with poor quality water. This is further exacerbated by
       the fact that coverage is very low and unreliable so residents have to seek alternative water
       sources.
ii.    There is limited political support for the initiative especially in supporting behaviour change
       campaigns, this is partly related to the project design that focused on data collection and to the
       already mentioned issue of lack of institutionalization of the project activities within MCC
       programs as the initiative is still considered to be in the development phase; in addition to other
       challenges such as limited funding faced by MCC.
iii.   MWAUWASA reported that based on random checks performed against utility generated GPS
       data, the mWater device geo-referencing system may not be accurate so calibration to ensure
       X and Y coordinates are synchronized with existing devices is required. This will improve
       credibility and thus upscaling of the mWater activities.
iv.    The MCC is charged with the dissemination of the test results. However the community expects
       either the government or mWater itself to provide all remedial action; for example, they will look
       to the government to dig another well when one well is found to be contaminated. As part of its
       mandate, MCC currently provides education including recommendations for improvement
       measures such as household water treatment and education on safe hygiene practices and
       environmental pollution. In one case, MCC obtained and supplied water treatment tablets to
       residents. mWater has also engaged the mass media (radio) in a sensitization campaign to
       explain the project and the roles of the different stakeholders.
v.     The project participants must have airtime to relay results from the field. The distribution of
       airtime is managed centrally by the project and is sometimes delayed. In addition, data collection
       by participants did not seem to be structured beyond requiring that data be provided on a specific
       number of water points.
vi.    mWater provides opportunity for access to data to support decision making on water quality
       management. What is required is to close the loop in regard to the steps after the testing is
       done, for example through defining roles and responsibilities for follow on action, and also align
       parameters with standard WQ testing requirements in the country. The application itself has the
                                                                         Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
18                                                               Field Review of Case Study – Tanzania



       potential for extended capabilities such as meter reading and water point mapping which would
       be of added value to MWAUWASA.

The following opportunities have been identified for upscaling and for improvement of the use and
applicability of the mWater application:

 i.    The institutional arrangements for mWater have not yet been defined and the key stakeholders
       with WQ mandates are still viewed as project participants. The project design should be
       rethought to create ownership of mWater; this is best suited to MWAUWASA so that the
       institutionalisation process and potential of mWater to improve operations can be better
       leveraged.
ii.    The potential for mWater as an advocacy tool for Local Government Authorities to solicit funds
       from the Tanzania social action fund on development of water sources was also identified.
iii.   The geographical coverage of the application is currently limited to the mWater project area.
       The inclusion of MCC and MWAUWASA as project partners creates an opportunity to upscale
       the application to the services areas of MWAUWASA and MCC.
iv.    The benefits of the application can be expanded beyond stimulation of behaviour change. The
       data and information generated by mWater can be used by the LGAs to advocate for changes
       and financing for WASH interventions and development of water sources.
Unlocking the Potential of ICT
Field Review of Case Studies – Tanzania                                                                19




4. CONCLUSION
The need to institutionalize the project activities is important for the long-term sustainability of the
project. This would require functional units in MWAUWASA and MCC that are charged with
monitoring the water sources, the piped water network and other installations. The functional units
would also be part of the reporting system, responsible for continuity and expansion e.g. inclusion of
a customer complaints function and expansion of the parameters that can be tested.

The roles and responsibilities of the stakeholder institutions should be clarified and communicated to
the communities e.g. when a water source is found to be contaminated, what institution is responsible
for the remedial solution and who is the custodian of the information.

There is a potential to collect more information from mWater by increasing the number of project
participants. The responsibility of collecting the data and /or updating the functionality and quality of
water could be relegated to the general public. The offline functionality feature of the application could
be improved and the public could be trained in use of the features of the application.

The discussion of technology and its impact on society goes deeper than just the use of the
technology. It should include an assessment of the objective of the technology itself. In this case, the
objective was to generate information that would stimulate behavioural change towards use of safe
drinking water and create demand for services. Furthermore, the benefits of increased information
are dependent on the institution’s ability to respond to the communities’ demand for services. The
communities that have monitored the quality of water points (mainly the springs, boreholes and dug
wells that are used as alternative sources) have triggered the implementation of health education
programs. In addition, communities such as Kaninu and Bukaga have requested for water kiosks,
following poor results of WQ tests done by mWater on community wells. The MCC is however
dependent on mWater for testing water points, and there are no immediate plans to integrate
activities. There is need for a design addition that links the MCC and MWAUWASA. Such a feature
would provide information necessary for planning WASH interventions.

Use of standardised testing methods is required if the project activities are to be upscaled e.g. use
of compact dry EC is not an approved method by the Tanzanian Bureau of Standards. There is also
a need to secure the equipment to avoid theft and vandalism. The phones should be password-
protected and have the ability to be tracked in case of theft.

The mWater pilot was managed independently by the project and although there was significant
stakeholder engagement and participation, sustainability considerations would have required that the
mandated institutions owned the project at the planning and inception stage. This could be in the
form of increased accountability of the participating Departments; incorporation of the mWater project
activities into the Departments’ Key Result Areas, and planning and budgetary processes. Promoting
ownership of the project at the initial stages of planning and inception would encourage assessment
of the financial and socio-economic benefits of the project activities by the participating institutions
and enable not only prioritization of the project activities, but also the testing of sustainability and
scalability interventions at the pilot stage. According to ref, DIV has invested approximately $100,000
in mWater, including development costs and the cost of the hardware (mobile phones, testing kits
etc). In addition, all costs of running the application are met by the project, including the cost of
sending the water point readings from the field (this is done by the project participants via sms). In
order to scale up the mWater activities or make improvements, the project activities have to be
incorporated into the annual budgets of the mandated institutions. The key participating institutions
– MWAUWASA and MCC - have however not yet incorporated the cost of running or scaling up
mWater into their capital or operational budgets. This has an impact on the ability to sustain and
expand the mWater operations.
                                                                    Unlocking the Potential of ICTs
20                                                          Field Review of Case Study – Tanzania




ANNEX A: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED
This case study has been prepared based on assessment of reports on mWater and on interviews
conducted in Mwanza, Tanzania in September 2014. The officials that were consulted during the
preparation of this report are:

i.      Daniel Chegere – Ag. Managing Director MWAUWASA
ii.     Robert M. Masunya – Assistant Manager Public Relations MWAUWASA
iii.    Yusuf – Water Quality Technician MWAUWASA
iv.     Amandus Mashamba – Project Director mWater
v.      Danford Kamenya – MCC
vi.     Environmental Health Officer - MCC
vii.    Environmental Health Officer - MCC
viii.   Juvenile -Water Quality Technician LVBWO
ix.     Kingu Kiula – IT Manager DAWASCO
x.      IT Administrator DAWASCO
xi.     Joash Nyitambe – Head ICT Ministry of Water
xii.    Kristoffer Welsien – WSP Tanzania
 Unlocking the Potential of ICT
 Field Review of Case Studies – Tanzania                                                      21




 ANNEX B: PICTORIAL OF FIELD MISSION




Consultation with the IT Department of DAWASCO            Billing hardware




Focus Group Discussion with mWater Project Participants   Discussion with the Ag. Managing Director
in Mwanza                                                 MWAUWASA
Unlocking the Potential of ICT
Field Review of Case Studies – Tanzania                                                    Ref-1




REFERENCES
DIV (2013) mWater Mobile Technology for Social Water Monitoring in Low-Resource Settings.
Development Innovation Ventures Program, USAID.

Eberhard R & Kapika J (2013) Peer Review of the Urban Water Sector Regulatory System in
Tanzania. ESAWAS

Gigler 2011, Informational Capabilities – The Missing Link for the Impact of ICT on development,
Working Paper Series No.1; E-Transform Knowledge Platform, Working Paper, The World Bank

Government of Tanzania, (2002). National Water Policy. URT

Ministry of Water and Irrigation & WSP (2014) Technical Workshop on Water Point Mapping in
Tanzania: Report on Workshop Proceedings. Dar es Salaam, Tanzania

MWAUWASA (2011) Mwanza Urban Water and Sewerage Authority Business Plan July 2011 – June
2014. Mwanza, Tanzania

MOWI (2006) National Water Sector Development Strategy 2006 to 2015 Ministry of Water and
Irrigation, Government of Tanzania. Dar es Salaam, Tanzania

MOWI (2014) Water Sector Development Program: Roadmap for the Institutionalization and
Enhancement of the Water Point Mapping System. United National University, Water Development
and Management Institute and Ministry of Water and Irrigation, Government of Tanzania. Dar es
Salaam, Tanzania
