               GENDER ANALYSIS
OF ARMENIAN SCHOOL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOKS



                 POLICY BRIEF




                  June, 2016
Prepared by

Iveta Silova, Ph.D.
 Arizona State University


This paper was commissioned by the World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this policy brief are entirely those of the author. They do
not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank and its affiliated
organizations.
                                       EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Armenian government has articulated the commitment to integrating the principles of gender
equality in its education system. This commitment has been reflected in the adoption of the Gender
Policy Concept Paper in 2010 and the Law on Securing Equal Rights and Equal Opportunities for
Women and Men in 2013, which identify gender equality as a priority area and call for

This policy report examines whether and to what extent the principles of gender equality are
reflected in Armenian school curriculum and textbooks, identifies key issues related to the
achievement of gender equality goals in education, and provides policy level recommendations to
improve gender-sensitivity in school curriculum and textbooks. Data was drawn from an overview
of existing studies on gender representation in Armenian school curricula and textbooks conducted
by local experts, primarily relying on the study commissioned by the World Bank (Osipov &
Sargizova, 2015). The study was based on a comprehensive analysis of 9 high school textbooks in
Social Science (grades 10 and 11), Armenian History (grades 10, 11 and 12), and Armenian
Literature (grades 10, 11 and 12), as well as an analysis of academic standards, syllabi, and
teacher’s guides for the same subjects. Data for the policy report was also supplemented by
interviews with key education stakeholders.
While the articulation of gender policy is an impressive step towards promoting gender equality in
the education sector, the findings of the policy report suggest that the Armenian government’s
commitment to gender equality has not yet been fully translated into practice. Evidence from the
existing studies indicates several issues that need to be urgently addressed. First, there is a
disconnect between key policy documents, practices, and processes, revealing that the principles of
gender equality have not been consistently translated into education standards, curricula, and
textbooks in all subjects and levels of the education system. Second, school textbooks reflect an
imbalanced gender representation, where men significantly outnumber women in in all forms of
representation, including texts and illustrations. Third, women are predominantly presented in
stereotypical ways, appearing in their family roles more frequently than professional occupations.
Some textbooks include texts that normalize gender-based violence, discrimination, and bias.
Finally, gender stereotypes exist in the broader school culture, shaping educational and career
choices among Armenian young men and women.

Key recommendations emerging from the policy report include:

 To explicitly identify gender equality as a goal in state programs and education standards.
 To consistently translate the principles of gender equality into educational materials and
  practices at all levels, including state educational standards, curricula, syllabi, teacher’s guides,
  and textbooks.
 To eliminate gender bias and stereotypes from school curriculum and textbooks, while
  acknowledging women’s diverse contributions to all areas of life.
 To develop gender sensitive standards and criteria for textbook development and review.
 To raise gender awareness among school principals, teachers, students, and parents.
 To consistently monitor the implementation of gender mainstreaming policies and practices.
 To coordinate efforts among various international donor agencies for the collective endeavor of
  eliminating gender disparity in education.
           THE INTEGRATION OF GENDER SENSITIVE PERSPECTIVES
            IN ARMENIAN SCHOOL CURRICULUM AND TEXTBOOKS
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND

Education plays a key role in achieving gender equality, making a significant contribution to
reaching the broader goals of human development. This is reflected in numerous
international documents – including the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), and the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Education for All (EFA) goals – which call for the
adoption of policies and practices to eliminate gender disparities in education and empower
women and girls at all levels. As a signatory to SDGs, MDGs, and EFA, Armenia has
demonstrated a strong commitment to ensuring gender equality in education. Armenia has
also ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW) in 1993, and the Optional Protocol on violence against women in
2006. Furthermore, it is a member of the Council of Europe since 2001 and is a party to
several regional treaties that reiterate the principles of nondiscrimination on the basis of
sex.1

At the national level, Armenia’s Constitution enshrines the right to gender equality and
outlaws all forms of discrimination on the basis of gender and other characteristics (Article
14.1). The Concept Paper on Gender Equality and the Gender Policy Strategic Action Plan,
2011–2015 have provided the basis for national gender policy, including in the education
area. In 2013, Armenia also adopted the Law on Equal Rights and Equal Opportunities for
Men and Women, which reiterates Armenia’s commitments under the Constitution and
international conventions. While the adoption of the Law was highly contentious, it is a
significant step forward. The challenge now is to enforce and comprehensively monitor the
implementation of the law and related policies in practice.

 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
    Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls:
    Adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislation for the promotion of gender equality
    and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels (Goal 5)


 Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
    Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women (Goal 3)


   Education for All Goals (EFAs)
    Eliminate gender disparities in primary and secondary education and achieve gender equality in
    education, with a focus on ensuring girls' full and equal access to and achievement in basic education of
    good quality


Indicators of Gender (In)Equality



1
 See, for example, the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms and the European Social Charter. Armenia has also expressed its commitment to implement the
Council of Europe Gender Equality Strategy, 2014 –2017.
Indicators of human development (especially the gender dimensions of development)
demonstrate that Armenia exhibits positive indicators of equality in some areas, while lagging
behind in others. For example, the 2014 UNDP Gender Development Index (GDI),2 which
shows the ratio of the female to the male Human Development Index, was at 0.994 for
Armenia, meaning that the gender gap in human development was fairly small and
comparable to the gaps observed for Europe and Central Asia combined. In the area of
education, Armenia exhibits gender parity in enrollment rates from primary to higher
education. In particular, enrollment statistics show that girls tend to stay in education for a
greater number of years, up to the level of postgraduate education. Boys more often enter
vocational education after having completed basic or general education. In terms of academic
achievement, girls tend to outperform boys on international student achievement tests such as
Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS, 2003, 2007, 2011), although
these differences are not statistically significant (see Appendix II).
Notwithstanding success in school access and academic achievement, gender patterns exist in
the type of study programs Armenian students pursue at the postsecondary level. For example,
young women tend to dominate the “traditionally female? areas of study (e.g., education,
social sciences, and health), which lead to work in lower-paid public sector jobs. Meanwhile,
young men tend to concentrate in technical fields (e.g., energy, transport, and construction),
which generally correlate with jobs in higher-paying sectors. Furthermore, many young
women who complete higher education do not become employed after graduation either
because their qualifications do not meet labor market demands or because they are expected to
take on family responsibilities after they marry (Asian Development Bank, 2015).

More importantly, data indicate that women’s high levels of school enrollments, academic
achievements, and educational attainment have not resulted in corresponding gains in the
labor market, where clear gender patterns can be observed in uneven political representation
and labor force participation (Asian Development Bank, 2015). For example, Armenian
women take only 10.7% of seats in parliament, compared to 43.6% in Sweden, 36.9% in
Germany, and 20.1% in Kazakhstan (see Appendix II). Among the country’s economically
active population (15–75 years old), working women constitute 55.2% compared with 72.1%
of men (Asian Development Bank, 2015, p 25). Furthermore, the labor market exhibits
stratification in the type of work performed by men and women. In particular, men tend to
engage in a more diverse range of economic activities, while women are more concentrated in
the lower-paying fields of education, health services, and trade (Asian Development Bank,
2015, p. 27).3 Such labor market segregation leads to a significant gender wage gap between
men and women in Armenia, which remains one of the largest in Southeast Europe and the
Commonwealth of Independent States (Asian Development Bank, 2015, p. 30).

In other words, women in Armenia are highly educated, yet their participation in the labor
market and representation in political decision-making remain quite low. Such gender
imbalance stems largely from the persisting influence of gender stereotypes, which is not
unique to Armenia, but is characteristic to many developing economies and OECD countries.

2
    UNDP GDI is based on sex-disaggregated data from the Human Development Index.
3   In the field of education, 84% of employees are women, yet
            (Asian Development Bank, 2015).
It is likely that gender stereotypes contribute to the reproduction of traditional (patriarchal)
gender roles through mass media, as well as school culture, curricula, and textbooks. As
OECD (2011) states, the effect of such gender imbalance is clearly serious:

       It hinders women’s careers, it lowers their future earning levels and deprives [OECD]
       economies of a source of talent and innovation. It is also an inefficient use of investment in
       education. (p. 2)
However, gender equality is not only a means to other ends such as economic development. It
is also “a value in its own right? (European Institute for Gender Equality, 2014, p. 6). Moving
beyond the economic argument, it is important to acknowledge gender equality as key to
achieving a broader principle of improving the quality of life of individuals, families, and
communities. Above all, gender equality is a fundamental human right.
Policy Report Goals and Overview
This policy report examines whether and to what extent the principles of gender equality are
reflected in Armenian school curriculum and textbooks, identifies key issues related to the
achievement of gender equality goals in education, and provides policy level
recommendations to improve gender-sensitivity in school curriculum and textbooks. Data is
drawn from an overview of existing studies on gender representation in Armenian school
curricula and textbooks conducted by local experts primarily relying on the study
commissioned by the World Bank (Osipov & Sargizova, 2015), which was based on the
analysis of 9 high school textbooks in Social Studies (grades 10 and 11), Armenian History
(grades 10, 11 and 12), and Armenian Literature (grades 10, 11 and 12). In addition, the study
included the analysis of academic standards, syllabi, and teacher’s guides for the same
subjects.
Methodologically, this in-depth study drew on both quantitative and qualitative analysis of
both texts and illustrations, including the analysis of the frequency of appearance of male and
female characters and their relative share in the total number of appearances; frequency and
share of quotations attributed to male and female figures; personality attributes of male and
female characters described in the textbooks. In addition to quantitative analysis, qualitative
analysis focused on how textbooks describe women and men (as well as girls and boys),
specifically identifying and analyzing instances of gender bias and stereotypical representation
of males and females in the context of family, employment, and socio-political spheres.
Finally, the study analyzed gender composition of teams of textbook authors. Not only was
this approach methodologically sound and sophisticated, but it was also very detailed in
providing both concrete examples of how gender issues are addressed in textbooks and very
practical examples of how gender representation could be improved in line with international
standards in order to reflect the diverse contribution of women to Armenian history, politics,
economics, and culture in meaningful ways.

The policy note also drew on the UNDP (2011) study of 138 textbooks for grades 1-11 in all
subjects, as well as a study by the NGO Society Without Violence (2014) of 5 social science
textbooks for grades 8-11. Interviews with key stakeholders were conducted in February
2016, including the representatives of the Ministry of Education, textbook authors, schools,
non-governmental organizations, and international agencies in Yerevan, Armenia.
II. THE ROLE OF SCHOOL CURRICULUM IN PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY
Numerous international agreements – including the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), and the Education for All (EFA) – have
emphasized the importance of achieving gender equality in education. To date, these goals
have primarily focused on achieving gender parity in enrollments (i.e., ensuring equal
access and participation in education for boys and girls) and increasing education quality for
all learners (i.e., ensuring equal academic achievement among boys and girls). As data
reveal, Armenia does very well in both of these areas, strongly exhibiting gender parity in
enrollment rates from primary to higher education, as well as demonstrating virtually no
difference in academic achievement among girls and boys.

However, school access and academic achievement alone do not guarantee gender equality.
In fact, the OECD report Closing the Gender Gap: Act Now (2013) found that gender
equality and women’s empowerment remain “unfinished business? across all countries. In
many OECD countries and developing economies, including Armenia, women are still less
likely to be represented in politics, they participate less in labor force, concentrate in lower-
paying economic sectors, and earn less than men. As Longwe (1998) notes, this is because
schools perpetuate – whether advertently or inadvertently – gender inequalities through
power relations, pedagogy, and stereotypical portrayal of male and female roles in
textbooks, curricula, and learning materials. Based on the analysis of studies from both
developing economics and OECD countries, Blumberg (2007) argued that gender bias in
textbooks is much more spread geographically than the remaining gender gap in parity. In
particular, females tend to be greatly underrepresented in school textbooks, and both males
and females are often depicted in gender-stereotyped roles, constraining visions of who boys
and girls are and what they can become. Similarly, an overview of textbook research in the
countries of Southeast/Central Europe and the former Soviet Union concluded that school
textbooks transmit rigid gender-based stereotypes that disadvantage women (Magno &
Silova, 2007). In this context, gender bias in textbooks and school curricula remains “one of
the best camouflaged – and hardest to budge – rocks in the road to gender equality in
education? (Blumberg, 2007, p. 4).

In addition to textbooks and school curricula, traditional gender stereotypes could also be
reproduced by teachers and the broader school culture. For example, the 2007 EFA report
(UNESCO 2006) concluded that in addition to stereotypes in learning materials, [differing]
teachers’ expectations of girls and boys negatively affect gender equality (p. 2). A recent
study commissioned by the European Parliament (McCracken, Unterhalter, Ma? rquez,
Chełstowska, 2015) similarly concluded that teacher attitudes and beliefs towards gender
“reinforce students’ gender roles, often to the disadvantage of girls? (p. 50). The study
revealed that traditional beliefs are frequently transferred “through teacher training, through
teachers’ attitudes and practices towards boys and girls and also through young people
themselves? (p. 51). As a result, education systems continue to subtly reproduce invisible
gender stereotypes both inside and outside the European Union.
Recognizing the role of schools in alleviating gender bias, the 2004 EFA report reaffirmed
that girls and boys should enjoy “teaching methods, curricula, and academic orientation
unaffected by gender bias? (UNESCO, 2003, p. 17, emphasis added). This means that
schools can no longer be seen as value-free, neutral environments that prepare all students
equally for citizenship (Stromquist, 2002). The emphasis needs to shift from equality of
education opportunity to equity, focusing on the concepts of fairness and justice that have
the potential to minimize disadvantages over which individuals have little or no control,
including economic situation, occupational choices, income, environment, and life chances.
OECD (1997) explains:




The focus on equity or the rights-based approach has formed the basis of the Beijing
Declaration (1995), which proclaims that “women’s rights are human rights? and argues that
achievement of gender equity “will require changes at many levels, including changes in
attitudes and relationships, changes in institutions and legal frameworks, changes in
economic institutions, and changes in political decision-making structures? (UN, 2002, p.
1). Gender equity has also been identified as the goal of the Dakar Declaration (2010),
which appeals to governments and international development agencies to take “urgent
action? to create empowerment opportunities for girls by “transform[ing] power hierarchies
in learning spaces, communities and policy structures.? Both instruments indicate the need
for a systemic approach to overcoming gender inequalities rather than a more limited “add-
on? approach or a narrow (yet important) focus on parity. Rather, the Beijing Declaration
(and subsequently the Dakar Declaration) has established gender mainstreaming as “a major
global strategy for the promotion of gender equality? (UN, 2002).
Gender mainstreaming
Gender mainstreaming is defined as “...the process of assessing the implications for women
and men of any planned action, including legislation, policies or programs, in all areas and
at all levels. It is a strategy for making women’s as well as men’s concerns and experiences
an integral dimension of the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of policies
and programs in all political, economic and societal spheres so that women and men benefit
equally and inequality is not perpetuated. The ultimate goal is to achieve gender equality?
(UN, 2002).
The gender mainstreaming approach is intended as a transformative process across multiple
areas, including sociocultural, economic, and institutional factors (McCracken et al., 2015).
As the study commissioned by the European Parliament (2015) argues, the impact of gender
mainstreaming efforts will be substantial only if implemented systemically. In the area of
education, this means a commitment to developing and implementing gender-sensitive
policies, curricula, textbooks, teacher training, and the overall school culture with the goal
of ultimately transforming social norms and values that perpetuate discrimination.
In the EU, three legislative models are used to address gender mainstreaming in education,
reflecting the degree to which gender equality concepts are embedded in legislative
frameworks: (1) general equal treatment and equal opportunities, (2) equal treatment and
equal opportunities in education, and (3) gender equality in education (Eurydice, 2010). The
first model, equal treatment and equal opportunities, entails general anti-discrimination
provisions on the equal treatment of and equal opportunities for women and men, which
provide the legal basis for gender equality policies in education. Anti-discrimination
provisions may appear as a separate anti-discrimination law or as a part of other acts (e.g.,
the Labor Code), but are not always explicitly reflected in education statutes. As the
Eurydice report (2010) summarizes, this model forms the basis of policymaking in Belgium
(Flemish and French communities), Denmark, Estonia, Italy, Cyprus, Hungary, the
Netherlands, and Poland. The second model, equal treatment and equal opportunities in
education, includes specific legislation on equal treatment and equal opportunities for
women and men in the education sector, as well as education acts that make specific
references to gender equality. However, gender equality is framed in terms of goals but not
outcomes. This means that education acts aim to ensure equal access to and equal treatment
in education for all students, but do not include specific provisions for combatting existing
inequalities in a wider society (Eurydice, 2010). This model can be found in Greece,
Lithuania, Portugal, Romania and Slovakia. The third model, gender equality in education,
explicitly states the goal of achieving gender equality as an outcome of education and can be
found in the Czech Republic, Germany, Spain, France, Ireland, Luxembourg, Malta,
Austria, Slovenia, Finland, Sweden, the United Kingdom, Iceland, Liechtenstein and
Norway (Eurydice, 2010).

While most European governments aim to address gender inequalities in education, fewer
countries have explicitly articulated the aim of reaching gender equality in terms of
outcomes or have successfully implemented a systemic approach to the gender
mainstreaming. The challenges associated with the implementation of gender-
mainstreaming strategies are multiple and diverse, including (1) the distribution of
educational provision and financial resources available to girls and women, (2) policies and
institutional factors that deliver education, and (3) cultural and social norms relating to
gender (McCracken et al., 2015). At the global level, no country has yet fully achieved
gender equity and, while many countries have made progress in the development of
legislation on gender equality and women’s rights (including Armenia), wide gaps remain
between legislation and its implementation in all areas of the Beijing Platform for Action
(Council of Europe Gender Equality Commission, 2015).

Notwithstanding the challenges of implementing a systemic approach to gender-
mainstreaming, there are many examples of successful policies, projects, and programs. For
the purposes of this report, only a select number of cases will be discussed, including gender
mainstreaming policies in the educational systems of the European Union countries (for
more detailed examples of gender mainstreaming policies in Sweden and Latvia, see
Appendix I for case-studies). These examples were chosen because of a relative success of
gender mainstreaming in these societies, but also because both cases demonstrate that
progress towards gender equality is a lengthy, extensive, and complex process.
For example, Sweden, which is currently one of the most gender egalitarian societies in the
world, has been consistently addressing gender equality in national policies since the 1970s
(Numhauser-Henning, 2015). Since 1994,




                                                    curricula at the pre-school, compulsory
school, and upper secondary school levels are guided by the Education Act (2010:800) in
the development of non-discrimination guidelines, which apply to both public and
independent schools. Standard non-discrimination clauses (including a direct reference to
gender equality) can be found at each level of the national curriculum and standards. At the
upper secondary level, the statement reads:

       The school should promote understanding of other people and the ability to empathise. No
       one in school should be subjected to discrimination on the grounds of gender, ethnic
       affiliation, religion or other belief system, transgender identity or its expression, sexual
       orientation, age or functional impairment, or to other forms of degrading treatment. All
       tendencies to discrimination or degrading treatment should be actively combated.
       Xenophobia and intolerance must be confronted with knowledge, open discussion and active
       measures. (Skolverket, 2013, p. 4)

Similarly, gender equality appears as an overarching principle of the curriculum in such
countries as Malta, Austria, Sweden, Liechtenstein, and Norway. In these countries, the
gender perspective permeates the whole curriculum and is taken into consideration
throughout all subjects and areas (Eurydice, 2010). For example, the Maltese National
Minimum Curriculum states that

       Gender equality is not a theme that should be treated by the school in isolation or during the teaching
       of a particular subject. Equality should be an interdisciplinary theme which teachers can develop
       within the context of their particular subject, confronting prejudice and promoting more gender-
       inclusive alternatives. (quoted in Eurydice, 2010, p. 57)

However, other countries’ experiences with gender-mainstreaming are much more limited
and less comprehensive. For example, the Latvian government had initially prioritized
substantial changes in its legal system over gender equality policies. The process of
accession to the EU and the adoption of the Acquis Communautaire contributed to the
promotion of gender equality in Latvia’s national policy agenda. As a result, the Ministry of
Welfare became the body responsible for the development of gender equality policy. Unlike
Sweden, however, Latvia takes an integrationist approach to gender mainstreaming, which
means that the principles of gender equality are taken into consideration while developing
policies; yet, it does not necessarily challenge existing policy paradigms or involve a
fundamental rethinking of gender relationships. Similar to Armenia, more female students
enter higher education institutions than male students, yet gender segregation exists in the
choice of their fields of study. Women tend to dominate in traditionally female fields of
study such as education/teaching and nursing, which eventually leads to lower paying jobs
in the future (European Commission, 2012). Traditional gender stereotypes are reproduced
in school curriculum and media. Latvia made significant steps towards alleviating gender
stereotypes in schools by introducing state education standards for all levels and subjects,
which include a non-discrimination clause and specifically reference gender. The next step
will be to incorporate these standards in teaching materials and textbooks. In fact, the
National Development Plan of Latvia 2014-2020 and the Education Development
Guidelines 2014-2020 envisage a complex support system to address gender equality goals
which includes the task of incorporating gender equality issues in curriculum and teaching
materials.

In addition to explicitly addressing the principles of gender equality in standards and
curriculum, it is important that these principles are reflected in textbooks. According to the
Eurydice report (2010), official guidelines on gender issues for authors of educational texts
and teaching materials exist in such countries as Germany, Ireland, Latvia, Austria, and
Iceland. Furthermore, many countries require school textbooks to be evaluated for gender
sensitivity.

Beyond teaching materials, it is necessary to ensure that the process and teaching and
learning itself reflects gender equality principles. As the Eurydice report (2010) states,
however, guidelines for schools and/or teachers in this area are not yet very widespread. In
some countries, this is the responsibility of the government bodies, while in others it is
developed by NGOs. In Finland, for example, teachers have access to a guidebook, which
advises how to prepare the plan and how to highlight the importance of developing teaching
methods and creating learning environments which will benefit both genders at a high
school level. In the Czech Republic, the Open Society NGO published a handbook for
teachers and students of pedagogical universities, describing the risks of gender stereotyping
in various areas of school life (Eurydice, 2010, p. 58). Within the project “Equal
opportunities for men and women in educational practices? (supported by the European
Social Fund and state budget), a manual for teachers at primary and secondary schools was
published in 2007 (Eurydice, 2010, p. 58). In Ireland, the resource packs prepared for
schools include model lessons that demonstrate “how all subject areas can be inclusive of
the perspectives, interests, and experiences of both boys and girls? (Eurydice, 2010, p. 58).
However, the Eurydice report (2010) concludes that more attention should be paid to “the
development of suitable gender-specific teaching methods and guidelines which could play
an important role in counteracting the gender stereotyping which influences students’
interests and learning? (p. 59).

To summarize, the cases discussed above – which represent a range of experiences with
gender mainstreaming policies and practices in the area of education – illustrate that
adoption of the gender mainstreaming approach has a direct impact on policy processes and
outcomes. Yet, gender mainstreaming is a challenging concept, which requires not only time
(sometimes decades), but also systemic effort and financial investment to adopt and
institutionalize a gender perspective into all aspects of policy processes. Although policies
and practices cannot be changed overnight, evidence suggests that a gradual introduction of
gender mainstreaming into the education system has the potential to transform the national
culture – including the discourses, policies, procedures, and participants – to the mutual
benefit of both women and men.

III. GENDER ANALYSIS OF ARMENIAN STANDARDS, CURRICULA, AND TEXTBOOKS: ON
OVERVIEW
The integration of principles of gender equality into the educational system of Armenia has
been articulated as a priority area for the government. This commitment has been reflected
in the adoption of the Gender Policy Concept Paper in 2010 and the Law on Securing Equal
Rights and Equal Opportunities for Women and Men in 2013, which identify priority areas
for education reform to promote gender equality. In particular, the Gender Policy Concept
Paper (2010) clearly states that education reform efforts should be focused on (1) creating
optimal conditions to maximize the creative and intellectual development of both sexes   by
further improvement and democratization of the education sphere; (2) educating socially
active and responsible citizens, shaping an egalitarian gender culture, supporting gender
equality in society, social justice and enjoyment of social freedoms; and (3)  establishing
gender balanced representation at all levels of the education sphere (pp. 17-18).   More
specifically, the Gender Policy Concept Paper (2010) identifies the primary directions of
gender policy in the education sphere, which include:
     F




                               
While the articulation of gender policy is an impressive step towards promoting gender
equality in the education sector, this commitment has not yet been fully translated into
education practice. For example, the Law on the Adoption of the State Program of
Educational Development (2011-2015) and the second draft of the State Program on
Educational Development for 2016-2025 do not identify gender equality as an explicit
principle of the state program. Similarly, evidence from existing studies suggests that the
principles of gender equality have not been consistently translated into education standards,
curricula, and textbooks in all subjects and levels of the educational system. In particular, an
analysis of recent studies of school curricula and textbooks identifies the following issues
that warrant immediate attention:

(1)       Inconsistent reflection of gender equality principles in state policy, education
          standards, programs, teacher guides, and textbooks.

(2)       Imbalanced gender representation in school textbooks.

(3)       Traditional and stereotypical representation of gender roles in school textbooks.

(4)       School textbooks predominantly written by men.

(5)       Gender stereotypes in the broader school culture.



(1) Inconsistent reflection of gender equality principles in state policy, education
standards, programs, teacher guides, and textbooks
While policy documents explicitly identify gender equality as a priority, state education
standards, programs, teacher guides, and textbooks do not consistently reflect the principles
of gender equality across all subject areas. For example, standards for some subject areas
(e.g., social science) promote a human rights-based approach to gender equality, presenting
clear guidelines for raising gender awareness among students and making course syllabi
more gender-sensitive. As noted in the study commissioned by the World Bank (Osipov &
Sargizova, 2015), some sections of the social science standards – especially the sections
related to Aesthetics, Psychology, Political Science, and Philosophy – contain specific
instructions for not only introducing gender perspective into curriculum and textbooks, but
also to equip students with adequate gender knowledge. For example, the Standard for
Aesthetics states that gender issues should be addressed through such topics as ‘masculinity
and femininity as specific manifestations of beauty,’ ‘the issue of communication styles and
rules of conduct of men and women,’ and ‘embodiment of feminine and masculine beauty in
arts.’ 4 Similarly, the Standard for Psychology focuses on gender in the ‘Family’ theme,
highlighting the topic of ‘gender relations in the present-day Armenian family.’5 And the
Standard for Political Science specifies addressing ‘the issue of women’s and men’s
engagement in political processes.’6 Importantly, the standards also identify the importance
of shaping a particular (gender-sensitive) mindset that would contribute to the elimination of
gender stereotypes still prevalent in the Armenian society, promote political participation of
both women and men, and consider changing identities and social roles of both sexes under
the impact of globalization.

However, education standards for other school subjects (e.g., Armenian language and
literature; Armenian history) focus exclusively on subject area content and generally remain
gender-blind. For example, the high school Armenian Language and the Armenian
Literature subject standards mention the importance of developing the student as a
personality and citizen by promoting a particular value system, but do not contain a
reference to gender equality, which is one of the core democratic values. In the standards for
Armenian history, a gender perspective is entirely missing from the subject’s mandatory
core content. As the textbook study (Osipov & Sargizova, 2015) points out, the standards
for Armenian history do not reference women’s issues and achievements in the 19th and the
early 20th centuries, including the origins of the women’s movement and the gender equality
discourse. In both of these subject areas, gender equality – and the principles of non-
discrimination more broadly – is neither stated as a goal nor explicitly manifested in the
state standards.

While state standards provide a general framework for education content development, they
play an important role in setting the direction for a more concrete elaboration of the actual
curricula, syllabi, assessment, teacher guides, and textbooks. If state standards do not
reference gender equality – either explicitly or in the context of human rights as equal rights
and opportunities that are free from biases and discrimination – it is unlikely that these
principles would translate into educational materials and school practice. On the one hand,
gender equality principles are not referenced in the state standards for Armenian language,

4
  Social Science. Standards for high schools, p. 11.
5
  Ibid., p. 12.
6
  Ibid., p. 12.
literature, and history at the secondary level and they are subsequently absent in curriculum
content, syllabi, teacher guides, and textbooks. On the other hand, standards for civic
education demonstrate a human-rights based approach to equality (specifically referencing
gender equality), which then appear – although briefly and inconsistently – in the
corresponding program curricula, syllabi, teacher guides, and textbooks.

The issue of the disconnect between key policy documents and processes (e.g., standards,
syllabi, teacher guides, and textbooks) could be explained by the fact that various
documents were developed and revised at different time intervals, rarely following a linear
process. In particular, most of the school curricula and textbooks currently used in schools
were developed and published before these policy commitments were made and therefore
did not undergo a gender analysis during or upon their production.7 As Armenia continues
to reform its education system, especially in the area of school curriculum and textbooks, it
is important that the principle of gender equality is reflected in state standards – either
explicitly or in the context of human rights – followed by a careful mapping of this goal into
educational materials and practices at all levels.

(2) Imbalanced gender representation in school textbooks
Numerous textbook studies conducted in Armenia reveal that school textbooks give a strong
preference to men in all forms of representation, including texts and illustrations. In the
social science and Armenian literature textbooks, for example, male characters and
personalities are represented over 4 times more frequently than female ones (82.4% versus
17.5% in social science and 80.5% versus 19.5% in literature). In Armenian history, women
represent less than 5% of all historical figures and characters (see Table 1). Furthermore,
textbook authors predominantly quote men in epigraphs, which is clearly visible across
social science, history, and literature textbooks at the secondary level. In some textbooks,
not a single quotation is attributed to a woman (e.g., 11th and 12th grade social science
textbooks).
While some may argue that the disciplines of social science and history derive from
philosophy, which has been historically dominated by men, it is important to acknowledge
the contributions of women – from the Middle Ages to the 21th century – in advancing a
wide spectrum of ideas in religion, metaphysics, philosophy, and political theory. 8
Alongside Plato and Aristotle, for example, textbooks can feature the contributions of
Diotima, Perictione and Theano. Textbooks should also acknowledge Mary Wollstonecraft
(alongside Rousseau), Anna Maria Van Schurman (alongside Kant), Hannah Arendt
(alongside Heidegger), Simone de Beauvoir (alongside Satre), and many other female
philosophers for their contributions to advancing the Western thought.
In Armenian history, textbooks can highlight the contributions of Armenian queens and
princesses to public life, charity, and political struggle over different historical periods.
Textbooks can also include the discussion of the birth of the women’s movement in
Armenia in the context of Western Enlightenment, highlighting the contributions of Srbuhi
Dussap, Zabel Yesayan, and others. Finally, women’s contributions to various aspects of life

7
 For example, the state educational standards were developed in 2010 and were revised in 2012.
8See, for example, Warren’s book (2012) Unconventional History of Philosophy, which is an excellent
example of re-discovering the names, lives, texts, and perspectives of women philosophers.
during national awakening and the Soviet periods could be more presented in more adequate
and meaningful ways.9


Table 1. Frequency of Representation of Female and Male Personalities and Characters in
Textbooks (text and illustrations combined)
                     Subject                            Women                           Men
    Social Science                                       17.5%                         82.4%
    Social Science (10th grade)                        18.4% (120)                   81.6% (531)
                      th
    Social Science (11 grade)                           16.4% (53)                   83.6% (269)
                      th
    Social Science (12 grade)                          17.9% (103)                   82.1% (472)

    Armenian History                                      4.2%                         95.8%
                           th
    Armenian History (10 grade)                         5.8% (28)                    94.2% (450)
    Armenian History (11th grade)                       2.5% (20)                    97.5% (769)
                           th
    Armenian History (12 grade)                         4.5% (29)                    95.5% (625)

    Armenian Literature                                  19.5%                         80.5%
    Armenian Literature (10th grade)                   18.9% (316)                  81.1% (1358)
                                th
    Armenian Literature (11 grade)                     19.9% (342)                  80.1% (1376)
                                th
    Armenian Literature (12 grade)                     19.8% (744)                   80.2% (596)


Similarly, the Armenian language and literature textbooks do not highlight the creative
legacy of Armenian female writers and do not include a presentation of the works of
Armenian female writers and poets of recent years. For example, the contributions of Sybil
and Srbouhi Dussap, who were involved in a theoretical discussion on the use of the
vernacular as a written Armenian language in 19th and 20th centuries are only briefly
mentioned in the 10th grade Armenian literature textbook. The 11th grade Armenian
literature textbook does not mention any female writers at all. In short, the contributions of
many female writers are not appropriately acknowledged in school textbooks. Among them
are Zaruhi Galemkiearian, Vittoria Aghanoor, Iskuhi Minasian, Haykanush Marrk, Hermine
Hovian, Armenuhi Tigranian, Anayis, Mariam Khatisian, Marie Beylerian, Shushanik
Kurghinian, Mannik Berberian, Sybil, and Zabel Yesayian. Furthermore, textbooks do not
present the work of a new generation of Armenian writers and poetesses such as Arpine
Grenier-Konyalian, Tina Demirdjian, Lola Koundakjian, Armine Iknadossian, Alene
Terzian, and Lory Bedikian 10 who have dominated the Armenian poetry scene of the
21st century. The omission of noteworthy works of Armenian literature in textbooks serves
to devalue the collective worth of Armenian writers by limiting the scope of the country’s
literary accomplishment to the work of men only. Adding diversity to the teaching materials

9
  For a more detailed discussion of female historical figures omitted in Armenian history textbooks, see section
   V in Osipov & Sargizova (2015), which provides a detailed reveiw of history textbooks for grades 10-12.
10
   Lory Bedikian is a winner of the 2010 Philip Levine Prize in Poetry, for her manuscript, The Book of
   Lamenting.
and curriculum by including significant literature regardless of the authors’ genders will
overcome the simplistic and limited portrayal of women in submissive and passive roles,
while providing a more complete picture of Armenian talent in the field of literature.


(3) Traditional and stereotypical representation of gender roles in school textbooks
In many Armenian textbooks, women are not only less visible than men, but they are also
presented in stereotypical ways, often appearing as passive, submissive, and dependent on
men. In most textbooks, for example, women and girls are principally linked to their family
status, particularly to being a mother, wife, daughter, and grandmother. In the 10th grade
Armenian literature textbook, for example, the images of women frequently appear in the
context of motherhood, highlighting their modesty, beauty, humility, propriety, and
readiness to sacrifice themselves for the sake of their husbands and homeland. In particular,
the depiction of the Armenian pagan deities is presented only from the perspective of their
reproductive function: “Anahit – the golden mother, the nurturing mother,? “was depicted in
the image and clothes of an Armenian woman with a child in her lap and was considered to
be the mother of all virtues and benefactor of the entire mankind…?, “Nane – patron of
motherhood? (quoted in Osipov & Sargizova, 2015, p. 101, emphasis added). In the 12th
grade social studies textbook, authors discuss gender equality achievements in the western
countries in relation to “a significant decrease in the birth rate,? implying (fairly explicitly)


                                       Similarly, the 10th grade social science textbook
generally portrays women through the lens of motherhood (as care-givers and child-
bearers), often showing women in the context of their families and children (Osipov &
Sargizova, 2015).

Furthermore, some textbooks (e.g., 10th grade Armenian history textbook) present women as
unnamed victims who are in need of protection, as well as passive creatures who are
kidnapped, taken hostage, or married off for diplomatic reasons such as forging closer ties
between different kingdoms. The World Bank commissioned study (Osipov & Sargizova,
2015) also points out that some textbooks include content that normalizes gender violence.
For example, a 10th grade Armenian history textbook includes the following commentary
on the Armenian legend about Artashes and Satenik: “Having been rejected by Satenik's
father, Artashes solves the problem in line with the Armenian custom and with self-esteem
worthy of the brave man: he crosses the river, ties up Satenik with a rope and kidnaps her?
(p. 153, emphasis added). This commentary seems to suggest that girl kidnapping is a
lawfully accepted Armenian custom and behavior worthy of the brave man. While such
explicit normalization of gender violence is rare, textbook content should be carefully
reviewed to eliminate instances of gender-based violence, discrimination, and bias that are
counterproductive to the attainment of a gender egalitarian society.

Across all textbooks and grade levels, women are less frequently identified in their
professional capacities compared to men. When they are, the range of professions and
occupations is generally limited to that of teachers and nurses. In contrast, men are
presented as decision makers, shapers of political history, political and religious figures,
advisors, generals, heroes, and cultural figures. They appear to occupy prestigious
professions such as scientists, civil servants, doctors, governors, war participants, persons of
arts, writers, clergymen, philosophers, and others. It is clear that textbooks would benefit
from a more balanced and fair representation of gender roles across the different subject
areas. Importantly, the 11th grade social science textbook acknowledges the issue of
women’s underrepresentation in politics, yet stops short of discussing multiple barriers
(other than traditions) preventing women from political participation and decision-making.
As Osipov & Sargizova (2015) highlight, to address the issue meaningfully, multiple
dimensions of moving towards gender equality could be discussed in social science
textbooks, including economic empowerment of women, development of democratic gender
culture, elimination of gender stereotypes, as well as the use of temporary special measures
and efforts to combat gender-based discrimination and violence against women.

(4)        School textbooks are predominantly written by men

School textbooks in Armenia are predominantly written by men and only a few textbooks
are written by teams of men and women. As evidenced by the data from the analysis of the
secondary school textbooks in social science, history, and literature, the most gender-
balanced textbook author teams worked on the social science textbooks for Grades 10th and
12th, which also appear to be more gender-sensitive compared to other textbooks. Textbook
author teams for history and literature at the secondary school level were written entirely by
men, without representation of a single woman. Furthermore, there are no females among
the editors of the secondary textbooks in social science, Armenian history, and Armenian
literature.

The gender composition of textbook author teams may be a significant factor in developing
a more balanced and gender-sensitive textbook content by bringing the diversity of
perspectives and life experiences of male and female authors, while decreasing the
dominance of male authors. While the inclusion of women does not automatically secure a
more gender equal perspective in school curricula and textbooks, it nevertheless can ensure
a symbolic representation, which is an important step towards a substantive representation.

(5)        Gender stereotypes in the broader school culture

Although an official gender assessment study in the area of education has not yet been
conducted in Armenia, several studies collected data on gender stereotypes that exist in the
education system and the broader Armenian culture. For example, a survey by NGO Society
without Violence (Andresson, 2013) 11 gave some indications of the types of gender
inequalities that exist in the broader school culture. In particular, the survey found that
traditional gender stereotypes exist among high school teachers and students.
Approximately half of the teachers believed that “women and men should keep traditional
professions? and “there are some professions that women should not have? and 56% of
teachers felt that a man can have any profession that he wants. These findings suggest that
many teachers subscribe to stereotypical views about gender, which in turn impacts the
opportunities that are presented to girls (Asian Development Bank, 2015). Indeed, the same
survey confirmed traditional gender stereotypes among high schools students themselves.
In particular, only 43% of surveyed students believed that “a woman can pursue any

11
     The survey included 283 high school students and 50 teachers from three schools in Yerevan.
profession she wants,? while half of the respondents stated that “there are some professions
that a woman should not have.? Of all respondents, the majority of surveyed boys (73%)
believe that there are some professions that a woman should not have.?

The survey also found that teachers treat male and female students differently. In particular,
54% of teachers believe that boys and girls are essentially different and should be treated
differently, while only 28% responded that they are different but should be treated equally.
Students confirmed that they face different treatment and discrimination by their teachers.
Furthermore, the survey also revealed that teachers lacked an understanding of what
constitutes a gender-equality approach to teaching and learning. The results indicated that
57% of teachers believed that they can change traditional stereotypes and that they do it in
their work, while 14% responded that they can change traditional stereotypes in their teacher
role but that they do not attempt to do it in their classrooms and 27% stated that their role is
simply educational. When asked about the possibility of integrating gender perspective in
the curriculum, 32% of surveyed teachers responded that they would eagerly do it, while
33% responded that they would not like to teach it and 36% did not know. These survey
findings indicate that teachers may lack knowledge of and skills in integrating gender
perspectives into curriculum. However, the findings also suggest that teachers may be
victims of traditional gender stereotypes themselves. This may have serious implications for
transforming the school culture:

           When teachers – or any other professional that has the ability to make a difference – accept
           inequality as something natural within Armenian culture, they project a mindset to the
           students that is not encouraging the critique of [existing] norms, but acceptance of existing
           norms. (Andresson, 2013)

In higher education, where women constitute the majority of all students, traditional gender
roles persist. A 2013 survey of male and female students at Yerevan State University,
(Center for Gender and Leadership Studies, 2014) 12 revealed that the majority of young
people (over 90% of men and women) think “a woman should have a good education.?
However, a considerably smaller percentage of surveyed students agreed that it is important
or very important “for a woman to have a successful career? (46% of men and 62% of
women respectively). As the Asian Development Bank (2015) suggests, these findings may
indicate that young women “lack self-confidence and do not have career aspirations and that
women fear that being successful in a career could compromise their family life and
challenge their traditional roles as wives and mothers? (p. 40). In other words, gender
stereotypes inside and outside the education system continue to shape educational and career
choices among Armenian young men and women.




12
     The survey included responses from 205 female students and 173 male students between the ages of 16 and
      25.
IV. RECOMMENDATIONS

The articulation of gender policy in Armenia has been an important step towards promoting
gender equality in the education sector. However, this commitment has not yet been fully
translated into education practice. The existence of imbalanced gender representation in
school curriculum and textbooks and the prevalence of patriarchal stereotypes has been
acknowledged in the Concept Paper on Gender Equality, which highlights the need to
develop “an egalitarian gender culture to overcome patriarchal stereotypes and promote
positive public perception of the concept of equal participation of men and women? in
various aspects of social life. Similarly, the Law on Equal Rights and Equal Opportunities
for Men and Women prohibits the reproduction of gender stereotypes in the media,
education, and general culture. As the analysis of the Armenian secondary school textbooks
revealed, however, serious efforts are necessary to ensure a more balanced and fair
representation of gender roles across the different subject areas and teaching/learning
materials. In this context, the following recommendations should be considered:

(1)     Policy/program level
Gender equality should be identified as a goal in state programs and education standards,
either explicitly or in the context of human rights. It is not sufficient for it to be implicit, as
it is currently. For example, gender equity has not been identified as an explicit principle in
the drafts of the State Program on Educational Development for 2016-2025. Since the
Armenian government has already made a commitment to the attainment of these goals by
adopting the Gender Policy Concept Paper in 2010 and the Law on Securing Equal Rights
and Equal Opportunities for Women and Men in 2013, it is necessary to reflect these
commitments in the state program, standards, and related policy documents in order to
consistently address the goals and their implementation in practice.

(2)     Textbooks and teaching/learning materials
Textbooks and teaching/learning materials are powerful tools for conveying and
mainstreaming the principles of gender equality. Thus, it is important “for textbooks to be
covered by policies which respect and include the rights of girls and women for their full
enjoyment of a good-quality education? (UNESCO, 2009, p. 67).

     The principles of gender equality should be consistently translated into educational
      materials and practices at all levels, including state educational standards, curricula,
      syllabi, teacher’s guides, and textbooks through a careful mapping exercise.

     Women’s representation in the textbook content should be more balanced in terms of
      visual and textual representation in order to gain more visibility and appropriately
      acknowledge women’s contributions to all areas of life, including history, politics,
      economics, science, arts, culture, literature, etc. This representation should be carefully
      reviewed and monitored to eliminate gender bias and stereotypes.

     Specific and clear gender guidelines should be developed to inform the work of
      textbook authors in translating gender-sensitive standards into textbooks and teaching
      materials to include more gender-balanced and sensitive representation of women and
      men, as well address the existing gender bias and stereotypes. Gender diversity in
      teams must be encouraged, as strongly endorsed by UNESCO (2009) and other
      organizations.

     All textbooks should undergo a careful review for gender-sensitivity before they
      receive a state approval for use in schools. Specific standards and criteria should be
      developed for the textbook review process. More specific guidelines for developing
      these tools are available in Promoting Gender Equality: A Methodological Guide
      (UNESCO, 2009).

(3)     School culture and teachers
Research suggests that investing adequate resources to implement gender mainstreaming at
different levels of the education system is important for embedding a concern with gender
in educational institutions (Unterhalter et al., 2014). Therefore, in addition to curriculum
and textbook reform, gender awareness should be mainstreamed into the broader system of
education and school culture.

     The principles of gender equality should be reflected in the vocational career guidance
      to address traditional career choices among young women and men. Career advice
      services should ensure they are not reproducing gender stereotypes in their work.

     Gender awareness should be raised among current and future school teachers and
      administrators through in-service and pre-service teacher education programs. This
      will not only improve teachers’ overall levels of qualification but will also enable them
      to engage explicitly with ideas around gender equality.

     Gender awareness should be raised among parents through brochures, posters, mass
      media (including social media), and specific projects.

(4) Research/evaluation/monitoring
Implementation of gender mainstreaming policies and practices in the education system
should be carefully monitored and research should be undertaken to guide policy
implementation.

     Research on gender representation in textbooks and teaching/learning materials should
      be conducted periodically to examine efforts made to eliminate gender stereotypes and
      biases.

     Qualitative studies at the classroom level should be conducted to examine how and
      why teachers and teacher trainers use gender-sensitivity training in their own teaching
      practice, as well as how students respond to and are affected by these interventions.

     Government, local authorities, and schools should collect and analyze performance
      data (such as patterns of under-achievement, dropout, exclusions, or truancy) to
      identify factors contributing to gender difference.
   At the high school and higher education levels, further research should be conducted
    to examine factors that shape gender differences in the choice of field of study.



(5) International agencies
Coordination among various international donor agencies for the collective endeavor of
eliminating gender disparity in education should be encouraged.




References

Andresson, A. (2013). Gender equality in Armenian high schools: A study on gender
equality and discrimination in school. Yerevan: Society without Violence.

Asian Development Bank (2015). Armenia: Country gender assessment.
Australian Human Rights Commission (2011). Human rights education in the national
school Curriculum: Position Paper of the Australian Human Rights Commission
Australian Human Rights Commission.

Blumberg, R. L. (2007). Gender bias in textbooks: A hidden obstacle on the road to gender
equality in education [Background paper prepared for the Education for All Global
Monitoring Report 2008 Education for All by 2015: will we make it?]. Available at:
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0015/001555/155509e.pdf




Council of Europe Gender Equality Commission (2015). Implementation of the Council of
Europe Gender Equality Strategy 2014-2017: Annual Report. Available at:
http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/standardsetting/equality/02_GenderEqualityProgramme/Gender%
20Equality%20Strategy%20-%20Annual%20Report%202015.pdf

European Institute for Gender Equality (2014). Benefits of gender equality. Available at:
http://eige.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/MH0413192ENC_PDF.Web_.pdf

Eurydice (2010). Gender differences in educational outcomes: Study on the measures taken
and the current situation in Europe. Brussels: Education, Audiovisual and Culture
Executive Agency.

Keddie, A. (2009). National gender equity and schooling policy in Australia: Struggles for a
non-identitarian feminist politics. Australian Educational Researcher, 36(2), 21-3.

Longwe, S. H. (1998). Education for women’s empowerment or schooling for women’s
subordination. Gender and Development , 6(2), 19–26.

McCracken, K., Unterhalter, E., Ma?rquez, S. & Chełstowska, A. (2015). Empowering
women and girls through education. Brussels: European Parliament.

Melbourne Declaration on Educational Goals for Young Australians (2008). The
Ministerial Council for Education, Employment, Training, and Youth Affairs.

Ministry of Education and Research, Government Offices of Sweden (2014). Gender
mainstreaming: Fact sheet. Available at:
http://eige.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/05%20Fact%20sheet%20-
%20gender%20mainstreaming%20in%20Sweden.pdf

OECD (1997).
Osipov, V. & Sargizova, J. (2015). General assessment of the content of the Armenian
literature, Armenian history, and Social Science school subjects from a gender perspective.
Yerevan: World Bank.

Society without Violence (2014). Integration of gender component into social science
subjects (Recommendation Package). Yerevan: Society without Violence.

Stromquist, N.P. (2002). Contributions and challenges of feminist theory to comparative
education research and methodology. In J. Schriewer (Ed.), Discourse formation in
comparative education. Peter Lang Publishing, Oxford.

UNDP (2011). Assessment of the level of human rights education and human rights
mainstreaming in the general education system of the Republic of Armenia. Yerevan,
Armenia: UNDP.

UNESCO (2009). Promoting gender equality: A methodological guide. Paris: UNESCO.

UNGEI (2010). Dakar Declaration on Accelerating Girls’ Education and Gender Equality.

Unterhalter, E., North, A., Arnot, M., Lloyd, C., Moletsane, L., Murphy-Graham, E., Parkes,
J., Saito, M. (2014). Interventions to enhance girls’ education and gender equality.
Education Rigorous Literature Review. UK: Department for International Development.




                     APPENDIX I: INTERNATIONAL CASE STUDIES

             Gender Mainstreaming in the Swedish Education System
Sweden, which is currently one of the most gender egalitarian societies in the world, has
been addressing gender equality in national policies since the 1970s (Numhauser-Henning,
2015). Non-discrimination policies are in place to promote gender equality both at the
societal level and within the Swedish education system. The current government has
declared itself a “feminist government? and considers gender equality and non-
discrimination based on gender to be central concerns (Numhauser-Henning, 2015). The
most recent legislation protecting against “discrimination based on gender, transgender
identity or expression, ethnic origin, religion or other belief, disability, sexual orientation or
age? is the Discrimination Act (2008:547), which applies to the workforce as well as the
education system (UNESCO, 2012).

Within the decentralized education system in Sweden there is a dedicated taskforce, the
Ministry of Education and Research (MOER), for the promotion of gender equality.
Additionally, the Swedish government, which is responsible for developing the national
curriculum and guidelines for its implementation, has created the Education Act (2010:800)
establishing non-discrimination in the national curriculum (Båvner, Barklund, Hellewell, &
Svensson, 2011). Curricula at the pre-school, compulsory school, and upper secondary
school levels reference the Education Act (2010:800) in the development of non-
discrimination guidelines, and the act applies to public and independent schools (Båvner et
al., 2011). Standard non-discrimination clauses can be found at each level of the national
curriculum. At the upper secondary level, the statement reads:

       The school should promote understanding of other people and the ability to empathise. No
       one in school should be subjected to discrimination on the grounds of gender, ethnic
       affiliation, religion or other belief system, transgender identity or its expression, sexual
       orientation, age or functional impairment, or to other forms of degrading treatment. All
       tendencies to discrimination or degrading treatment should be actively combated.
       Xenophobia and intolerance must be confronted with knowledge, open discussion and active
       measures. (Skolverket, 2013, p. 4)

This sweeping non-discrimination clause is further developed in the subjects detailed in the
national curriculum at all levels. At the pre-school level, a central concern is the
counteraction of traditional gender patterns and roles. The curriculum calls for pre-schools
to provide opportunities for students to explore their abilities independently of gender-
stereotyped roles (Skolverket, 2011b). These activities serve the fundamental task of the
pre-school to engender the understanding of human life as inviolable and deserving of
freedom, integrity, and equality (Skolverket, 2011b).

The national curriculum at the compulsory school level acknowledges, “The way in which
girls and boys are treated and assessed in school, and the demands and expectations that are
placed on them, contributes to their perception of gender differences? (Skolverket, 2011a, p.
10). As at the pre-school level, the guidelines thus promote opportunities for ability and
interest to be developed without affiliation to gender. The compulsory school curriculum not
only addresses the promotion of gender equality as an overarching goal of education, but
also details how critical thought and consciousness can be developed in each subject. In
religion courses, for example, the curriculum stipulates, “teaching should help pupils to
develop their knowledge of how different religions and other outlooks on life view
questions concerning gender, gender equality, sexuality and relationships? (Skolverket,
2011a, p. 176). As a result of the national curriculum standards aimed at promoting gender
equality, Blumberg (2007) has observed that the textbooks used in Sweden have been
written to promote gender equality and reduce gender stereotypes. Given the explicitly
stated guidelines for the reduction of gender stereotypes in the national curriculum at all
levels, it is not surprising that textbooks and teaching materials in Sweden are more likely to
promote gender equality and prevent the perpetuation of gender stereotypes.

References
Båvner, P., Barklund, A., Hellewell, A. & Svensson, M. (2011). OECD – Overcoming
school failure. Country background report Sweden. Retrieved from:
http://www.oecd.org/edu/school/49528267.pdf
Blumberg, R. L. (2007). Gender bias in textbooks: A hidden obstacle on the road to gender
equality in education [Background paper prepared for the Education for All Global
Monitoring Report 2008 Education for All by 2015: will we make it?]. Available at:
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0015/001555/155509e.pdf
Numhauser-Henning, A. (2015). The Policy on Gender Equality in Sweden. Policy
Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs. Retrieved from:
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2015/510011/IPOL_STU(2015)5100
11_EN.pdf
OECD (2013). Unfinished business – Women and girls front and centre beyond 2015. Paris:
OECD Publishing.
Skolverket (National Agency for Education Sweden). (2011a). Curriculum for the
compulsory school, preschool class and the recreation centre 2011. Stockholm: Skolverket.
Skolverket (National Agency for Education Sweden). (2011b). Curriculum for the
preschool Lpfö 98: Revised 2010. Stockholm: Skolverket. Retrieved from:
http://www.ibe.unesco.org/curricula/sweden/sw_ppfw_2010_eng.pdf
Skolverket (National Agency for Education Sweden). (2013). Curriculum for the upper
secondary school. Stockholm: Skolverket.
United Nations (2002). Gender mainstreaming: An overview. New York: UN.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). (2012).
Sweden. World Data on Education, 7(1). Retrieved from:
http://www.ibe.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/Publications/WDE/2010/pdf-
versions/Sweden.pdf




                 Emerging Gender Mainstreaming Policies in Latvia

Latvia’s experience with gender-mainstreaming is much more limited and less
comprehensive compared to other EU countries like Sweden. Having regained its
independence in 1991, the Latvian government had initially prioritized substantial changes
in its legal system over gender equality policies. The process of accession to the EU and the
adoption of the Acquis Communautaire contributed to the promotion of gender equality in
Latvia’s national policy agenda. As a result, the Ministry of Welfare became the body
responsible for the development of gender equality policy, hosting a Gender Equality Unit at
the Department of European and Legal Affairs. Line ministries are responsible for
coordinating the integration of the gender equality principles into policies, normative acts,
programs, and information campaigns (Novikova, 2014). In May 2010, it was reorganized
into the Gender Equality Commission, which coordinates gender equality policy and
promotes cooperation between Ministries, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), social
partners, municipalities, and other bodies. The Gender Equality Unit is the main executive
institution for gender equality policy within the Latvian administration. The Gender
Equality Commission has a consultative role and also a role in co-ordinating gender equality
policy between different stakeholders (Rastrigina, 2015).

Unlike Sweden, Latvia takes an integrated approach to gender mainstreaming, which means
that the principles of gender equality are taken into consideration while developing new
policies in any area and at all levels. However, this approach does not directly and explicitly
challenge existing policy paradigms or involve a fundamental rethinking of gender
relationships. Compared to other European Union countries, Latvia scores lower on gender
equality related indexes. As a result, after the 8th Parliamentary elections (2002-2006), the
sub-committee on gender equality of the Committee on Human Rights and Public Affairs
was launched to promote the gender equality agenda in politics. The first strategic document
for gender equality policy in Latvia, the Concept Paper on Gender Equality Implementation
(2001), became the basis for the action plans and policy documents. Major policy
documents include the Program for the Implementation of Gender Equality and the Gender
Equality Action Plan 2012-2014. The program focuses on four major action areas: (1)
reduction of gender roles and stereotypes; (2) promotion of healthy and environmentally
friendly lifestyles for men and women; (3) promotion of economic independence for men
and women and their equal opportunities in the labor market; (4) monitoring and evaluating
gender equality policy. However, gender equality policy efforts in Latvia have been
seriously challenged by the recent economic crisis. Because of the lack of financial
resources and budget cuts, the implementation of the Program only includes policy
measures that do not require additional financial or human resources.

Similar to Armenia, female students demonstrate comparable (and sometimes higher)
academic achievement compared to male students and more female students enter higher
education institutions than males. Yet, gender segregation exists in the choice of their fields
of study. Women tend to dominate in traditionally female fields of study such as
education/teaching and nursing, which eventually leads to lower paying jobs (European
Commission, 2012). The 2013 survey confirms that the stereotypes concerning gender roles
are strong and most striking in terms of the labor market dividing professions into "female"
or "male" professions rather than according to each person's individual abilities
(Government of Latvia, 2014). In 2004-2007, extensive public awareness campaigns were
carried out. These campaigns were aimed at different groups in society, including men, to
break stereotypes about "masculinity" or "masculine" behaviors, while promoting and
encouraging men to get involved in caring for children and household duties (Government
of Latvia, 2014).
Various studies suggest that traditional gender stereotypes are reproduced in school
curriculum and media. To reduce educational stereotypes and occupational segregation, the
Gender Equality Committee established a Working Group, which, in 2013 developed
recommendations "On the integration of gender equality aspects into process and content of
all educational levels until 2020." In 2013, Latvia made some significant steps towards
alleviating gender stereotypes in schools by introducing state education standards for all
levels and subjects, which include a non-discrimination clause and specifically reference
gender. In particular, gender equality in educational content is viewed in the context of
human rights as equal rights and opportunities which are free from stigma and
discrimination. For example, one of the goals articulated in the state standards of primary
education is to foster students’ responsible attitude and awareness of the physical and
mental safety, growth, development, relationship, sex, family planning, social norms and
traditions, etc. Gender equality issues are also explicitly addressed in standards for such
subjects as geography, history (including world history and history of Latvia), foreign
language, Latvian literature, social studies, and politics and law.

The next step will be to incorporate these standards in teaching materials and textbooks. In
fact, the National Development Plan of Latvia 2014-2020 and the Education Development
Guidelines 2014-2020 envisage a complex support system to address gender equality goals
which includes the task of incorporating gender equality issues in curriculum and teaching
materials.

References
European Commission (2012). The current situation of equality in Latvia: Country profile.
Available online: http://ec.europa.eu/justice/gender-
equality/files/epo_campaign/130911_epo_country_profile_latvia.pdf

Republic of Latvia (2014). Latvia National report on the implementation of Beijing
Declaration and Platform of Action (1995) and Special Session of the General Assembly
(2000). Available online: www.lm.gov.lv

Novikova, I. (2014). Men and gender equality in Latvia: Comments. Available online:
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/gender-
equality/files/exchange_of_good_practice_fi/lv_comments_paper_fi_2014_en.pdf

Rastrigina, O. (2015). The policy on gender equality in Latvia: Detailed analysis. Brussels:
European Union.
