         DISCUSSION PAPER	                 NO. 1607




Benefits and Costs of Social Pensions
               in Sub-Saharan Africa

               Melis U. Guven and Phillippe G. Leite




                                       June 2016
Benefits and Costs of Social Pensions in Sub-Saharan Africa


          Melis U. Guven and Phillippe G. Leite


                        June 2016
Abstract


The lack of efficient social security systems, the presence of large informal sectors, and the
pace at which the population is aging in some Sub-Saharan African countries are red flags
warning of a potential long-term problem: that is, the inability of countries to provide old-
age income security to all. Many adults in the region have difficulties accessing health care
and other essential services, increasing their vulnerability and their likelihood of becoming
impoverished as they age. Since the coverage of contribution-based pension schemes has
remained low for decades, direct cash grants (henceforth, universal social pensions) are
increasingly proposed as a way to address the coverage gap and to fight poverty among the
elderly. This paper explores the role of universal social pensions in 12 Sub-Saharan African
countries, showing that they may be part of the answer to the coverage gap in pensions and
may be important from a human rights lens. However, they have limited impact on poverty
because a significant share of the elderly population is found not to fall into the poorest and
most vulnerable segments of society. Universal social pensions can also be quite costly,
difficult to sustain in low-income settings, and less cost-effective at fighting poverty
compared to poverty-targeted cash transfer programs. Implementation errors are quite
prevalent in universal social pension schemes, contradicting the apparent simplicity of
identifying program beneficiaries. The report’s main findings are that a discussion of poverty
targeted programs vis-à-vis universal programs is less relevant for policymakers than how to
design and implement a policy or a mix of coordinated and harmonized policies under a
robust system that allows governments to reach their main objectives of meeting the basic
needs of their most vulnerable citizens.


JEL Classification: D61, I38
Keywords: Social pension, elderly poverty, old age poverty, population aging, Sub-Saharan
Africa, targeting social pension, non- contributory cash transfer program for elderly, universal
social pension


                                               1
Acronyms


CSG        Child Support Grant
GDP        Gross Domestic Product
ILO        International Labour Organization
LICs       Low Income Countries
NPS        National Pension Scheme
SSA        Sub-Saharan Africa
UN         United Nations




                                          2
Table of Contents
Abstract ......................................................................................................................................................... 1
   I.      Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 4
   II.     Objectives of Universal Social Pensions........................................................................................... 6
   III.        Benefits of Universal Pensions ..................................................................................................... 8
   IV.         Challenges in Adopting Universal Social Pensions .................................................................... 11
   V.      Cost ................................................................................................................................................. 11
   VI.         Implementation ........................................................................................................................... 14
   VII.        Targeting Errors .......................................................................................................................... 16
   VIII.       Beneficiaries ............................................................................................................................... 18
   IX.         Creating or Adjusting a Universal Social Pension Program: Recommendations ....................... 28
   Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................. 34
   Bibliography ........................................................................................................................................... 37
   Annex I: Adult equivalence scales .......................................................................................................... 41


List of Tables
Table 1: Sample of Large Social Pension Programs in Sub-Saharan Africa 2014*** ................................. 8
Table 2: Spending on Social Pension Programs in Select African Countries ............................................. 13
Table 3: Share of Elderly SSA Population Covered by Social Pensions ........................................... 17
Table 4: Share of Poorest 10 Percent of SSA Households Selected by Universal Programs ..................... 21
Table 5: Composition of the Poorest 10 Percent of Households in Sub-Saharan Africa ............................ 22
Table 6: Simulating Changes in Poverty Rate as a Result of a General Cash Transfer Targeted to
the Poor and of a Universal local ........................................................................................................... 26
Table 7: Running Cost of Progresa in Mexico ........................................................................................... 31


List of Figures
Figure 1: Share of African Working-Age Population Who Actively Contribute to a Pension ..................... 7
Figure 2: Share of African Population above Retirement Age in Receipt of a Pension ............................... 9
Figure 3: Mauritius: Projected Spending on Universal Pension (% of GDP) ............................................. 14
Figure 4: Share of Elderly in Sub-Saharan Africa by Quintiles of Welfare Distribution ........................... 19
Figure 5: Pre-Post Transfer Household Welfare Poverty Rates by Age in Mauritius (2006) ..................... 19
Figure 6: Pre-Transfer Household Welfare Poverty Rates by Age in Zambia (2010) ................................ 20
Figure 7: Pre-Transfer Poverty Household Welfare Rates by Age in Kenya (2005) .................................. 20
Figure 8: Share of SSA Households with Children Who Would Be Protected through a Universal Social
Pension Program ......................................................................................................................................... 24
Figure 9: Cost–Benefit Ratio of Social Pensions and Cash Transfers in Countries Worldwide................. 30



                                                                                 3
I.          Introduction

Universal social pensions, non-contributory cash transfer programs for the elderly, are
increasingly becoming an attractive policy to protect the elderly in Sub-Saharan Africa. Until a
decade ago, few countries in the region had any form of social pension program, but in recent
years the number has increased. Currently, old-age social pensions with varying design
elements are employed in eight countries in the region. Of these eight countries, only the South
Africa and Cape Verde programs determine eligibility on the basis of a means test. The
remaining six  Botswana, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, Seychelles and Swaziland  are
universal programs. In addition, four countries are pilot-testing universal social pensions:
Kenya, Nigeria, Uganda and Zambia. Kenya and Nigeria are also simultaneously piloting means-
tested and pension-tested social pensions as well as universal pensions. 1

                                                                                                    Universal social pensions
      Box 1: Universalism versus Targeting
                                                                                                    are conceived of as a way
      Targeting is a hugely controversial topic, considered anathema by some and panacea by         to improve coverage of the
      others when, as with many divisive topics, the most sensible view is probably somewhere
      in between.                                                                                   elderly population and
      In relation to social protection, the universalist approach proposes that all citizens of a   protect them from falling
      nation receive the same state-provided benefits. Targeting proposes that state-provided       into poverty because
      benefits differ depending on individuals’ circumstances. Proponents of both approaches
      understand that in most developing countries, current budgets do not allow a meaningful       current contributory
      provision of transfers to all citizens, and also that targeting experience is far from        pension programs have not
      uniformly excellent. There are two glasses of milk, each of them half empty and half full;
      the “camps” differ about which they perceive can be filled.                                   been able to expand
      Universalists are optimistic that the social unity resulting from a uniform provision of
                                                                                                    protection beyond a small
      benefits will garner a sufficient budget (nationally financed in middle-income countries      segment of the elderly in
      and donor assisted in low-income countries) to provide meaningful protection.
      Universalists believe that experience with targeting as a way to increase the efficiency of
                                                                                                    the region. Those who
      redistributive spending has been unsatisfactory to date, uninspiring in relation to hope      receive a pension from
      for the future, and detrimental to efforts to increase the budget.
                                                                                                    contributory schemes are
      In contrast, targeters have a more optimistic assessment of targeting experience and are
      hopeful that bad experiences can be replaced by good experiences and that perhaps the
                                                                                                    typically relatively
      good experiences can be improved. Targeters’ pessimism concerns budgets, seeing both          privileged with higher
      political and technical obstacles to budgets becoming sufficient to provide meaningful
      universal benefits.
                                                                                                    incomes and stable jobs, a
      In reality, the distinction between the approaches is not absolute. Even the European
                                                                                                    category that includes civil
      welfare states that have gone the furthest in universal provision of child allowances,        servants. This situation is
      education, and health insurance and have extensive minimum wage laws, labor market
      activation, pension coverage, and the like have last resort needs-based programs that are
                                                                                                    unlikely to change, as a
      tightly targeted.                                                                             large share of the
      Source: Grosh and Leite (2009); and Grosh et al. (2008).                                      population in the region
                                                                                                    lives in rural areas and is
                                                                                                    either unemployed or

1   Pensions-tested schemes determine eligibility based on the receipt of a contributory pension benefit.

                                                                          4
employed in the informal labor market. Current low participation rates in contributory pension
programs mean that the coverage gap for the elderly will continue to be a challenge, since few
elderly will be eligible for a contributory pension in the future as well.

Universal social pensions are considered by some to be the most effective way to reduce old
age poverty because there is a widely-shared perception among policymakers that children and
the elderly are more vulnerable to poverty than the rest of the population. 2 The elderly will at
some point rely on income support from family or government, by this reasoning; thus, by
implementing a universal social pension, governments can generate some form of
redistribution to the poor. In other words, there is an almost axiomatic view that the elderly are
typically poorer than the rest of the population, and that universal social pensions will protect
them from the risk of falling into poverty. 3 Moreover, universal social pensions may contribute
to meeting human rights obligations in a specific country. In short, the basic idea is that
universal social pensions comply with the principles of universality and non-discrimination, and
are aligned with the adoption of a human rights-based approach, responding to international
obligations and commitments while at the same time fighting poverty.

However, others argue that poverty-targeted schemes do more to help the impoverished
elderly than do universal pensions despite targeting errors. They believe that targeting and
implementation can be improved with proper design. They question whether universal
schemes can provide a benefit that is large enough to alleviate poverty.

This paper aims to contribute to an objective analysis of the merits of these tools for helping
the elderly in need. We take a closer look at the assumptions underlying universal social
pensions and test these assumptions against data from countries where such pensions have
been adopted. We examine the experience of these countries in detail to uncover potential
pitfalls in implementing universal pensions. We compare and contrast the effects of social
pensions and poverty-targeted pensions. Finally, we suggest solutions and best practices for

2
  While social pension programs have rarely been evaluated independently, a 2011 report by the Independent
Evaluation Group of the World Bank indicates that any predictable cash transfer program, which can include
universal social pensions, can increase the quantity and improve the quality of household consumption, improve
children’s nutritional intake, education, and health status, and increase household expenditures on productive
activities and assets needed to build the resilience of the most disadvantaged population. This finding has been
replicated in several other studies (e.g., Grosh et al. 2008). Hence, cash transfers are key policies to protect
household consumption and human capital while helping reduce poverty and increase productivity in a permanent
way.
3
  “In low and middle income countries the majority of older people do not receive a pension. Social pensions are
non-contributory cash transfers paid regularly to older people. They are widely acknowledged to be one of the most
effective social protection tools to reduce old age poverty and invest in human capital development.” Pension
Watch, www.pension-watch-net.
See also Handayani and Babajanian (2012) Social protection for older persons: Social pensions in Asia.


                                                        5
countries that are interested in creating a universal pension program, or in adapting an existing
program to be more effective.

II.     Objectives of Universal Social Pensions

All countries grapple with how best to reduce poverty for the elderly, given limits on both their
budgets and their ability to accurately track individual needs in their populations. These
challenges can be particularly severe in developing countries, which have more people in need
than resources available, and whose economies are not fully developed. Policy tools that are
effective in many developed countries may be far less successful in emerging economies.

In particular, contributory pension schemes, which cushion the elderly against poverty in many
developed countries, are often ineffective in emerging nations, including those in Sub-Saharan
Africa (SSA). Most countries in the region have some sort of contributory pension program that
was either inherited from colonial times or established after independence. In such a program,
participants are required to pay contributions during their work life in return for pension
benefits in retirement. These systems, however, have been unable to extend coverage beyond
the formal sector, which comprises employees from the public sector, state enterprises, and
large private companies, resulting in stubbornly low pension coverage for the elderly. 4 A large
share of the region’s adult population 5 has no access to contributory pension schemes during
their work lives, leading to a significant coverage gap in income security in old age.6

Increasing the coverage of contributory schemes remains a regional challenge. 7 A large share of
the population in SSA is composed of the rural poor, who are either unemployed, employed in
the informal labor market with low-paying jobs, or “employed” in small subsistence agriculture
production. They are not earning enough to set aside money for old age and have no incentive
to take part in the current system. Thus, the SSA recipients of a pension from a contributory
scheme are relatively privileged, with higher and stable incomes.

The rural poor are highly unlikely to have access to or participate in earnings-related schemes.
Figure 1 presents active contributors to pension programs in the region as a share of the
working-age population. In the countries presented in Figure 1, contributors account for less
than 25 percent of the working-age population, except for Seychelles where the share is

4
  While contributory pension coverage varies among countries, the share of elderly in receipt of a pension from a
contributory scheme typically does not go beyond a maximum of 20 percent of the population above retirement
age, leading to a substantial coverage gap among the elderly in the region.
5
  For purposes of this policy note, individuals 16-64 years old are representative of the adult-age population.
6
  For purposes of this policy note, individuals 65 years old and older are representative of the elderly population.
7
  Actually, as presented in Rofman et al. (2013), the Latin America and Caribbean region faced a similar problem.
Growing concern about the negligible progress on coverage of the old-age population with contributory schemes
led to an emphasis on policies that would address the coverage gap.

                                                         6
significantly higher, although even there nearly half of the working-age population does not
contribute. While the affordability of contributions prior to retirement is probably the most
important factor in low participation rates, lack of trust in the system due to governance issues
is another likely contributor.

         Figure 1: Share of African Working-Age Population Who Actively Contribute to a Pension

                                      Active Contributors / Working-Age Population
  55%
  50%
  45%
  40%
  35%
  30%
  25%
  20%
  15%
  10%
   5%
   0%




Source: Pensions Database HDNSP, World Bank (2013).


In order to address this significant coverage gap in old-age income security, several countries
have introduced or are considering non-contributory cash benefit schemes for the elderly. A
social pension program, unlike a contributory program, does not require contributions prior to
retirement. Therefore, in theory a social pension would help all of the elderly in a country, not
just those who have a formal work history.

Until the last decade, only a few countries in the SSA region had some form of social pensions:
(a) a universal social pension program, (b) means-tested social pension programs; or (c)
pension-tested social pension programs. South Africa’s older persons grant, the oldest program
in the region (introduced in 1927), is administered on the basis of a means test. As Table 1
shows, social pensions with varying design elements are currently employed as a tool for old-
age poverty alleviation in eight SSA countries: Botswana, Cape Verde, Lesotho, Mauritius,
Namibia, Seychelles, South Africa, and Swaziland.




                                                           7
                   Table 1: Sample of Large Social Pension Programs in Sub-Saharan Africa 2014***
                       Income Level of     Social Pension Program       Monthly      Ratio: Monthly     Eligibili      Targeting
                          Country*                                      Benefit     Benefit Amount      ty Age
                                                                         (US$)     over Intl. Poverty
                                                                                  Line 1.25 PPP a Day
                                                                                            **
    Botswana          Upper-Middle       State Old Age Pension           29             1.43            65            Universal
    Cape Verde        Lower-Middle       Minimum Social Pension          60             1.82            60          Means-Tested
    Lesotho           Lower-Middle       Old Age Pension                 39             1.56            70          Pension-Tested
    Mauritius         Upper-Middle       Basic Retirement Pension        109            4.91            60            Universal
    Namibia           Upper-Middle       Old Age Pension                82****          2.40            60            Universal
    Seychelles        Upper-Middle       Old Age Pension                 173           11.38            63            Universal
    South Africa      Upper-Middle       Older Persons Grant             155            5.92            60          Means-Tested
    Swaziland         Lower-Middle       Old Age Grant                   26             1.14            60          Pension-Tested
Source: Pension Watch, http://www.pension-watch.net/country-fact-file (accessed January 2014).
Note: *World Bank 2013 Income classification. ** This share represents how large the monthly benefit is
compared to the international poverty line of 1.25ppp a day. *** Other countries in the region with social
pensions–Angola, Benin, Guinea-Bissau, and São-Tomé e Principe–are not included in this table due to limited
information. ****ILO (2014) report set the monthly benefit at 600NAD a month.

III.          Benefits of Universal Pensions

In a broad discussion of universal social pensions, advocates often align the concept with
human rights obligations. Their premise is that universal social pensions comply with the
principles of universality and non-discrimination. The adoption of a human rights-based
approach, in this view, responds to international obligations and commitments (such as the UN
Social Protection Initiative launched in 2009). In addition, it can help countries design a
comprehensive approach to tackling poverty, since the elderly are seen as largely vulnerable to
poverty. Finally, advocates of universal social pensions such as Help Age International 8 argue
that these programs maximize inclusion of the elderly poor. Exclusion of the elderly poor, they
say, is a problem often present in poverty-targeted programs due to “targeting errors.” 9 The

8
  See http://www.pension-watch.net/
9
  Extract from key debate topics at http://www.pension-watch.net/key-debates/key-debates/targeting/
“…Poverty-targeting misses poorest: It is often argued that targeting the poorest is a more efficient approach. For a
set amount of money, the belief is that cash transfers will have more impact if restricted to the poorest. However,
one of the little-acknowledged facts of targeting is that this approach has huge margins for error. Evidence from
existing schemes shows that those targeted at the poorest groups miss many who are meant to receive them, and
benefit many who are not eligible. Help Age has yet to see an example of any poverty-targeted scheme in a
developing country that reaches over 50% of the target group. Errors occur as a result of various factors. Eligibility
criteria always involve some level of subjectivity, and this means that such criteria can miss people who are
vulnerable. Additionally, targeting systems often involve administrative hurdles for individuals to claim the grant.
This can include complicated application forms and visits to administrative centers. These kinds of hurdles are most
challenging for the poorest people. Many are unable to read or write and frequently live in remote rural areas, far
from an administrative hub. A key lesson here is that the larger the target group, the lower the margin for error.
For example the old age pension in South Africa that targets older people (excluding the rich) is more effective at

                                                                    8
major benefit of universal social pensions is considered to be a reduction in poverty. We
examine the evidence for this claim generally here, and in more detail later in this paper.

Of the eight countries that have social pensions, only the programs in South Africa and Cape
Verde determine eligibility on the basis of a means test. The remaining six have universal social
pension programs.10 As expected, countries with a social pension have been able to extend
coverage to a much larger share of the elderly relative to countries constricted to a
contributory pension program. Figure 2 presents statistics from the International Labor
Organization (ILO) on the share of the retirement-age population in receipt of a pension. The
coverage of the elderly in Cape Verde, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, and South Africa is
significantly higher, ranging between 78 and 100 percent. Given this success, other SSA
countries are considering social pensions, and four—Kenya, Nigeria, Uganda, and Zambia—are
at the pilot stage of testing universal social pensions. Kenya and Nigeria are simultaneously
experimenting with means- and pension-tested social pensions.11

                                     Figure 2: Share of African Population above Retirement Age in Receipt of a Pension

                                                    120
       Share of population above legal retirement




                                                    100
            age in receipt of a pension (%)




                                                     80

                                                     60

                                                     40

                                                     20

                                                      0




Source: ILO (2010).
Note: The database uses self-reported administrative data as its primary source of covered populations,
and there is no agreed-upon framework for what the covered working-age population is. Also, coverage of
the working-age population is affected by the relative size of the economically active population.



reaching the poorest than a narrowly targeted social pension. All this points to universal pensions as the most
successful way of reaching the poorest, with some reaching 100% coverage…”
10
   The programs in Lesotho and Swaziland are pension-tested; in practice, however, Swaziland does not implement
the pension test.
11
   Recently, Rofman et al. (2013) confirmed the important trend towards relying more heavily on social pensions in
Latin America and the Caribbean as opposed to the expansion of contributory pensions to address the coverage
gap in old-age pensions.

                                                                             9
Experience thus shows that universal social pension programs are indeed an effective tool to
expand coverage of the elderly in Sub-Saharan Africa (and elsewhere). These programs have
proved to be an improvement over the contributory schemes that have failed to expand
coverage beyond a fraction of the elderly. In addition, universal social pensions programs can:

   1. Lead to some improvement in the human capital of children. Researchers and think-
      tankers have shown social pensions to have positive effects on children. Duflo (2003)
      and Ambler (2011) found that social pensions had a significant impact on
      granddaughters in South Africa in relation to HIV/AIDS infection, while Knox-Vydmanov
      (2010) highlighted their impact on the education of children in Zambia. It must be noted
      that this improvement is not universal and only reaches households where elderly and
      children are co-residents. Other authors such as Legido-Quigley (2003) and Ferreira et
      al. (2001) indicate that even when programs help develop human capital they fail to
      reach everyone. South Africa’s program did not reach South African grandparents under
      60 years old who took care of HIV/AIDS orphans in the early 2000s, since they were
      ineligible for the old-age grant. In general, however, universal pensions, like other cash
      transfer programs that help mitigate income constraints that affect utilization of basic
      services (e.g., education and health care), can be expected to have a positive impact on
      the human capital of children.
   2. Improve the status of the elderly in SSA countries. Advocates say that social benefits
      provided directly to the elderly will improve their status in the household, since the
      elderly will be seen as contributing to household income. Advocates say this status
      boost would not occur with a general cash transfer program, as the program beneficiary
      is often the head of household (in many cases, a woman), leaving any elderly household
      members invisible or causing them to be considered a burden to the household since
      they do not contribute to household income.
   3. Simplify implementation. Universal social pensions are conceptually simple, which
      advocates suggest will make their implementation easier than other cash-transfer
      programs. The underlying argument is threefold. First, having age as the sole eligibility
      criterion makes it significantly easier for administrators to implement a program and to
      reach the intended group. Second, having age as the only criterion prevents the
      potential stigma attached to the poverty-targeted grants and at the same time are
      gender-neutral. Third, built-in errors that might result from relying on either estimated
      income (proxy means test) or self-reported income (means test), as well as other
      possible conflicts caused by more complex selection criteria, are avoided.




                                               10
IV.      Challenges in Adopting Universal Social Pensions

While there are benefits to social pensions, much depends on the way the programs are
implemented and whether potential pitfalls can
be eliminated. Because impact evaluation
literature on universal social pensions is limited,
                                                      Box 2: Household Survey Data Used
we conducted analyses and simulations using
national representative household survey data          For this analytical work, we explored the standard
                                                      statistical data analysis, econometric models, and ex
from 12 SSA countries (see Box 2) to prepare a
                                                      ante model simulations to prepare a comparative
comparative cross-country assessment of
                                                      cross-country assessment of similarities and
similarities and differences among the                differences, such as in living arrangements, elderly and
populations in the countries. Our goal was to         non-elderly welfare, the role of equivalence scales for
evaluate the benefits as well as the potential        welfare measurement, and social assistance
challenges of universal social pensions, for the      performance in different countries in the region. All

benefit of countries that are either considering      data analysis in this work was done on 12 household
                                                      surveys from Sub-Saharan Africa: Rep. of Congo,
adopting them or that are attempting to make
                                                      Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Mozambique,
existing programs more effective. Our findings
                                                      Namibia, Nigeria Rwanda, Uganda, and Zambia. The
are highlighted below.                                list of household surveys by year is presented below:

V.       Cost                                                                                               Year
                                                                           Rep. of Congo                    2011
The fiscal affordability of universal social              Ghana                                        2005
                                                          Kenya                                        2005
pension programs presents a key challenge for             Malawi                                       2010
policy makers in the Sub-Saharan Africa region.           Mali                                         2009
                                                          Mauritius                                    2006
Clearly, a universal social pension program is an         Mozambique                                   2008
                                                          Namibia                                      2009*
effective tool to improve social protection               Nigeria                                      2010
                                                          Rwanda                                       2005
coverage in old age. An expansion of coverage,            Uganda                                       2009
nevertheless, comes with a fiscal cost. Müller            Zambia                                       2010

(2009) highlights fiscal sustainability as a       Source: World Bank ASPIRE Data Base.
                                                   *Namibia 2009 data was manipulated by authors using the ASPIRE approach
dominant recurring theme of the universal
social pension program in Bolivia (Bonosol)
since its inception. Monchuk (2013) finds that
the universal old-age pension in Lesotho is one
of the most expensive programs in the country, despite covering only 4.4 percent of the
population.

Given that fiscal cost is so crucial for policy makers in their decision-making, advocates of
universal social pensions have also done some research into their costs. A simulation conducted


                                                              11
by Help Age International 12 and ILO 13 found that universal social pensions would cost around 1
percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in African countries. They argue that this associated
cost, while not insignificant, is affordable, and can be justified given the positive impacts
associated with universal pensions.

However, the experience of countries with well-established universal pensions shows that their
fiscal costs are higher than 1 percent of GDP. For example, South Africa spends more than 1.7
percent of GDP on its social pension programs, while Namibia spends 1.1 percent of GDP. In the
Seychelles, spending on the universal social pension program is close to 2 percent of GDP, and
in Mauritius, it accounts for 2.2 percent of GDP.

The high cost of universal social pensions has significant implications for other safety-net
spending. As Monchuk (2013) shows, in most African countries, especially low-income
countries (LICs), spending on social safety nets is low in comparison with other countries
worldwide. Average spending on safety nets in LICs is about 1.1 percent of GDP.

Given the expense associated with large social pensions, we found that SSA countries with
them (e.g., Lesotho, Mauritius, and Namibia) spend most of their social protection funds on old-
age programs. For example, in Mauritius, universal old age pension program account for 60
percent of social safety net spending. In addition, in countries with a large share of the
population covered by pensions, (i.e., Cape Verde, Lesotho, Namibia, Mauritius, and South
Africa), the expenditure on social pensions as a share of GDP is quite high (see Table 2). This can
create a real financial burden for countries such as Cape Verde and Lesotho, given the large
extent of poverty (that is, the need for safety nets) and the limited national income (that is,
resources available to distribute) because their tax revenue is quite low. 14

One way to assess the magnitude of these countries’ spending on universal pensions is to
compare it against total spending on social safety net programs and against total government
spending. Table 22 presents spending on social pension programs relative to total social safety-
net spending and to GDP in select countries where data is available. Except for Botswana, the
countries shown allocate between 29 and 61 percent of their total social safety-net spending to
social pensions. In Mauritius and South Africa, where data on total government spending is
available, the amount spent on social pension’s accounts for more than 20 percent of total
government spending.



12
   Knox-Vydmanov (2011).
13
   International Labour Organization (2010).
14
   Note that the civil service pensions in Botswana and South Africa are fully funded, creating fiscal space for social
pensions.

                                                          12
                    Table 2: Spending on Social Pension Programs in Select African Countries
       Country                     Targeting                 Eligibility       Monthly          Social Pension
                                                                Age           Benefit ($)         Program
                                                                                                  Spending
                                                                                                 Percent       Share of Total SSN
                                                                                                    of           Spending (%)
                                                                                                   GDP
 Botswana                 Universal                              65               29               0.33                9
 Cape Verde               Means Tested                           60               60               0.40               NA
 Lesotho                  Pensions Tested                        70               39               1.77                38
 Mauritius                Universal                              60              109               2.20                39
 Namibia                  Universal                              60              82**             1.1**              61**
 Seychelles               Universal                              63              173               1.70                51
 Swaziland                Pensions Tested                        60               26               0.60                29
 South Africa             Means Tested                           60              155               1.72                49
 Kenya (pilot)            Universal/Means Tested                 65               18              1.09*
 Nigeria (pilot)          Pensions Tested                        65               32              1.23*
 Uganda (pilot)           Universal                              65               9               0.84*
 Zambia (pilot)           Universal                              60               12              0.47*
Source: Monchuk (2013), ILO (2014) and author’s calculation (2014).
Note: *This estimate assumes that the program is scaled nationally. **According to an ILO (2014) report.


Fiscal costs will present an increasing challenge in countries with an aging demographic. This
challenge will be more pronounced in countries that are projected to age faster (i.e., Seychelles
and Mauritius), as old-age dependency ratios increase. 15 Even in Namibia, where universal
social pensions are important for poverty alleviation, ILO (2014) highlights concerns about
sustainability and duplication of benefits.16

In order to show the long-term fiscal cost of social pensions, a simulation exercise was
conducted for Mauritius, which can expect the aging of its population to have a substantial
impact on the fiscal cost of its universal social pension program. Currently, the universal social
pension stands at around 17 percent of average wages in Mauritius. The exercise assumes that
the benefit amount will remain constant as a share of average wages and takes into
consideration the aging process. The projections reveal that the current high cost of the
universal social pension in Mauritius will increase further and will reach almost 7 percent of
GDP in the long term. If the indexation of the universal social pensions is lower than wages,

15
   ILO (2014) highlights the issue with aging demographic in Namibia. The report states that after 2030 the rise in
the old-age dependency ratio is projected to be larger than the child dependency ratio, pushing up the total
dependency ratio. In the report’s words, “These trends bode well for a cautious expansion of social protection
provisions in the medium run, which can be sustained in the long run, provided there is (among other factors)
adequate economic growth and labour absorption.”
16
   Two suggestions in the report are to create a targeted benefit which can be used to pay more benefits to the
remaining eligible group using a simple means test, or to exclude those in the tax system. The main gains would
come from disqualifying the top 20 percent of earners, thereby ensuring that wealthier individuals, who are mainly
in the formal sector (and mostly public servants) and those in receipt of the Veterans’ Subvention are not eligible
for old-age benefits.

                                                                      13
then the cost would be lower; however, it would not be inaccurate to assume that
governments would not let the benefit level decrease markedly in real terms and therefore the
cost would increase significantly (Figure 3).

              Figure 3: Mauritius: Projected Spending on Universal Pension (% of GDP)

 8%
 7%
 6%
 5%
 4%
 3%
 2%
 1%
 0%
      2012
      2014
      2016
      2018
      2020
      2022
      2024
      2026
      2028
      2030
      2032
      2034
      2036
      2038
      2040
      2042
      2044
      2046
      2048
      2050
      2052
      2054
      2056
      2058
      2060
      2062
      2064
      2066
      2068
      2070
      2072
      2074
      2076
      2078
      2080
While cost is perhaps the most serious concern related to universal social pensions, our analysis
also uncovered other concerns such as implementation challenges, targeting errors and
inaccurate expectations about the elderly, based on the experience of countries that have
adopted social pensions.

VI.    Implementation

Similar to other cash transfer programs, universal social pension programs are exposed to
implementation challenges. One such challenge is the absence of a reliable management and
information system. For example, once a decision on eligibility has been made, an elderly
individual should receive a social pension only until he or she is deceased. However, if the
database is not updated by the beneficiary family or the system lacks interoperability with the
civil registry, the death will not be recorded and the administrators may continue to pay the
benefit if they do not have the means to ascertain that the recipient is deceased. In such cases,
the benefit may sit in a bank account for months, for example, without anybody collecting it.
Moreover, the absence of a reliable database (e.g., a social registry of potential beneficiaries) is
likely to lead to fraud and errors, as some individuals may collect the benefit before they have
reached eligibility age and others (in most cases surviving relatives) may claim the benefit for a
deceased beneficiary. Mobility issues and illiteracy present concerns for any cash transfer
transaction that involves the elderly, including universal social pensions. Populations in remote
areas or those with mobility constraints (e.g., health issues or disabilities) have limited access to
cash transfer “payment centers,” inhibiting their access to regular cash transfers. Additionally,



                                                 14
in low-income countries, illiteracy rates are higher, making a significant segment of the
population more susceptible to being taken advantage of.

In practice, universal social pensions are likely to miss those who need cash transfers the most,
the poorest.17 Lack of documents and residence in remote areas are characteristics that relate
more to the poor. In addition, the absence of an open registration process, social registry, and
robust monitoring process are important challenges in identifying the poor, whether they are
elderly or not:

        •    In Uganda, an Overseas Development Institute report (2012) 18 highlights a number
             of challenges related to implementation of a social pension program. These mainly
             include difficulties in verifying the age of beneficiaries, especially in sub-counties;
             lack of staff at the local government level; delays in reporting deaths of
             beneficiaries; delays at pay points caused by system failures; large private costs to
             access benefits, including long distances to pay points; and difficulties in
             administering the program due to limited automation, especially at the lower levels
             of local government.
        •    In Zambia, a Help Age (2009) report underscores the problems caused by lack of an
             open registration process for social pensions in the Katete region. The program
             excluded anyone who turned 60 (the cutoff for receiving pensions) after the initial
             registration was completed. There was no mechanism for updating the registry as
             people aged. Furthermore, despite a relatively strong system of national registration
             cards, some people had cards with inaccurate information; and, in terms of
             institutional capacity, delays in releasing funds for beneficiary payments meant that
             payments often arrived late.
        •    In Bolivia, Müller (2009) highlights that outreach to the poorest areas of Bolivia was
             inefficient because elderly slum dwellers and poor rural inhabitants were least likely
             to be able to present the requisite identity card for payment confirmation (some did
             not have any identity papers). At the same time, the poor were most likely to suffer
             from administrative shortcomings such as outdated beneficiary information or a
             duplicate card number, and to live long distances from branch offices or other pay
             points (which meant that they spent substantial amounts of money and time to
             collect the Bonosol).




17 See Müller (2009) and Hanlon et al. (2010).
18 Bukuluki and Watson (2012).

                                                 15
VII.    Targeting Errors

Another challenge in implementing universal social pensions is the presence of targeting errors, a
fact that on its face may seem surprising. Having age as the sole criterion for a pension scheme
would seem to make it easy to distribute pensions and reduce errors from the more complex
eligibility schemes in typical poverty-targeted programs. Many who favor universal social
pensions have suggested that one advantage of such pensions is they are less susceptible to
targeting errors. According to Help Age, “one of the little-acknowledged facts of [poverty]
targeting is that this approach has huge margins for error. Evidence from existing schemes shows
that those targeted at the poorest groups miss many who are meant to receive them, and benefit
many who are not eligible. Errors occur as a result of various factors. Eligibility criteria always
involve some level of subjectivity, and this means that such criteria can miss people who are
vulnerable.”

To be sure, errors of inclusion and exclusion are a challenge in implementing a targeted program.
But universal programs are not exempted: Targeting errors, including large errors, are also found
in universal programs. Rofman et al. (2013) show that universal social pension schemes do not
cover the entire elderly population, due to various unforeseen implementation issues. The large
errors observed in universal social pensions are due to implementation issues such as those
presented above.

The challenges of using even a simple indicator such as age to determine eligibility in a low-
capacity environment are underestimated. While age may be a simple variable to verify, at least
conceptually, it is a complex variable to ascertain in a low- or middle-income setting. In most poor
and developing countries, the share of citizens without an official identification is not negligible.
In particular, official identification coverage is low for the poor; many likely do not have access
to an ID or any other documentation for the purposes of age verification. Consequently, these
elderly are rejected for an old-age benefit, either because they cannot prove their declared age or
because administrators have to estimate their age based on “events.” This potentially leads to errors
in implementation, as it means people will be included who may be younger than the eligibility
age, and people will be excluded if they meet the eligibility criteria but cannot prove their age with
a formal identification document.
The errors identified above can occur in a surprisingly large percentage of the population. It is
clear that there are inclusion and exclusion errors for the universal programs in Botswana, Lesotho,
and Namibia, and exclusion errors in South Africa. (South Africa’s program is not universal by
definition but can be considered to be universal given its extensive coverage.) Figure 4: Share of
Elderly in Sub-Saharan Africa by Quintiles of Welfare Distribution




                                                    16
        35

        30
                                                                                  1st     2nd     3rd      4th      5th
        25

        20
   %




        15

        10

         5

         0




Source: Authors’ calculation based on the following household surveys: Ghana 2005; Kenya 2005; Malawi 2010; Mali 2009; Mauritius 2006 (pre-
transfer); Mozambique 2008; Namibia 2009; Nigeria 2010; Republic of Congo 2011; Rwanda 2005; Uganda 2009; and Zambia 2010.
Note: Post-transfer welfare for all countries but Mauritius.


 below shows that universal pensions can have more or fewer beneficiaries than expected due to
the fact that inclusion and exclusion errors or ghost beneficiaries exist. Notice that in Botswana,
Lesotho, and Namibia, the number of pensioners in both the contributory (column 1) and non-
contributory (column 2) pensions is higher than the total number of elderly in the country (column
4). This indicates either many “young” retirees or systemic error and fraud.

                       Table 3: Share of Elderly SSA Population Covered by Social Pensions
                                                                     Old-Age Beneficiaries                     Target            Second
                                                                                                             Population        Beneficiaries

                                            Recent        Contributory       Social             Total        Above Age           Coverage
                                             Year          Pensions         Pensions                           Limit            (Excluding
                                                                                                                               Contributory)
                                                           (Thousands)      (Thousands)      (Thousands)         (Thousands)

                                                               (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)           (2)/(4)
 Botswana
                                             2009               0               91               91                  74          122.5%
 (65+ population)
 Namibia
                                             2011              97              1374             234                1492           91.9%
 (Projection for 60+ population)
 South Africa
                                             2010             337             2,490             2,827             3,7543          66.3%
 (Projection for 60+ population)




                                                                     17
 Lesotho
                                            2008              0               80              80              751           106.6% 19
 (Projection for 70+ population)
 Source: Pensions Database HDNSP, World Bank; 1-2006 Lesotho Population and Housing Census - Volume 11 Census Tables Report, BOS; 2-
 2009-2010 National Household Income and Expenditure Survey, Namibia Statistics Agency; 3-Statistics South Africa, Country Projection by
 Population Group, Sex and Age (2002-2013); 4 – ILO (2014) and authors' calculation (2014).



VIII.     Beneficiaries

In addition to the fact that unforeseen implementation challenges occur with universal pensions,
some of the expectations about the income status and age of those who stand to benefit from them
is contradicted by the experience of a number of countries. Below, we examine two notions: that
the elderly are among the poorest citizens, and that giving a benefit to the elderly will result in
redistribution to other population groups, such as poor children.

Advocates 20 of social pensions argue that social pensions benefit the elderly because they are
poorer than the rest of the population. In order to assess the poverty situation of the elderly relative
to the rest of the population, we looked at where the elderly fall in terms of the household per
capita consumption distribution of the population in 12 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, using
nationally representative survey data.

The results of the analysis, which is presented in Figure 4, show that of the 12 countries, only
Mauritius, Namibia, 21 and Uganda have a significant share of the elderly in the bottom 40 percent
of the population. These findings corroborate results from an analysis by Kakwani and Subbarao
(2005) utilizing household survey data for 15 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, and also are
consistent with the results of earlier analysis by Devereux (2001), Kakwani and Subbarao (2005),
Devereux (2001), and Grosh and Leite (2009). Moreover, Figures 5a-c depict three countries in
which the elderly are not poorer than other groups (such as children), even considering pre-transfer
status in Kenya and Zambia.




19
   Recent calculations indicate that this figure is between 121-130% on the basis of administrative data and population projections
reported by the Lesotho Bureau of Statistics and UN Population projections.
20 See Kakwani, and Subbarao, K. (2005) for a discussion around this axiomatic view.
21
   The fact that Namibia has a higher share of elderly among the poorest 40 percent (~60 percent) is corroborated by Levine et al.
(2011) findings. The author had disaggregated the number of universal social pension recipients by income decile and found that
the poorest 40 percent of individuals receive almost 70 percent of universal social pension benefits, which is a good result but
raise concerns about leakage.

                                                                  18
              Figure 4: Share of Elderly in Sub-Saharan Africa by Quintiles of Welfare Distribution22



         35

         30
                                                                                                                    1st           2nd        3rd           4th        5th
         25

         20
     %




         15

         10

          5

          0




Source: Authors’ calculation based on the following household surveys: Ghana 2005; Kenya 2005; Malawi 2010; Mali 2009; Mauritius 2006 (pre-
transfer); Mozambique 2008; Namibia 2009; Nigeria 2010; Republic of Congo 2011; Rwanda 2005; Uganda 2009; and Zambia 2010.
Note: Post-transfer welfare for all countries but Mauritius.


          Figure 5: Pre-Post Transfer Household Welfare Poverty Rates by Age in Mauritius (2006)

               40
                                                            Pos-transfer poverty                    Social pension poverty reduction impact
         P     35
         o
         v     30
         e
         r     25
         t
               20
         y
           15
         R
         a 10
         t
            5
         e
                0
                    0
                        2
                            4
                                6
                                    8
                                        10
                                             12
                                                  14
                                                       16
                                                            18
                                                                 20
                                                                      22
                                                                           24
                                                                                26
                                                                                     28
                                                                                          30
                                                                                               32
                                                                                                    34
                                                                                                         36
                                                                                                              38
                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                        42
                                                                                                                             44
                                                                                                                                  46
                                                                                                                                       48
                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                                 52
                                                                                                                                                      54
                                                                                                                                                           56
                                                                                                                                                                 58
                                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                                           62
                                                                                                                                                                                64
                                                                                                                                                                                     66
                                                                                                                                                                                          68
                                                                                                                                                                                               70+




                                                                                                    Age

Source: Author’s calculation based on Mauritius Household Survey 2006.


22The main results hold even when equivalence scales (adult or standard) are used. Data is available for a sample of countries upon
request.

                                                                                               19
           Figure 6: Pre-Transfer Household Welfare Poverty Rates by Age in Zambia (2010)

            35

          P 30
          o
          v 25
          e
          r
            20
          t
          y
            15

          R
            10
          a
          t
          e 5

                0
                      0
                      2
                      4
                      6
                      8
                     10
                     12
                     14
                     16
                     18
                     20
                     22
                     24
                     26
                     28
                     30
                     32
                     34
                     36
                     38
                     40
                     42
                     44
                     46
                     48
                     50
                     52
                     54
                     56
                     58
                     60
                     62
                     64
                     66
                     68
                    70+
                                                                                                Age
Source: Authors’ calculation based on Zambia Household Survey 2010.


            Figure 7: Pre-Transfer Poverty Household Welfare Rates by Age in Kenya (2005)

           30

        P
        o 25
        v
        e 20
        r
        t
          15
        y

        R 10
        a
        t 5
        e

            0
                0
                    2
                        4
                            6
                                8
                                    10
                                         12
                                              14
                                                   16
                                                        18
                                                             20
                                                                  22
                                                                       24
                                                                            26
                                                                                 28
                                                                                      30
                                                                                           32
                                                                                                34
                                                                                                     36
                                                                                                          38
                                                                                                               40
                                                                                                                    42
                                                                                                                         44
                                                                                                                              46
                                                                                                                                   48
                                                                                                                                        50
                                                                                                                                             52
                                                                                                                                                  54
                                                                                                                                                       56
                                                                                                                                                            58
                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                      62
                                                                                                                                                                           64
                                                                                                                                                                                66
                                                                                                                                                                                     68
                                                                                                                                                                                          70+




                                                                                                Age

Source: Authors’ calculation based on Kenya Household Survey 2005.

While it may be true in the aggregate that the elderly are poorer than the rest of the population,
the literature as well as data analysis performed in this work do not confirm such a view when it
comes to subpopulations. This research shows that impact of social pension programs on overall
poverty is marginal because a significant share of the elderly population is found not to fall into
the poorest and most vulnerable segments of society. Moreover, as stated previously, errors are
prevalent in universal social pension schemes despite the assumed simplicity of identifying

                                                                                           20
program beneficiaries, due to weak implementation arrangements and low investment in
monitoring and information systems.

In general, therefore, universal social pension programs that only use age as eligibility criteria
and do not take into consideration the poverty situation of the elderly would seem to generate
a limited impact on poverty reduction in the majority of SSA countries.

In examining why more poor do not benefit from universal pensions, we discovered that one of
the underlying assumptions about family structure in these countries is not borne out by the
data. Many advocates of universal social pensions have argued that virtually everyone will benefit
from old-age pensions since the elderly live with their families and spend on their families.
However, studies show this is not the case. Watkins (2008) found that in Zambia, age, gender of
household head, disability status, and even orphan status are ineffective at reducing the poverty
gap, compared to an enhanced poverty-targeted method. In other words, this study found that
using categorical targeting methods such as age generated less impact on poverty than did
poverty-targeting methods. Along the same lines, the data in Table 4 shows that universal
transfers to the elderly (age 65 and older) would mostly go to the non-poor households. In fact,
Mauritius, Namibia and Mali, are the only countries with a large share of elderly among the
poorest households, 38, 32 and 43 percent respectively. In other, old-age schemes would mainly
reach non poor households in contrast to ‘children’ targeted programs. In fact, we looked at the
demographic structure of the households that fall in the poorest 10 percent of the population.
The results of our analysis (Table 4) show that in the majority of the countries, poor households
have at least one child, while the share of households with elderly is quite small. With the
exception of Mauritius, more than 90 percent of the poorest decile households have at least one
child under age 15.

           Table 4: Share of Poorest 10 Percent of SSA Households Selected by Universal Programs
                                                                                                               Rep. of Congo
                                                                              Mozambique
                                                                  Mauritius




                                                                                           Namibia




                                                                                                                               Rwanda

                                                                                                                                        Uganda
                                                  Malawi




                                                                                                                                                 Zambia
                                                                                                     Nigeria
                                  Ghana

                                          Kenya




                                                           Mali




Poorest Households with…



Children                         93%      96%     98%      95%    64%         91%          92%       92%       96%             95%      92%      93%
The Elderly                      23%      20%     14%      43%    38%         15%          32%       23%       15%             13%      22%      15%
Source: Authors’ calculation based on the following household surveys: Ghana 2005; Kenya 2005; Malawi 2010;
Mali 2009; Mauritius 2006; Mozambique 2008; Namibia 2009; Nigeria 2010; Republic of Congo 2011; Rwanda
2005; Uganda 2009; and Zambia 2010.

The implications of these household characteristics on the poverty impact of a universal social
pension program are evident, as shown in Table 5. A universal social pension would miss a
significant share of the poor in all 12 countries, since the program would select only 15–43

                                                            21
percent of the poor households, leading to an exclusion of a majority of the poor by design. 23 In
contrast, a universal program for children would reach more than 90 percent of the poorest
households in all countries except Mauritius, where a significantly higher share of the poorest
households (64 percent) would still be captured compared to a universal social pension program,
where only 38 percent would be selected.

Household survey data show that most of the poorest households have a large concentration of
children (those under 15 years old). The demographic structure of households in SSA is quite
heterogeneous and children are more likely to be poor than the elderly (see table 5).24 Acosta et
al. (2011) find similar results when comparing programs for children and the elderly in Latin
America and the Caribbean, supporting the view that to achieve poverty reduction, choosing the
beneficiaries is almost as important as targeting.

As previously noted, universal social pensions provide some support for human capital
development in children. However, if the objective of a universal pension program is to improve
human capital, it should be reiterated that these programs miss large segments of poor children.
In Table 5, the middle column, in bold and underlined, shows the percentage of very poor
households that have at least one child under 15, but no elderly member. In Malawi,
Mozambique and Rwanda, more than 70 percent of households fall into this category.

            Table 5: Composition of the Poorest 10 Percent of Households in Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                Percent of Households According to Household Composition
                                                                              Households     Households
                                                                                                            Households
                                                     Only                         with        without
                                                                 Missing                                   with Children Households
                                                    Elderly                     Children      Children
 Total                     Number of Households                 Generation                                   (under 15)   with Adults
                                                   Living in                   (under 15)    (under 15)
                                                               Households 25                                  and with   (16-64) Only
                                                  Household                   and without     and with
                                                                                                               Elderly
                                                                                 Elderly       Elderly
 Ghana                             5,531,967         4.2            1.4           56.2          3.1            7.8           27.2
 Kenya                             6,933,337         2.5            1.0           66.9          2.8            9.5           17.3
 Malawi                            3,071,674         3.0            2.2           73.2          2.4            6.7           12.6
 Mali                              1,332,939         0.5            0.6           63.6          1.6           25.6           8.2
 Mauritius - Pretransfer             334,508         4.8            0.1           46.9         10.5            6.4           31.3
 Mozambique                        4,610,558         2.5            1.0           73.7          2.1            6.3           14.4
 Namibia                             415,723         1.7            0.7           50.2          3.1           14.5           29.8
 Nigeria                          28,882,581         3.0            1.5           64.1          6.2           11.6           13.5
 Rep of Congo                        954,185         2.4            0.6           64.5          3.3            6.6           22.6
 Rwanda                            1,891,669         1.2            1.8           75.5          2.5            7.4           11.5
 Uganda                            5,200,972         1.9            0.9           69.7          1.6            9.6           16.3


23
   Estimated as 100 percent minus the sum of households with children and without elderly, and households with
adults presented in the bottom half of Table 5.
24
   These main findings hold even using adult equivalent scales.
25 Missing generation households are composed of children under 15 and elderly aged 65 or above. In these
households, there are no adults aged 15-64.

                                                                   22
Zambia                       2,486,113       1.2          0.6         70.3          2.5           6.5       18.9
                                                                  Poorest 10% of the Population
Ghana                         332,992         0.8          1.4        73.5          2.2           18.2       3.9
Kenya                         499,024         1.3          1.8        78.5          0.8           16.0       1.6
Malawi                        232,100         0.3          2.1        85.4          1.0           10.2       1.1
Mali                           77,915         1.0          0.2        54.9          2.0           40.4       1.7
Mauritius - PreTransfer        40,939        12.8          0.2        52.2          14.0          11.2       9.7
Mozambique                    362,406         2.8          0.9        80.3          1.6           9.5        5.0
Namibia                        42,318         0.2          0.7        61.9          1.9           28.9       6.4
Nigeria                      2,063,125        0.7          1.3        73.3          3.6           17.8       3.3
Rep of Congo                   68,044         1.1          1.2        83.0          1.3           11.7       1.7
Rwanda                        170,837         0.8          3.1        83.8          1.5           8.1        2.8
Uganda                        423,076         2.1          2.4        75.7          3.4           14.3       2.2
Zambia                        191,336         0.7          1.0        80.0          1.2           12.4       4.8
Source: Authors’ calculation based on the following household surveys: Ghana 2005; Kenya 2005; Malawi 2010; Mali
2009; Mauritius 2006; Mozambique 2008; Namibia 2009; Nigeria 2010; Republic of Congo 2011; Rwanda 2005;
Uganda 2009; and Zambia 2010.



Figure 8 suggests that the spillover effect on children (missing-generation households and
intergenerational households with children and the elderly) associated with universal social
pensions would reach a mere 9 to 30 percent of all households, since a large majority of
households with elderly in our SSA countries sample do not have children. If looking only at the
poorest 10 percent of households, the expected spillover effect on children would reach 11 to 42
percent of the households in which they live. Again, if the goal is to develop human capital in
children there are more effective ways to achieve that goal than a universal pension.26




26 ILO (2014) indicates, with the caveat of potential underreporting of social pensions in the household surveys, the
universal social pensions would reach 22 percent of poor children and 18 percent of all children.

                                                         23
Figure 8: Share of SSA Households with Children Who Would Be Protected through a Universal Social
                                        Pension Program

 50%

 45%
                                 41%
 40%

 35%
                                                            30%
 30%
                                    26%
 25%
        20%                                                         19%
 20%            18%
                                                                                             17%
                                                             15%
 15%                                                                  13%    13%                      13%
                         12%               11%
                   11%                             10%                               11%       11%
           9%               9%                                                          9%
 10%                                                  7%                       7%                        7%
                                              7%
  5%

  0%




                                          Poor households   All households


Source: Authors’ calculation based on the following household surveys: Ghana 2005; Kenya 2005; Malawi 2010; Mali
2009; Mauritius 2006; Mozambique 2008; Namibia 2009; Nigeria 2010; Republic of Congo 2011; Rwanda 2005;
Uganda 2009; and Zambia 2010.



Experience with both social pensions and poverty-targeted cash transfers has been far from
uniformly excellent. That said, poverty-targeted programs have a larger impact on poverty. For
the SSA countries in the study, we compare the poverty impact of cash transfer programs that
are given to every elderly individual (i.e., universal social pensions), to programs with similar
budgets that are confined to the poor within each population group (i.e., “poverty targeted”
transfers). Simulating the impact of two programs that would have the same effect on their
respective countries’ budgets (1 percent of GDP) shows that a cash transfer program targeted to
the poorest decile of the population would be more effective for poverty reduction than universal
social pensions, even in the presence of targeting errors. (The simulation assumed that 25
percent of the current poor were randomly excluded from the targeted cash transfer program,
while 3 percent of the non-poor population were included.) The result (Table 6) holds for all

                                                       24
households, including missing-generation households where the elderly either live alone or with
orphans—despite the fact that such households are often held up as an example of the benefit
to children of social pensions. In addition, due to the fact that households with children are in
general much larger, the total number of direct/indirect beneficiaries is larger in poverty-
targeted than in universal social pension programs despite the lower number of households
being covered.27




27 A broader discussion of the relative benefits of universal programs versus targeted safety net programs is
available in the literature, including: Acosta, Leite, and Rigolini (2011), Holman et al. (2009), and Knox-Vydmanov
(2011).

                                                        25
Table 6: Simulating Changes in Poverty Rate as a Result of a General Cash Transfer Targeted to the Poor and of a Universal local
                          Pensions Program for 10 SSA Countries, Conditioned on a Fixed Budget
                                                                                                              Household with     Household       Household with
                                                                                 Only Elderly     Missing                                                          Household with    Average     Number of        Number of
                                                                                                              Children (under without Children   Children (under                                                                  Budget (PPP
         Country                Population of Interest                  Total    Living in the   Generation                                                        Adults (18-64)   Household   Beneficiaries   Direct/Indirect
                                                                                                              15) and without (under 15) and      15) and with                                                                      Million)
                                                                                 Household       Households                                                             only        Transfers   Households       Beneficiaries
                                                                                                                  Elderly        with Elderly        Elderly

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (d)=
                                                                                      (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)            (a)           (b)              (c)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (a)x(b)

       Ghana                Current Poverty Rate                        10%        1.00%          6.80%         10.30%            5.20%            17.30%             1.60%
                      Changes in poverty rates due to:
                                                                   ∆   −11.28%     0.00%          -30.88%        -11.65%          -11.54%           -9.25%            -18.75%       $26.30        408,482         2,262,733         $10.70
                   Imperfect targeted program to the poor (pop.)
                     Changes in poverty rates due to:
                    Universal Social Pension’s Program (elderly    ∆   −1.47%      0.00%          -41.18%         0.00%           -5.77%            -5.78%             0.00%         $11.74       915,051         1,023,973         $10.70
                                       pop.)



       Mauritius            Current Poverty Rate                        10%        0.00%          0.00%         15.00%            2.10%             11.10%            2.10%
                      Changes in poverty rates due to:
                                                                   ∆   −49.05%        -              -           -48.67%          -47.62%           -62.16%           -42.86%       $197.62        28,201          125,074          $5.60
                   Imperfect targeted program to the poor (pop.)
                     Changes in poverty rates due to:
                    Universal Social Pension’s Program (elderly    ∆   −2.69%         -              -            0.00%           -52.38%           -18.02%            0.00%        $76.35        72,953           87,539           $5.60
                                       pop.)


       Mozambiqu
                            Current Poverty Rate                        10%        8.00%          7.10%          10.10%           5.50%            14.90%             2.70%
       e
                      Changes in poverty rates due to:
                                                                   ∆   −43.11%     -17.50%        -7.04%         -43.56%          -50.91%           -31.54%           -44.44%        $18.85       400,994         2,197,847         $7.60
                   Imperfect targeted program to the poor (pop.)
                     Changes in poverty rates due to:
                    Universal Social Pension’s Program (elderly    ∆   −4.27%     -100.00%        -29.58%         0.00%           -61.82%           -26.17%            0.00%         $13.78       548,522          634,822          $7.60
                                       pop.)



       Nigeria              Current Poverty Rate                        10%        2.50%          7.30%         10.20%            4.80%            13.90%             2.50%
                      Changes in poverty rates due to:
                                                                   ∆   −60.10%    -80.00%          0.00%         -60.78%          -81.25%           -45.32%           -80.00%       $65.00       2,370,736       16,500,000        $154.10
                   Imperfect targeted program to the poor (pop.)
                     Changes in poverty rates due to:
                    Universal Social Pension’s Program (elderly    ∆   −9.08%     -100.00%       -100.00%         0.00%           -95.83%           -30.22%            0.00%        $23.89       6,451,606        7,446,889        $154.10
                                       pop.)



       Mali                 Current Poverty Rate                        10%       10.40%          0.80%          8.10%            6.80%            13.30%             2.70%
                      Changes in poverty rates due to:
                                                                   ∆   −36.25%     0.00%           0.00%         -34.57%          -19.12%           -42.11%           -74.07%       $65.99         96,195         1,290,752         $6.30
                   Imperfect targeted program to the poor (pop.)
                     Changes in poverty rates due to:
                    Universal Social Pension’s Program (elderly    ∆   −7.23%     -39.42%          0.00%          0.00%           -38.24%           -14.29%            0.00%         $16.85       376,711          466,101          $6.30
                                       pop.)



       Uganda               Current Poverty Rate                        10%       10.50%         25.20%          9.60%            16.90%            14.10%            2.50%
                      Changes in poverty rates due to:
                                                                   ∆   −41.16%     -38.10%        -58.73%        -42.71%          -49.11%           -32.62%           -12.00%       $35.95        456,062         3,018,408         $16.40
                   Imperfect targeted program to the poor (pop.)
                     Changes in poverty rates due to:
                    Universal Social Pension’s Program (elderly    ∆   −8.11%     -100.00%        -53.17%         0.00%           -68.05%           -29.08%            0.00%        $22.56        726,625          841,158          $16.40
                                       pop.)




                                                                                                                   26
                                                                                                                    Household with     Household       Household with
                                                                                       Only Elderly     Missing                                                          Household with    Average     Number of        Number of
                                                                                                                    Children (under without Children   Children (under                                                                  Budget (PPP
           Country                    Population of Interest                  Total    Living in the   Generation                                                        Adults (18-64)   Household   Beneficiaries   Direct/Indirect
                                                                                                                    15) and without (under 15) and      15) and with                                                                      Million)
                                                                                       Household       Households                                                             only        Transfers   Households       Beneficiaries
                                                                                                                        Elderly        with Elderly        Elderly

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (d)=
                                                                                            (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)            (a)           (b)              (c)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (a)x(b)



         Zambia                   Current Poverty Rate                        10%        4.90%         16.90%         10.20%            4.90%             17.10%            2.70%
                            Changes in poverty rates due to:
                                                                         ∆   −11.19%    -44.90%         -18.93%        -60.78%          -46.94%           -55.56%           -48.15%       $38.66        213,238         1,326,446         $8.20
                         Imperfect targeted program to the poor (pop.)
                           Changes in poverty rates due to:
                          Universal Social Pension’s Program (elderly    ∆   −1.50%     -100.00%        -63.91%         0.00%           -77.55%           -51.46%            0.00%        $30.74        268,254          314,334          $8.20
                                             pop.)



         Rwanda                   Current Poverty Rate                        10%        7.30%         15.40%         10.50%            4.40%            10.80%             2.40%
                            Changes in poverty rates due to:
                                                                         ∆   −62.76%    -50.68%         -69.48%        -60.95%          -90.91%           -57.41%           -50.00%        $17.63       180,276          967,597          $3.20
                         Imperfect targeted program to the poor (pop.)
                           Changes in poverty rates due to:
                          Universal Social Pension’s Program (elderly    ∆   −7.70%     -100.00%       -100.00%         0.00%          -100.00%           -57.41%            0.00%         $12.94       245,577          291,507          $3.20
                                             pop.)



         Kenya                    Current Poverty Rate                        10%        4.30%         13.30%         10.50%            2.30%            13.60%             1.00%
                            Changes in poverty rates due to:
                                                                         ∆   −5.10%      -44.19%        -34.59%        -40.95%          -56.52%           -42.65%           -40.00%       $33.78        583,333         3,603,682         $19.70
                         Imperfect targeted program to the poor (pop.)
                           Changes in poverty rates due to:
                          Universal Social Pension’s Program (elderly    ∆   −1.09%     -100.00%        -25.56%         0.00%           -82.61%           -25.00%            0.00%         $17.99      1,095,532        1,279,084         $19.70
                                             pop.)



         Malawi                   Current Poverty Rate                        10%        0.83%         10.40%          10.41%           3.25%            13.74%             0.92%
                            Changes in poverty rates due to:
                                                                         ∆   −22.50%    -33.30%         -30.77%        -21.97%          -33.46%           -25.39%           -17.14%       $20.98        255,688         1,434,052         $5.36
                         Imperfect targeted program to the poor (pop.)
                           Changes in poverty rates due to:
                          Universal Social Pension’s Program (elderly    ∆   −2.99%     -83.20%         -44.38%         0.00%           -67.07%           -16.77%            0.00%         $12.27       437,027          519,039          $5.36
                                             pop.)



         Namibia                  Current Poverty Rate                        10%        0.31%          7.59%         10.49%            5.41%            14.24%             1.23%
                            Changes in poverty rates due to:
                                                                         ∆   −75.00%    -100.00%       -100.00%        -70.48%          -67.54%           -82.09%          -100.00%       $398.90       30,699           200,465          $12.25
                         Imperfect targeted program to the poor (pop.)
                           Changes in poverty rates due to:
                          Universal Social Pension’s Program (elderly    ∆   −26.04%    -100.00%       -100.00%         -0.15%         -100.00%           -72.72%            0.00%        $146.12       83,827           100,214          $12.25
                                             pop.)



         Rep. of Congo            Current Poverty Rate                        10%        3.50%         17.50%          11.00%           3.30%            13.80%             1.00%
                            Changes in poverty rates due to:
                                                                         ∆   −10.65%     -11.43%         0.00%         -10.00%          -6.06%            -19.57%           -10.00%        $92.12        80,517          416,108          $7.40
                         Imperfect targeted program to the poor (pop.)
                           Changes in poverty rates due to:
                          Universal Social Pension’s Program (elderly    ∆   −1.82%      -25.71%         0.00%          0.00%            0.00%            -13.04%            0.00%        $60.24         123,119         143,944          $7.40
                                             pop.)



Source: Authors’ calculation based on following household surveys: Ghana 2005; Kenya 2005; Malawi 2010; Mali 2009; Mauritius 2006; Mozambique 2008;
Namibia 2009, Nigeria 2010; Republic of Congo 2011; Rwanda 2005; Uganda 2009; and Zambia 2010.


                                                                                                                         27
IX.     Creating or Adjusting a Universal Social Pension Program: Recommendations

As the preceding sections have shown, an examination of countries’ experience to date with
contributory pension schemes and universal social pensions finds mixed results for both
programs. Neither type of pension reaches all of the elderly in a country, nor do they go far to
alleviate poverty, even among the elderly. The benefits of contributory pension schemes are
limited primarily to those in the formal employment sector, which is a minority of the population
in Sub-Saharan Africa. On the other hand, universal social pensions, while they reach more
elderly, fail to reach the entire elderly population in these countries. They also are not that
effective at alleviating old-age poverty, as the better-off elderly are much more likely to obtain
the benefit than the impoverished elderly. A stronger impact on poverty could be achieved by
focusing on social assistance programs to cover those in poverty, instead of emphasizing one
population group.

From a purely ethical or human rights perspective, horizontal equity is better achieved with
universal policies, which treat every member of the society in an equal way. However, a stronger
impact on poverty could be achieved by focusing on social assistance programs to cover those in
poverty, instead of emphasizing one population group. Rather than argue the merits of these two
approaches, we suggest combining them. Universal policies need not stand opposed to targeted
policies. Poverty-targeting is not an objective in itself but a method used to improve the impact
of some policies, once policymakers find the right balance between the costs of accuracy and
errors. By focusing some policies on the neediest, governments maximize impact and minimize
cost to achieve a given goal. 28 At same time, targeted benefits to the poor and vulnerable
improve equity, increase household welfare, and improve risk management. Such economy-wide
effects combined with reasonable economic growth can generate significant impacts on poverty
(See Hanlon et al. (2010), Coady et al. (2004), and ECLAC (2000)).

Given that one of the main objectives of a universal social pension program is to alleviate poverty
in old age, it is important to focus beyond coverage and human rights and evaluate what role
social pension programs should play in reducing poverty among the elderly in Sub-Saharan Africa.
To this end, one should take a holistic view in measuring their effectiveness over alternative social
policies in addressing poverty, bearing in mind scarce resources, opportunity costs, and poverty
rates among the elderly relative to other groups (e.g., children), among other considerations.


28
  In practical terms, governments and policy makers have any (or all) of three reasons for targeting: (i) Economic:
given limited resources targeting is needed to maximize coverage of the poor; (ii) Investment: spending on social
programs is an investment in human capital, so to maximize the payoff, investment should focus where returns are
highest (the poor); and (iii) Justice: public spending has historically tended to go to higher-income groups who have
more means, information, and connections (especially to those employed in the formal sector, where the poor are
few).

                                                         28
The preceding sections underline the importance of conducting country-specific analysis before
assuming that universal social pensions are always the right policy tool, keeping in mind the
widespread poverty rates in this region. Therefore, the main findings of our analysis of household
data and of the literature suggest that policy makers need to assess whether enough of the
elderly are indeed among the poorest segment of the population to justify an elderly-focused
cash transfer program (i.e., social pensions). 29

Universal social pensions are one of many tools countries can include in a social safety net, but
care is required to ensure that the pensions effectively benefit needy elderly. Policymakers
cannot afford to oversimplify implementation of any cash scheme, including universal social
pensions.

Conduct a Cost-Benefit Analysis

Experience shows that universal social pension programs can indeed expand coverage of the
elderly population in Sub-Saharan Africa but at a high cost, and are not necessarily an effective
policy for poverty reduction. While these programs have proved to be a promising policy tool
over the contributory schemes that have failed to expand coverage beyond a fraction of the
elderly, the implication of universal social pensions in the region on the overall budget allocated
to safety nets is significant. As Monchuk (2013) shows, in most African countries, especially low-
income countries (LICs), average spending on social safety nets of 1.1 percent of GDP is low in
comparison with spending in countries worldwide. 30 In the SSA countries with large social
pensions (e.g., Lesotho, Mauritius, and Namibia), most of the spending on safety nets goes to
old-age programs. For example, in Lesotho, almost 40 percent of the 4.65 percent of GDP
spending on safety nets is for universal social pensions, while in Namibia the share is 61 percent
of the 1.8 percent GDP spending in safety nets. However, the allocation of significant resources
to social pensions does not translate into poverty reduction.

One tool that can be used to assess the effectiveness of a cash transfer program in reducing
poverty is the cost–benefit ratio, an indicator that measures the poverty gap reduction a program
generates as a result of every dollar invested in program benefits. Based on the World Bank
ASPIRE database, which compiles social protection indicators for more than 50 countries, out of
which a few have universal (or pension-tested) social pensions, we found that in the large
majority of cases (except Latvia and Nepal), cash transfers (either unconditional or conditional)

29 This analysis does not present findings using either adult equivalence scales or economies of scale. However,
Annex 1 includes two examples of such an analysis, for Ghana and Mauritius. They show that the poverty trend is
immune to scales. Such an analysis for all countries would be valuable; unfortunately, the data available for most of
the countries lacks an official adult equivalence scale.
30 Grosh et al. (2008) shows that average spending on social safety net programs is 1.9 percent of GDP, and that in
high-spending countries such as Malawi and Ethiopia, only a tenth of the 4.5 percent of GDP invested in social safety
nets is domestically financed.

                                                         29
would have a larger impact than social pensions for the poorest 20 percent of the population
(Figure 7).

   Figure 9: Cost–Benefit Ratio of Social Pensions and Cash Transfers in Countries Worldwide

                                                  90%
     Cost -Benetit ration for poverty reduction




                                                  80%
                                                  70%
                                                  60%
                                                  50%
                   (poorest 20%)




                                                  40%
                                                  30%
                                                  20%
                                                  10%
                                                  0%




                                                        (U) Cash Transfer   (C) Cash Transfer   Social Pension

Source: Authors’ calculation based on World Bank ASPIRE database (2014).

Given scarce fiscal resources, the high percentage of pension spending creates tradeoffs for other
safety net programs, crowding out spending on essentials such as health and education or on
programs that more effectively reduce poverty. For example, Monchuk (2013) shows that
roughly 15 million people, about 30 percent of South Africa’s population,31 receive at least one
type of social grant; but allocation is skewed towards the old-age grant (representing around 50
percent of the overall budget), which reaches 2 million people, because of its generosity. On the
other hand, an analysis of the household survey data indicates that the child support grant (CSG)
is the main contributor to the 60 percent income increase for the poorest 20 percent of the
population that is associated with the social grants. The CSG benefit is about 23 percent of the
benefit allocated to the elderly under the old-age grant. In this instance, a small program targeted
to the poor has a much larger impact on the poorest population than a large, well-funded social
pension program. The level of the benefit also determines the tradeoffs; in Botswana, for
example, total spending on the universal social pension is lower due to a lower relative benefit
level, minimizing the pension’s potential impact on poverty.

These findings do not point to a crowding-out problem where governments should look for one
of the two programs, that is, social pensions or poverty-targeted cash transfer. They simply show

31 South Africa spends around 3.5 percent of its GDP on its social grants programs, which include several types of
means-tested grants targeted to the elderly, poor families with children, foster families, people with disabilities, and
war veterans.

                                                                                30
that if the objective is reducing poverty, universal pensions may not be as effective and a cash
transfer targeted to the poor, where the elderly poor are also beneficiaries, may be preferable.

Invest in Implementation

The implementation of a universal social pension program requires as much investment as any
other cash transfer program, as can be seen by the experience of nations that have tried it. For
example, Knox-Vydmanov (2010) shows that the running cost 32 of the Katete social pension
scheme in Zambia is around 6 percent of the total transfers, while the pilot in Kalomo had costs
of 15–17 percent. Stewart and Yermo (2009) discover that in Namibia, the universal pension
scheme known as the national pension scheme (NPS), a social pension funded by taxation, has
relatively high overhead costs (however, adding poverty targeting to program criteria does not
increase costs substantially). Watkins (2008) evaluated the administrative costs of different
targeting tools in Zambia and found that targeting specific population groups (the elderly, the
disabled or women-headed households) is marginally cheaper than using poverty targeting
methods, such as a means test or proxy means test. Skoufias et al. (2010), Caldés et al. (2006),
and Coady (2002) confirm this finding, showing that the running cost, one element of
administrative costs, is significant while setting up the program but decreases as the program
matures. Generally, once a targeted program has expanded, the running cost falls below 10
percent, as seen in the programs in Brazil (Bolsa Família), Chile (Solidário), and Mexico
(Progresa/Oportunidades). 33

                                Table 7: Running Cost of Progresa in Mexico
 Year                   Transfers    Administrati      Running        Evaluation      Percent of         Cost-
                                       ve Cost          Cost             Cost        Running Cost       Transfer
                                                                                                         Ratio
                                        (Thousand Pesos Mx$)
                          (a)             (b)           (c)               (d)          [c/(a+c)]          [c/a]
 Dec-97                 265,619.8       28,375.0       223,664.6         36,018.6         46%            0.842
 Dec-98              2,927,151.0        44,649.0       471,574.3       137,215.6          14%            0.161
 Dec-99              6,527,703.5        39,057.0       396,667.0       103,613.4          6%             0.061
 Dec-00              8,478,476.2        14,866.0       304,416.6       140,463.0          3%             0.036
 Total 1997-         18,198,950.
 2000                          5       126,947.0     1,396,322.5       417,310.6          7%             0.077
Source: Coady (2000).


32 The running cost includes all costs linked to the execution of a program such as identification of the population,
delivery of transfers, verification of compliance, cost of payment, etc.
33 Overall administrative costs that include management, strengthening of information systems, oversight,
monitoring and evaluation, payment delivery, asset buying, beneficiary identification, etc., are inevitably higher (as
a share of total budget), because such investments are needed to develop and implement the required infrastructure
to run the program.

                                                         31
In order to address challenges of mobility and illiteracy and ensure eligible individuals receive
regular services, administrators need to prepare a detailed assessment of the accessibility of
beneficiaries to payment centers so that mitigation measures are in place to account for these
costs for this segment of the population and to protect the illiterate and semi-literate from fraud
and corruption.

Finally, the administration of a universal social program requires an efficient and reliable social
registry linked to other databases such as a civil registry that allows for tracking of the deceased.
This will eliminate fraud and errors. To cite a specific instance, in Namibia 91.9 percent of the
total number of elderly are receiving old-age pensions  which would seem to indicate observed
exclusion errors (see table 3). ILO (2014) reports that comparing 2011 administrative data with
the latest census population counts shows that regional coverage rates vary from an estimated
73 percent in Erongo to 112 percent in Oshana. As mentioned before, such errors can be partially
linked to population migration or imperfect data, but as the ILO (2014) report states, “it could
also be a sign of a different kind of administrative leakage wherein persons aged below 60 years
of age also access the benefit.” We may refer to these as inclusion errors of targeting. To mitigate
such errors, a system is needed to monitor beneficiaries and cross-check information with other
databases (e.g., civil registry or contributory pensions). In short, a more developed system and
better implementation are needed to prevent these types of targeting errors in universal social
pensions.

At the same time, the social registry should be able to provide data for those who reach the
eligibility age for the universal social pension on a regular basis—not just during program
implementation—since age is a dynamic variable and people enter the program every day. Using
the data from the registry, administrators can create a dynamic roster of beneficiaries linked to
other databases, which would allow for updating payrolls by adding those who reach the
eligibility age and by removing the deceased.

Use Pensions to Improve the Status of Elderly in the Household

Poverty-targeted cash transfer programs do not necessarily promote the status of a household’s
elderly, but it is possible to design or redesign programs with that aim in mind. One example in
the SSA region is a new program being implemented in the Republic of Congo: the Lisungi Cash
transfer program. This poverty-targeted cash transfer program has three separate pots: one
directed at the general household, to increase household consumption; one for children, to
improve their human capital; and one for the elderly, to promote their status in the household




                                                 32
and to protect them from poverty. A poor household can thus receive as many as three separate
cash benefits if it is deemed eligible for cash-transfer intervention. 34




34 The Lisungi project aims to be a pillar of Congo’s social protection system, and the cash transfer program is the
first to use the system. Households can receive a fixed transfer of $20, a variable per-child transfer of $5 (to a
maximum of three per household) and an individual transfer of $20 per elderly member. Depending on household
composition, transfers can range from $20 to $45 dollars a month, since the government has limited their total to a
maximum of $45 a month.

                                                        33
Conclusion

We may assume that the ultimate goal of providing pension coverage to the elderly in Sub-
Saharan Africa is to reduce old-age risks. Pension systems are designed to help populations
manage risk in old age, but protecting all of the elderly in SSA will require intensive reform of the
current pension schemes. A set of coordinated and balanced interventions is needed to reduce
the risk of poverty in old age, as one moves from work in retirement. In setting out this broad
objective, policy makers need to consider an array of questions to better deal with the poverty
and vulnerabilities of different income groups. Key questions for consideration in this context
are, for example: How much of a country’s scarce fiscal resources should be devoted toward
providing old-age poverty protection if data suggests that other groups may face greater poverty
prevalence or vulnerability? To what degree should a society aim to redistribute income through
the pension system, and how can it ensure that this redistribution is made transparent and
progressive? To be clear, we do not argue against the value of social pensions but against
misunderstandings related to their main objectives: helping people deal with and hopefully
overcome multiple risks.

The increasing support for implementation of social pensions in low- and middle-income
countries should serve as a wake-up call to their governments that such policies must be designed
as part of a larger social protection and labor (SP&L) agenda, since social pensions can have
implications for contributory schemes and overlap with other poverty-targeted transfers. SP&L
policies are needed to widen access to social security in old age, heighten income security, reduce
elderly poverty, and minimize intergenerational poverty by improving the human capital
development 35 of children when the families themselves are unable to do so. It would be
somewhat naïve to expect a social pension to improve all of these indicators at once, and the
trade-offs are not negligible. However, social pensions could help close the old-age social security
gap for those not covered by contributory schemes in the interim while social security reform is
being implemented. An effective targeted social pension would complement the contributory
pension schemes extant in many SSA countries.

Universal social pensions are one element of a SP&L system and must be integrated in the long-
term government strategy of poverty reduction and risk mitigation. The current debate regarding
poverty-targeted or universal policies misses the broad objective of social policies. The discussion
regarding a universal social pension or a poverty-targeted cash transfer program has often failed
to consider the objective of the program. Alderman and Yemtsov (2012) highlight the main

35
  By human capital development, one must understand that due to HIV or other diseases or adult migration; often
the elderly are in charge of raising grandchildren, that is, the elderly are the main caretakers of the family. Given the
lack of income or the irregular remittances received, social pensions can generate some impact on children
outcomes, mainly on health and education.

                                                           34
problem around the targeting discussion as follows: “The greater problem is that the relative
weights placed on these objectives are not overt and, thus, projects may be assessed on criteria
that may differ from the goals.” In other words, discussions are based on elements that are not
directly associated with the main objectives of the program.

Other cash transfer programs have been shown to be more effective at reducing poverty than
grants to the elderly. In South Africa, Monchuk (2013) shows that the child grants program
accounts for 60 percent of the income increase in the poorest groups despite a much smaller
budget allocation than the old-age grants. Soares et al. (2006) show that both BPC—a means-
tested old-age pension and disability grant program—and the Bolsa Família program, which does
not exclude household with elderly only as beneficiaries, jointly were responsible for 28 percent
of the fall in Brazil’s Gini inequality between 1995 and 2004. The two benefits may be combined
for some households, since neither BPC income nor Bolsa Familia income are included in
calculating per capita income. The contribution of Bolsa Família, however, was three times larger
than that of the BPC (21 and 7 percent, respectively), despite the fact that the BPC budget is
almost three times larger than Bolsa Família’s budget.

Thus, broader cash transfer programs targeted to the poor that include the elderly poor can be
more effective in poverty reduction, as they capture more vulnerable populations than a single
program targeted to one population group, such as the social pension. This broader program
definition does not exclude a social pension because those programs have complementary
objectives.

To summarize, complementary policies that benefit all of the elderly  but perhaps reserve
social pensions only for the impoverished among them  need to be designed under the SP&L
system. The literature shows that any kind of unconditional cash transfer, inclusive of social
pensions, leads to improvements in intermediate human capital indicators and consumption as
do conditional cash transfers (that are part of human capital investment interventions), and both
lead to poverty reduction. Cash transfers have multiple benefits for the population as well for the
elderly. Increasing coverage to the elderly at risk of poverty such as in Chile (where social
pensions are designed to exempt the top 40 percent of income earners from coverage), Brazil
(whose Benefício de Prestação Continuada is means-tested to the poor), or Mexico (70 y Mais is
a targeted intervention for the elderly poor) can be valuable to mitigate the risks of old age in
synchronization with other targeted policies to the poor such as Chile’s Solidário, Brazil’s Bolsa
Família, or Mexico’s Oportunidades, in each respective country. Complementary policies, where
programs are targeted to the poor, and not solely to a particular group, can generate better
results in poverty reduction in Sub-Saharan Africa as has happened in other regions.




                                                35
In the end, social pensions (universal or not) should fit into a broader agenda of SP&L reform.36
They must be integrated with the government’s long-term strategy of poverty reduction and risk
mitigation. The current debate vis-à-vis poverty-targeted or universal pensions misses the broad
objective of social policies. Universal and targeted policies are not rivals. What matters most is
not the abstract question of whether or not to target pensions; rather, it is how best to design
and implement a policy or a mix of coordinated and harmonized policies under a system that
allows government to reach its main objectives: helping people deal with and hopefully
overcome multiple risks.




36
  Social Protection and Labor Programs are social assistance (social safety nets) such as cash transfers, school
feeding and targeted food assistance; social insurance such as old-age and disability pensions and unemployment
insurance; and labor market programs such as skills-building programs, job-search and matching programs, and
improved labor regulations.

                                                      36
Bibliography
Acosta, P., Leite, P., and Rigolini, J. (2011). Should Cash Transfers Be Confined to the Poor?
Implications for Poverty and Inequality in Latin America. Policy Research Working Paper No. 5875.
Washington DC: World Bank.

Alderman, H., and Yemtsov, R. (2012). Productive Role of Safety Nets: Background Paper for the
World Bank 2012-2022 Social Protection and Labor Strategy. Social Protection Discussion Paper
No. 67609. Washington DC: World Bank.

Ambler, C. (2011). Bargaining with Grandma: The Impact of the South African Pension on
Household Decision Making. Population Studies Center Research Report 11-741. Ann Arbor,
Mich.: University of Michigan.

Bukuluki, P., and Watson, C. (2012). Transforming cash transfers: beneficiary and Community
Perspectives on the Senior Citizen Grant (SCG) in Uganda. London: Overseas Development
Institute.

Caldés, N., Coady, D., and Maluccio, J.A. (2006). “The Cost of Poverty Alleviation Transfer
Programs: A Comparative Analysis of Three Programs in Latin America.” World Development 34
(5): 818–37.

Coady, D. (2000). The Application of Social Cost-Benefit Analysis to the Evaluation of Progresa.
Washington DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.

       __ (2002). Social Safety Nets, Human Capital and the Poor: Evidence from Recent Program
       Evaluations. Paper prepared for the Asian Development Bank and Inter-American
       Development Bank Workshop on Social Protection for the Poor in Asia and Latin America:
       Concepts and Experiences, Manila, October 21-25, 2002.

Coady, D., Grosh, M., and Hoddinott, J. (2004). Targeting of Transfers in Developing Countries:
Review of Lessons and Experience. Regional and Sectoral Studies. Washington DC: World Bank.

Croome, D., Nyanguru, A., and Molisana, M. (2007). The Impact of the Old Age Pension on Hunger
Vulnerability: A Case Study from the Mountain Zone of Lesotho. Roma: Institute of Southern
African Studies, National University of Lesotho, www.nul.ls/isas.

Devereux, S. (2001). Social Pensions in Namibia and South Africa. IDS Discussion Paper 379.
Brighton: Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex.

Duflo, E. (2003). “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old‐Age Pensions and Intrahousehold
Allocation in South Africa,” World Bank Economic Review 17(1): 1-25.

Dorfman, M., and Pallares-Miralles, M. (2012) Pension Reform Needs in Sub-Saharan Africa. The
World Bank Draft
ECLAC - Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (2000). Equity, Development
and Citizenship. United Nations, Santiago, Chile.

Ferreira, M., Keikelame, M.J., and Mosaval, Y. (2001). Older Women as Carers to Children and
Grandchildren Affected by AIDS: A Study towards Supporting the Carers. Cape Town, South Africa:
Institute of Ageing in Africa, University of Cape Town.

Garcia, M., and Moore, C.M.T. (2012). Cash Dividend: The Rise of Cash Transfer Programs in Sub-
Saharan Africa. ISBN 978-0-8213-8897-6

Government of Zambia (2008). Project Profile: Katete Social Cash Transfer Scheme. Lusaka:
Ministry of Community Development and Social Services.

Grosh, M., del Ninno, C., Tesliuc, E., and Ouerghi, A. (2008). For Protection and Promotion: The
Design and Implementation of Effective Social Safety Nets. Washington DC: World Bank.

Grosh, M., and Leite, P. (2009). “Defining Eligibility for Social Pensions: a view from a social
assistance Perspective.” In: Robalino, D., R. Holzmann, and T. Takayama eds. Closing the Coverage
Gap: The Role of Social Pensions. Washington DC: World Bank, ISBN 978-0-8213-7971-4.

Hagen, K. (2008). The Old Age Pension in Lesotho: An Examination of the Institutional Impact.
Amsterdam: World Granny and University of Utrecht.

Handayani, S. W.; Babajanian, B. (2012) Social protection for older persons: Social pensions in
Asia. Mandaluyong City, Philippines: Asian Development Bank, 2012.

Hanlon, H., Barrientos, A., and Hulme, D. (2010). Just Give Money to the Poor: The Development
Revolution from the Global South. West Hartford, Conn.: Kumarian Press.

Holzmann, R., Robalino, D., and Takayama, N. (2009). Closing the Coverage Gap: The Role of Social
Pensions and Other Retirement Income Transfers. Washington DC: World Bank, ISBN 978-0-8213-
7971-4.

Independent Evaluation Group (2011). Evidence and Lessons Learned from Impact Evaluation of
Safety Nets 2001-2010. Washington DC: World Bank.

International Labor Organization (2010). Extending Social Security to All. Geneva: ILO.

       __________ (2014). Namibia Social Protection Floor Assessment Report.

       ISBN: 978-92-2-128879-4

Kakwani, N., and Subbarao, K. (2005). Ageing and Poverty in Africa and the Role of Social Pensions.
Washington, DC. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/8535
License: CC BY 3.0 Unported.”



                                                38
Kidd, S., and Whitehouse, E. (2009). “Pensions and Old Age Poverty”. In: Robalino, D., R.
Holzmann, and T. Takayama eds. Closing the Coverage Gap: The Role of Social Pensions.
Washington DC: World Bank, ISBN 978-0-8213-7971-4.

Knox-Vydmanov, C. (2010). A social pension in Zambia: Perceptions of the cash transfer pilot in
Katet. HelpAge International. ISBN 1-872590-47-0

       __________ (2011). The Price of Income Security in Older Age: Cost of a Universal Pension
       in 50 Low- and Middle-Income Countries. London: HelpAge International.

       __________ (2013). Should older people be targeted? Social pensions for the elderly or
       social       assistance         for        households.          http://www.pension-
       watch.net/download/51b1c4b729f11

Legido-Quigley, H. (2003). The South African Old Age Pension: Exploring the Role of Poverty
Alleviation in Households Affected by HIV/AIDS. Paper Prepared for the International Social
Security Association Fourth International Research Conference on Social Security. Social Security
in a Long-Life Society, Antwerp, May 5-7.

Levine, S., van der Berg, S. and Yu, D. (2011). The impact of cash transfers on household welfare
in Namibia. Development Southern Africa 28 (1): 39–59.

Melguizo, Á., Bosch, M., and Pages, C. (2013). Better Pensions, Better Jobs: Toward Universal
Coverage in Latin American and the Caribbean. Washington DC: International Development Bank.

Müller, K. (2009). “Contested Universalism: From Bonosol to Renta Dignidad in Bolivia.”
International Journal of Social Welfare 18(2):163–172.

Monchuk, V. (2013). Reducing Poverty and Investing in People: The New Role of Safety Nets in
Africa. ISBN 978-1-4648-0094-8.

Rofman, R., Apella, I., and Vezza, E. (2013). Más allá de las Pensiones Contributivas: Catorce
Experiencias en América Latina. Primera edición – Buenos Aires: Banco Mundial, 2013

Skoufias, E., Lindert, K., and Shapiro, J. (2010). “Globalization and the Role of Public Transfers in
Redistributing Income in Latin America and the Caribbean.” World Development 38(6): 895-907.

Stewart, F. and Yermo, J. (2009), "Pensions in Africa", OECD Working Papers on Insurance and
Private Pensions, No. 30, OECD publishing, © OECD. doi: 10.1787/227444006716.

Taylor, J.E., Thome, K. and Filipski, M. (2012). “Evaluating Local General Equilibrium Impacts of
Lesotho’s Child Grants Programme.” PtoP Project Report. Rome: FAO and World Bank.

Veras Soares, F., Soares, S., Medeiros, M., and Osório, R. (2006). Cash Transfer Programmes in
Brazil: Impacts on Inequality and Poverty. Working Papers 21. Brasilia: United Nations
Development Programme, International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth.

                                                 39
Watkins, B. (2008). Alternative Methods for Targeting Social Assistance to Highly Vulnerable
Groups. Independent Monitoring & Evaluation Study. Kimetrica




                                            40
Annex I: Adult equivalence scales
         Figure A1.1 Poverty rates using per capita or adult equivalence scales by age

Ghana 2010 : Poverty line 2$PPP a day
Dark line: Poverty rate using per capita welfare
Dotted line: Poverty rate using adult equivalent welfare scale

 16.0%


 14.0%


 12.0%


 10.0%


  8.0%


  6.0%


  4.0%


  2.0%


  0.0%
         0   2   4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80




                                                                   41
         Figure A1.2 Poverty rates using per capita or adult equivalence scales by age

Mauritius 2006 : Poverty line 2$PPP a day
Dark line – Poverty rate, using per capita welfare
Dotted line - Poverty rate, using adult equivalent welfare scale

8.0%

7.0%

6.0%

5.0%

4.0%

3.0%

2.0%

1.0%

0.0%
       0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80




                                                            42
               Social Protection & Labor Discussion Paper Series Titles
                                     2014-2016

No.    Title

1607   Benefits and Costs of Social Pensions in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Melis U. Guven and Phillippe G. Leite, June 2016

1606   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Germany-
       Turkey Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Michael Fuchs, Seçil Paçacı Elitok and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1605   Do Bilateral Social Security Agreements Deliver on the Portability of Pensions and Health Care
       Benefits? A Summary Policy Paper on Four Migration Corridors Between EU and Non-EU Member
       States
       by Robert Holzmann, May 2016

1604   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the France-Morocco
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Florence Legro and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1603   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Belgium-Morocco
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Jacques Wels and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1602   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Austria-Turkey
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Michael Fuchs, Seçil Paçaci Elitok and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1601   The Greek Pension Reform Strategy 2010-2016
       by Georgios Symeonidis, July 2016

1507   Integrating Disaster Response and Climate Resilience in Social Protection Programs in the Pacific
       Island Countries
       by Cecilia Costella and Oleksiy Ivaschenko, September 2015

1506   Effectiveness of Targeting Mechanisms Utilized in Social Protection Programs in Bolivia
       by Ignacio Apella and Gastón Blanco, September 2015

1505   Kyrgyz Republic: Social Sectors at a Glance
       by João Pedro Azevedo, Paula Calvo, Minh Nguyen and Josefina Posadas, August 2015

1504   Entering the City: Emerging Evidence and Practices with Safety Nets in Urban Areas
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2015

1503   Pension Patterns in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Mark Dorfman, July 2015
1502   Social Protection in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries: Trends and Challenges
       by Mirey Ovadiya, Adea Kryeziu, Syeda Masood and Eric Zapatero, April 2015

1501   Defining, Measuring, and Benchmarking Administrative Expenditures of Mandatory Social Security
       Programs
       by Oleksiy Sluchynsky, February 2015

1425   Old-Age Financial Protection in Malaysia: Challenges and Options
       by Robert Holzmann, November 2014

1424   Profiling the Unemployed: A Review of OECD Experiences and Implications for Emerging Economies
       by Artan Loxha and Matteo Morgandi, August 2014

1423   Any Guarantees? An Analysis of China’s Rural Minimum Living Standard Guarantee Program
       by Jennifer Golan, Terry Sicular and Nithin Umapathi, August 2014

1422   World Bank Support for Social Safety Nets 2007-2013: A Review of Financing, Knowledge Services
       and Results
       by Colin Andrews, Adea Kryeziu and Dahye Seo, June 2014

1421   STEP Skills Measurement Surveys: Innovative Tools for Assessing Skills
       by Gaëlle Pierre, Maria Laura Sanchez Puerta, Alexandria Valerio and Tania Rajadel, July 2014

1420   Our Daily Bread: What is the Evidence on Comparing Cash versus Food Transfers?
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2014

1419   Rwanda: Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Alex Kamurase, Emily Wylde, Stephen Hitimana and Anka Kitunzi, July 2012

1418   Niger: Food Security and Safety Nets
       by Jenny C. Aker, Carlo del Ninno, Paul A. Dorosh, Menno Mulder-Sibanda and Setareh Razmara,
       February 2009

1417   Benin: Les Filets Sociaux au Bénin Outil de Réduction de la Pauvreté
       par Andrea Borgarello et Damien Mededji, Mai 2011

1416   Madagascar Three Years into the Crisis: An Assessment of Vulnerability and Social Policies and
       Prospects for the Future
       by Philippe Auffret, May 2012

1415   Sudan Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Annika Kjellgren, Christina Jones-Pauly, Hadyiat El-Tayeb Alyn, Endashaw Tadesse and Andrea
       Vermehren, May 2014

1414   Tanzania Poverty, Growth, and Public Transfers: Options for a National Productive Safety Net
       Program
       by W. James Smith, September 2011
1413        Zambia: Using Social Safety Nets to Accelerate Poverty Reduction and Share Prosperity
            by Cornelia Tesliuc, W. James Smith and Musonda Rosemary Sunkutu, March 2013

1412        Mali Social Safety Nets
            by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1411        Swaziland: Using Public Transfers to Reduce Extreme Poverty
            by Lorraine Blank, Emma Mistiaen and Jeanine Braithwaite, November 2012

1410        Togo: Towards a National Social Protection Policy and Strategy
            by Julie van Domelen, June 2012

1409        Lesotho: A Safety Net to End Extreme Poverty
            by W. James Smith, Emma Mistiaen, Melis Guven and Morabo Morojele, June 2013

1408        Mozambique Social Protection Assessment: Review of Social Assistance Programs and Social
            Protection Expenditures
            by Jose Silveiro Marques, October 2012

1407        Liberia: A Diagnostic of Social Protection
            by Andrea Borgarello, Laura Figazzolo and Emily Weedon, December 2011

1406        Sierra Leone Social Protection Assessment
            by José Silvério Marques, John Van Dyck, Suleiman Namara, Rita Costa and Sybil Bailor, June 2013

1405        Botswana Social Protection
            by Cornelia Tesliuc, José Silvério Marques, Lillian Mookodi, Jeanine Braithwaite, Siddarth Sharma
            and Dolly Ntseane, December 2013

1404        Cameroon Social Safety Nets
            by Carlo del Ninno and Kaleb Tamiru, June 2012

1403        Burkina Faso Social Safety Nets
            by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1402        Social Insurance Reform in Jordan: Awareness and Perceptions of Employment Opportunities for
            Women
            by Stefanie Brodmann, Irene Jillson and Nahla Hassan, June 2014

1401        Social Assistance and Labor Market Programs in Latin America: Methodology and Key Findings from
            the Social Protection Database
            by Paula Cerutti, Anna Fruttero, Margaret Grosh, Silvana Kostenbaum, Maria Laura Oliveri, Claudia
            Rodriguez-Alas, Victoria Strokova, June 2014


To view Social Protection & Labor Discussion papers published prior to 2013, please visit www.worldbank.org/spl.
Abstract

The lack of efficient social security systems, the presence of large informal sectors, and the pace
at which the population is aging in some Sub-Saharan African countries are red flags warning
of a potential long-term problem: that is, the inability of countries to provide old-age income
security to all. Many adults in the region have difficulties accessing health care and other essential
services, increasing their vulnerability and their likelihood of becoming impoverished as they age.
Since the coverage of contribution-based pension schemes has remained low for decades, direct
cash grants (henceforth, universal social pensions) are increasingly proposed as a way to address
the coverage gap and to fight poverty among the elderly. This paper explores the role of universal
social pensions in 12 Sub-Saharan African countries, showing that they may be part of the answer
to the coverage gap in pensions and may be important from a human rights lens. However, they
have limited impact on poverty because a significant share of the elderly population is found
not to fall into the poorest and most vulnerable segments of society. Universal social pensions
can also be quite costly, difficult to sustain in low-income settings, and less cost-effective at
fighting poverty compared to poverty-targeted cash transfer programs. Implementation errors
are quite prevalent in universal social pension schemes, contradicting the apparent simplicity
of identifying program beneficiaries. The report’s main findings are that a discussion of poverty
targeted programs vis-à-vis universal programs is less relevant for policymakers than how to
design and implement a policy or a mix of coordinated and harmonized policies under a robust
system that allows governments to reach their main objectives of meeting the basic needs of their
most vulnerable citizens.




About this series

Social Protection & Labor Discussion Papers are published to communicate the results of The World Bank’s
work to the development community with the least possible delay. This paper therefore has not been
prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate for formally edited texts.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s), and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank
and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments
they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgement on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.
For more information, please contact the Social Protection Advisory Service, The World Bank, 1818 H Street,
N.W., Room G7-803, Washington, DC 20433 USA. Telephone: (202) 458-5267, Fax: (202) 614-0471, E-mail:
socialprotection@worldbank.org or visit us on-line at www.worldbank.org/spl.

                                  © 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
