  LE A R N ING PR O DUC T




 Lessons from
Environmental
Policy Lending
Lessons from Environmental Policy Lending

IEG Learning Product




June 29, 2016
     © 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
     1818 H Street NW
     Washington DC 20433
     Telephone: 202-473-1000
     Internet: www.worldbank.org




     This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
     interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World
     Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

     The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
     denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
     part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of
     such boundaries.


     Rights and Permissions
     The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
     knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
     attribution to this work is given.

     Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
     Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-
     2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




Director-General, Independent Evaluation                                  :   Ms. Caroline Heider
Director, IEG Financial, Private Sector and Sustainable Development       :   Mr. Marvin Taylor-Dormond
Manager, IEG Sustainable Development                                      :   Ms. Midori Makino
Task Manager                                                              :   Mr. Stephen Hutton
                                                                    ii



Contents

Preface................................................................................................................................. v
Acknowledgments............................................................................................................. vii
Summary ............................................................................................................................ ix
1. Introduction ..................................................................................................................... 1
2. What does the portfolio look like? .................................................................................. 2
3. In what context is policy lending most effective? .......................................................... 7
4. Political economy in DPF design .................................................................................. 10
5. Lessons on results frameworks ..................................................................................... 14
6. Lessons on DPF preparation ......................................................................................... 27
7. Conclusions ................................................................................................................... 36
References ......................................................................................................................... 37
Appendix A. The Environmental DPF Portfolio .............................................................. 38
Appendix B. Case studies ................................................................................................. 44
Appendix C. Methodology................................................................................................ 58


Boxes
Box 1: Political economy in energy and environmental policy lending in Turkey .......... 11
Box 2: Main findings from IEG Learning Product on DPF results frameworks .............. 18
Box 3: Examples of relatively clear objectives from Environmental DPOs .................... 23
Box 4: Selected outcome-oriented results indicators from environmental DPOs ............ 24

Tables
Table 1: Outcome ratings of environmental DPF ............................................................... 6
Table 2: IEG Criteria for assessing the prior actions (PAs) of development policy
operations .......................................................................................................................... 19
Table 3: Prior action examples ......................................................................................... 20
                                                      iii




Figures
Figure 1: Number and volume of environmental DPOs, FY2000-16 ................................. 2
Figure 2: Types of prior actions supported by environmental DPOs, FY 2000-2016 ....... 4
Figure 3: Lessons from self-evaluations and independent validations/evaluations of
closed environmental DPOs, FY 2000-2016 ...................................................................... 3
                                               v


Abbreviations
AFD    French Agency for Development
BNDES Brazilian National Bank for Economic and Social Development
CEA    Country Environmental Analysis
DPF    Development Policy Financing
DPO    Development Policy Operation
ENR    Environment and Natural Resources
Env PRL Programmatic Loan for Environmental Sustainability
GP     Global Practice
ICR    Implementation Completion Report
ICRR Implementation Completion Report Review
IEG    Independent Evaluation Group
IMF    International Monetary Fund
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency
M&E monitoring and evaluation
NREG National Resources and Environmental Governance
PA     prior action
PEA    Political Economy Analysis
PPAR Project Performance Assessment Report
PRL    Programmatic Reform Loan
SCD    Systematic Country Diagnosis
SDN    Sustainable Development Network
SEA    Strategic Environmental Assessment
TA     Technical Assistance
TTL    Task Team Leader
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
                                           vi


Preface
This report is one of a series of learning products on Development Policy Financing
(DPF) being undertaken by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG), covering a range of
issues such as results frameworks, macro-fiscal frameworks, public expenditure reviews,
environmental and social risk management, political economy, and in this case
environmental policy lending. A forthcoming product will cover the use of political
economy analysis in DPF design and implementation. Consequently these topics are not
covered separately in this report.

This learning product aims to provide operationally relevant lessons from World Bank
Development Policy Operations (DPOs) to inform the design of environmental and other
sectoral development policy lending. The focus is not to evaluate the performance of the
DPF instrument, but rather to draw lessons on the “how” and “why”, and to share what
works and what doesn’t. The specific questions to be answered were:

1.     How has policy lending been used for environmental goals?

2.     In what context can policy lending for the environment be most effective?

3.     What constitutes high-quality design?

5.     What contributes to high-quality monitoring and evaluation?

The main audiences are operational task teams preparing DPF operations, especially
those with environmental objectives. Many lessons are also relevant for country
management units, the Bank’s operational policy and country services vice presidency,
and client governments.

The report draws on a portfolio review of 64 World Bank environmental DPOs, four
field-based case studies in Brazil, Ghana, Indonesia and Turkey, a desk-based case study
for Mexico, desk reviews for 38 closed operations, and more than 20 interviews with
operational staff and managers who have been involved in environmental DPF (see
Appendix C).
                                         vii


Acknowledgments
The report was prepared by Stephen Hutton (Evaluation Officer, IEG) under the
supervision of Marvin Taylor-Dormond (Director, IEG), Stoyan Tenev (Acting Director,
IEG) and Midori Makino (Manager, IEG). Maria Shkaratan carried out the portfolio
review, John Eriksson produced a detailed desk review of environmental DPO experience
in Mexico and provided overall advice and guidance, and John Redwood contributed to
sections on climate change operations in Vietnam and Indonesia and acted as senior
advisor. Vibhuti Narang Khanna provided program support. We are grateful for
comments and advice from Carter Brandon, Andrew Stone, Zeljko Bogetic, Chris
Nelson, Daniel Musiitwa, Aghassi Mkrtchyan, and Moritz Piatti.

Kirk Hamilton, Giovanni Ruta and Fernando Loayza were peer reviewers for this
product.

The team gratefully acknowledges the contributions of present and former World Bank
Group managers and staff who assisted in the report, especially interview subjects.
                                             ix


Summary
Sustainable development, including environmental sustainability, is at the core of the
World Bank Group’s strategy. Environmental policy is a crucial driver of environmental
outcomes and of development and poverty outcomes, because policy frameworks affect
incentives and alter the behavior of public and private sector agents. Policy lending has
been a major part of the World Bank’s lending operations for decades, supporting
economic policy and institutional reforms. In the past most policy lending operations
were multi-sector, but over time the number of operations in specific sectors has
increased, particularly for policy lending with environmental goals.

This report reviews the World Bank’s experience with Development Policy Financing
(DPF) in the Environment sector, broadly defined.1 This product seeks to offer lessons
from evaluation of this experience and inform stakeholders on how to design and
implement this instrument, outlining some of the tensions and tradeoffs that must be
grappled with in design. The main audience is Bank teams helping governments to
prepare and implement DPF with environmental goals, particularly those staff who are
relatively new to the instrument.

The World Bank’s environmental policy lending has grown rapidly since 2005. These
operations have supported policy actions across a broad range of subsectors, including
climate change mitigation, climate change adaptation and disaster risk management,
environmental protection, pollution management, institutional strengthening, and specific
sectoral reforms in energy, transport, water, agriculture, forestry, and other sectors. Many
operations are multi-sectoral but use an environmental lens. Despite the variation in the
types of policies supported, environmental policy lending operations have tended to
generate lessons focusing on a common set of issues. These center around issues of
political economy, of operation design and preparation, and of institutional strength and
capacity. Many of these lessons are not unique to environmental policy lending but rather
to the instrument, and may apply to other sectoral DPF operations or even to multi-
sectoral operations.

Key insights

Environmental development policy lending is most effective when used in a way that
plays to the strengths of the instrument. Environmental policy lending can be most
effective when policy issues are the main barrier to improving environmental outcomes,
rather than capacity or other issues. It offers advantages for achieving sector-wide or
multi-sectoral goals across many projects. It can be most effective when the Bank has
prior knowledge of the country and sector and strong institutional relationships, which
may be developed through use of other instruments. It is useful for those policy issues
that need attention from high-level decision makers, especially in financing and planning
ministries. Its flexibility allows the Bank to take advantage of opportunities as they arise,
1
 Environmental Development Policy Operations were defined as those either mapped to the
Environment sector or Environment and Natural Resources (ENR) Global Practice, or which had
an environmental or natural resource management theme as a primary or secondary theme (see
Appendix C).
                                             x


when the timing for reform in a country is particularly promising, given the presence of a
reformist government or champion; but this can be a risky approach. It can be most
effective when used in combination with other instruments.

A few key design and implementation considerations tend to determine the extent to
which environmental policy lending can be effective. Policy lending is most effective
when there is a clear political theory of change for how the operation will influence
policy outcomes. Examples include supporting policy reforms that would not happen
without the World Bank operation, or in other cases, influencing prioritization, timing, or
technical quality. Policy lending is more effective with a strategy for achieving
institutional buy-in and complementary use of other instruments.

The design of results frameworks lies at the core of DPF design. This process requires
intensive dialog and debate between Bank teams and governments. It involves a number
of tradeoffs and tensions: between ambition and realism, between additionality and
country ownership, between depth and breadth. The strongest policy actions are those
that are relevant, critical, additional, and measureable, as described in a separate IEG
Learning Product on Results Frameworks in DPF. Programmatic series offer a number of
advantages, including the ability to induce or support longer-term government
commitment to reforms. Yet they can be more effective if they endeavor to include
substantial policy actions from the first operation, if they ensure that spacing between
operations matches the time needed to complete reform actions, and if careful
considerations are made about decisions to drop indicative triggers from future
operations.

Monitoring and evaluation systems for environmental DPF have often been weak.
Policy lending faces inherent difficulties in designing monitoring and evaluation
frameworks because of the disconnect between the substantial length of time needed to
observe results and the brief time after which operations are evaluated. Yet even given
this challenge, there are ways in which the quality of monitoring and evaluation in
environmental DPF could be improved. Objectives have often been imprecise or unclear,
and indicators have not provided a direct or adequate reflection of the objectives or sub-
objectives with which they were associated. Results frameworks sometimes end up
measuring processes rather than results or impact. This review offers advice on selection
of objectives and indicators, and notes some pitfalls to avoid.

Analytical work and technical assistance are important to the success of
environmental policy lending operations. Analytical work plays a key role as a
diagnostic and in providing the evidence base on which to persuade decision makers.
Technical assistance is often critical for development of reforms and completion of policy
actions. Yet despite unanimous agreement on its importance, sufficient analytic and
advisory work is not always present. One cause of this has been tightening budgets and
declining availability of trust funds. Another has been the issue of timing and the reliance
on previous analytical work rather than new work commissioned specifically for the
operation. And a third has been the unwillingness of many governments to borrow for
technical assistance.
                                               1




1. Introduction
1.1      Sustainable development, including environmental sustainability, is at the core
of the strategy of the World Bank Group, which states that action on this goal is required
to secure the future of the planet, ensure social inclusion, and set a solid foundation for the
well-being of future generations (World Bank 2013a). Environmental sustainability is also a
critical part of achieving inclusive growth and poverty reduction, because environmental
degradation has a range of negative effects that harm the poor. Environmental policy is a
crucial driver of environmental outcomes and, in turn, of development and poverty outcomes:
policy frameworks affect incentives and alter the behavior of public and private sector
agents. As noted in the World Bank Group’s Environment Strategy (World Bank 2012),
policies can be critical in enabling the private sector to use natural resources sustainably, to
support inclusive and resilient decision making, to improve governance risks, to remove
perverse incentives, and to encourage sustainable growth policies. Supporting policy reforms
remains a high priority under the strategy.

1.2    The World Bank offers three main categories of financing: Investment Project
Financing directly finances specific investments; Program For Results Financing uses
country systems and disburses based on achievement of specific results; and Development
Policy Financing (DPF) supports a government program of policy and institutional actions.
The DPF instrument is intended to achieve development results primarily through the
supported policy reforms and associated policy dialog and support.

1.3     Policy lending has been a major part of the World Bank’s lending operations for
decades, supporting economic policy and institutional reforms. The DPF instrument
established in FY 05 has been used in different ways. Many Development Policy Operations
(DPOs) aim to support economywide, multi-sector reforms that include, for example,
governance, financial sector, and trade and competitiveness issues. In the past, most DPOs
were multi-sector operations. However, the number of sectoral DPOs has grown substantially
in number and commitment amounts over time. Lending through sectoral DPOs has grown,
particularly for policy lending with environmental goals.

1.4     This learning product focusses on the World Bank’s experience with DPOs in
the Environment sector, broadly defined. For the purposes of this review, environmental
DPOs were defined to be any policy lending operation mapped to the Environment and
Natural Resources (ENR) Global Practice or, prior to that, the Environment Sector Board, or
any other policy lending operation with an environmental or disaster risk management theme
as the primary or secondary theme (see Appendix C). This experience covers a wide range of
sectors, including climate change mitigation and adaptation, green growth, natural resource
management, disaster risk management, forestry, environmental policy, and others. Much of
the experience is very new, with 25 of the 64 operations yet to be evaluated. Many of the
active programs are among the first environmental DPOs in their country or region. Many
operations were designed and implemented by teams that included staff with relatively little
policy lending experience, and so the opportunity for learning is substantial.
                                                       2



1.5     This product is not an evaluation of the environmental DPF portfolio; it does not seek
to assess the overall impact of these operations, but rather to use this experience to offer
lessons on how to design and implement this instrument to maximize its effectiveness. The
conception of an effective DPO used through this paper is one that achieves relevant
development objectives through policy reform relative to a counterfactual where the DPO did
not exist. Yet there are seldom definitive answers on best practice in DPF design. The key
challenges often involve tensions where either extreme can cause problems: between
ambition and feasibility, between country ownership and Bank additionality, between breadth
and depth, and others. Thus the lessons that follow are always context-sensitive; the art of
policy lending involves determining where impact is likely to be highest under particular
circumstances and constraints.

2. What does the portfolio look like?
Environmental policy lending represents an important part of the Bank’s work.
Environmental policy lending began with a small number of operations during the 1990s, but
commitments grew rapidly in the 2000s to a peak, at the time of the global financial crisis, of
nearly US$3 billion in both 2009 and 2010 (Figure 1). Though commitments declined after
the crisis, the numbers of environmental DPOs have remained high by historical standards.
Bank lending through environmental DPF has totaled over US$14 billion since 2000.
Although the environment sector was the second smallest in terms of total lending
commitments in the former Sustainable Development Network (SDN), in recent years it was
the second largest of the SDN sectors in terms of DPF commitments. Of SDN sectors,
environment has the highest proportion of commitments coming from DPF (39 percent of
ENR global practice commitments since 2000) as compared to other instruments. Since 2000,
environmental DPF has accounted for roughly 9 percent of the Bank’s DPF commitments.

Figure 1: Number and volume of environmental DPOs, FY2000-16
                  Number and volume of environmental DPOs, FY2000-16
  3,500                                                                                                         9

  3,000                                                                                                         8
                                                                                                                7
  2,500
                                                                                                                6
  2,000                                                                                                         5
  1,500                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                3
  1,000
                                                                                                                2
   500                                                                                                          1
     -                                                                                                          -
          2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

                          Number of operations (right axis)       Commitments $million (left axis)

Source: IEG portfolio analysis. Note that operations prior to FY2005 are adjustment loans, not formally DPOs.
                                               3



2.1     Environmental DPOs have supported a wide range of policy actions. The 64
operations in the portfolio collectively supported 396 environmentally relevant prior actions
covering climate change mitigation, climate change adaptation and disaster risk management,
environmental protection, pollution management, institutional strengthening, and specific
sectoral reforms, along with another 131 policy actions supporting other types of actions (see
Figure 2, and Appendix A Table 5). A database published as a companion to this review can
help project designers locate specific examples where operations have supported particular
types of policies.

2.2     Environmental DPOs are frequently multi-sectoral in nature, especially those
designed as climate change or green growth operations. Many environmental issues are
outside the control of traditional environment agencies, and are rather in the energy, water,
agriculture, transport, and industry sectors. The ability to address environmental aspects of
these sectors jointly through a common approach is a strength of the instrument.

2.3     Despite the wide variation in the types of policies supported, environmental
DPOs have tended to generate lessons focusing on a common set of issues. These include
issues of political economy, operation design and preparation, and institutional strength and
capacity (see Figure 3, and Appendix A Table 6). Many of these lessons are generic to the
instrument, and could also apply to other sectoral DPOs or even to multi-sectoral operations.
They offer the potential for learning within the Bank across institutional boundaries. A
database published as a companion to this review can help project designers locate specific
examples where particular issues have played a critical role. Lessons from individual project
evaluations were heavily focused on use of the DPF instrument and on process issues; they
rarely touched on technical policy issues of specific environmental subsectors.

2.4      Performance ratings for environmental DPOs have been similar to those of the DPF
portfolio as a whole. The World Bank’s 2015 DPF Retrospective noted that 81 percent of
DPF operations during 2012–14 were rated Moderately Satisfactory or above (World Bank
2015); the 2012 Development Policy Lending Retrospective noted a similar figure of 84
percent for operations during 2010–12 (World Bank 2013b). Of the environmental DPF
identified in this IEG report, roughly 60 percent have been evaluated with an ICR and ICRR.
Of those operations, 81 percent were rated Moderately Satisfactory or above (see Table 1). It
is difficult to draw any meaningful conclusions about comparative performance for
subdivisions within the portfolio; given the small size a change in ratings by one increment
(e.g. Moderately Satisfactory to Moderately Unsatisfactory) for a small number of operations
could reverse any apparent patterns.
                                                      4



Figure 2: Types of prior actions supported by environmental DPOs, FY 2000–16




Source: IEG portfolio review.
Note: Number in parentheses is number of instances in the portfolio of a type of prior action.
                                                       5




Figure 3: Lessons from self-evaluations and independent validations/evaluations of
closed environmental DPOs, FY 2000–16.




Source: IEG portfolio review. A “case” is a single standalone operation or programmatic series.
Note: M&E = monitoring and evaluation; TA = technical assistance.
                                                   6



Table 1: Outcome ratings of environmental DPOs
                                                  Number of operations

 Rating               All             Mapped to Mapped to Programmatic Standalone
                      operations      ENR GP    Other GPs series

 Satisfactory         13              6                7               8                   5

 Moderately
 Satisfactory         19              7                12              8                   11

 Moderately
 Unsatisfactory 3                     2                1               1                   2

 Unsatisfactory 4                     1                3               1                   3

 Total                39              16               23              18                  21

 Percent rated
 MS+                  82%             81%              83%             89%                 76%

Source: IEG portfolio review of Environmental DPF.
Notes: Figures are numbers of operations unless otherwise specified. No operations were rated Highly
Satisfactory or Highly Unsatisfactory. ENR GP is the Environment and Natural Resources Global Practice.
                                                  7




3. In what context is policy lending most effective?
3.1       DPF can be a powerful instrument for influencing reform efforts:

         …when policy issues are the main barrier to improving environmental outcomes.
          Environmental goals are heavily affected by policy frameworks, which set incentives
          and regulations that affect decision by the private sector. Many environmental
          challenges include governance, public good, and externality issues where policy
          interventions are needed to achieve efficient outcomes. Many countries have major
          gaps in their environmental policy frameworks and, thus, scope for improvement. If
          the binding constraints are not policy issues but rather issues of capacity,
          enforcement, or others then DPF may not be an effective instrument. For example, in
          an energy and environment DPO series in Turkey the Bank chose to open an
          engagement on environment through policy lending. An IEG evaluation concluded
          that policy barriers were not the most significant ones; rather, the main challenges
          were weak capacity and enforcement of existing regulations, so raising environmental
          standards did not have much impact.

         …for achieving multi-sectoral or sector-wide goals. One of the great challenges of
          environmental management is that most issues are inherently multi-sectoral, crossing
          energy, water, agriculture, urban, industry, and transport sectors in addition to
          environmental management Here the policy lending instrument offers major
          advantages, in that it can help to address environmental issues in these sectors in a
          way that is more difficult for other instruments. Environment agencies are usually
          weak and have little influence on high level government policy making. An
          environmental DPO can help the Bank to engage on environment issues with other,
          stronger ministries, particularly finance and planning.

          With investment lending it can be difficult to influence sector-wide outcomes, and
          although there can be positive spillovers from demonstration or other effects, most
          impacts are within the bounds of the project. Available lending envelopes may be
          enough to fund a single large infrastructure project, while equivalent financing from
          policy lending could change the incentives for all projects in that sector. For example,
          in Himachal Pradesh in India, Bank staff argue that it was more effective to use
          policy lending to change how cumulative impact assessments were done for the
          hydropower sector at a policy level than to engage in hydropower investment lending,
          where available financing would likely be consumed by a single dam. Climate change
          and green growth DPOs can help to create an overarching narrative vision for a
          reform process, tying together efforts in disparate sectors with a common lens of
          sustainable development. Policy dialog attached to operations has the potential to help
          decision makers realize how environmental issues affect the whole economy and
          development agenda.

         … when the Bank has prior knowledge of the country and sector and strong
          institutional relationships. Policy lending requires a substantial degree of technical
                                             8



       knowledge in the country and sector in order to support effective policies. It needs an
       understanding of the political and institutional dynamics, especially within
       government agencies: knowledge of which agencies and what people within them
       have formal and informal authority over particular decisions. And it requires a degree
       of institutional and personal trust, to facilitate access to senior officials and
       willingness within government to collaborate with the Bank.

       DPF can work better as part of a sequence where sectoral knowledge and engagement
       with counterparts has been built up by prior activities. In Turkey, a strong foundation
       of energy sector investment lending laid the groundwork for successful energy policy
       lending, but a relative lack of engagement on the environment made progress more
       difficult. In Himachal Pradesh, India, previous investment lending and a previous
       multi-sector fiscal DPO in the state supported the willingness of the government to
       engage in an environmental DPO. In Vietnam, prior engagement in investment
       lending in the water sector helped with development of a climate change DPO that
       added an environmental dimension to water resource management.

       It is more difficult to start an engagement with policy lending. If these prior forms of
       interaction don’t exist, then engagement is likely to need a longer and more intensive
       preparatory stage, which may also require additional resources.

      …for issues that need attention from high-level decision makers, especially in finance
       and planning ministries. Line ministries may be weak (especially for environment) or
       have limited ability to implement large-scale reform programs. Environmental issues
       have often not been a priority for finance ministries, which do not always recognize
       the substantial economic, poverty, health and other impacts of environmental issues.
       The potential for the substantial financing amount associated with budget support
       helps to get the attention of senior decision makers and the opportunity to convince
       them of the advantages of identifying environmental issues as priorities. DPOs can
       help to influence budget directions, by, for example, helping to protect environmental
       funding during periods of budget cuts.

3.2    DPF can allow the Bank to take advantage of opportunities as they arise, but this
poses risks.

      Sometimes an opportunity arises when a new government or champion emerges
       which has an appetite for environmental reform, and who can generate buy-in from
       line ministries and agencies. It may make sense for the Bank to consider supporting
       policy lending in such cases, even when the existing base is weaker. This possibility
       argues for an ongoing minimal level of analytic work and knowledge generation in
       countries where the Bank believes such an opportunity might occur. However, an
       opportunistic approach can be highly risky and vulnerable to the loss of particular
       champions, and an understanding of these risks by the Bank can help to set
       expectations appropriately.
                                                  9



         Yet it is difficult to support significant environmental policy reforms under emergency
          circumstances. DPF is designed as an instrument for achieving development impact
          through policy reforms, but its ability to offer fast-disbursing budget support also
          makes it appealing for client countries and Bank country management units to use the
          instrument to provide emergency fiscal support in the face of natural disasters, or
          macroeconomic or financial shocks. However, these circumstances tend not to be a
          context in which it is possible to prepare new substantial reforms. There are
          incentives to select prior actions that are either relatively minor or are already existing
          or well-advanced be likely to proceed even in the absence of the DPO. In such cases
          the additional impact of the DPO on policy reforms is modest, and the benefit is
          largely limited to that of the fiscal transfer.

          For example, in Samoa a 2013 DPO was rapidly prepared in the wake of a severe
          cyclone. The operation provided much-needed rapid fiscal support to the government
          on grant terms. But many of the specific prior actions of the operation either were
          weak (including minor changes to planning guidelines and very preliminary
          preparation for transport reforms—which were not implemented), would have
          occurred in much the same manner even in the absence of the DPO, or had been
          completed already before the conception of the operation (IEG 2016b). It did also,
          however, include support for a significant policy action implementing a housing
          reconstruction loan scheme. Although DPOs could be used to support substantial
          reforms on disaster risk management, this usually requires time that is not available
          under emergency circumstances when pressures for rapid disbursement are high.

3.3       The effectiveness of environmental DPF has been dependent on country context.

         It has proven difficult to get country support for environmental policy lending in
          high-poverty contexts. Sometimes these are cases with the most serious
          environmental issues – but they also face the most serious other development
          challenges, so it can be difficult to convince governments to give priority to the
          environment. Doing so requires making a strong economic case, which may be easier
          for environmental policy lending with a focus on natural resource sectors, where
          improved management can be a source of growth. Environmental DPF has been
          easier to support in large middle-income countries, where environmental quality and
          sustainability are a higher priority, and where the size of the Bank’s portfolio is larger
          and more able to support standalone operations in specialist areas.

         The timing of a DPO can be a significant determinant of its impact. Operations may
          be more effective if they are aligned with timing of national development plans and
          decision-making contexts. The Bank needs to have sufficient knowledge of political
          processes to understand the point in the cycle of a government when it is most open to
          being influenced on policy decisions, and to take advantage of opportunities as they
          arise. For example, the substantial portfolio of environmental policy lending in
          Mexico was motivated in part by periodic financial crises that made the government
          interested in budget support, and in part by Mexico’s intensive efforts to meet the
                                             10



       requirements for joining the OECD, in addition to severe domestic environmental
       problems and growing awareness of threats posed by climate change.

3.4      DPF is often most effective when used in parallel or coordination with other
instruments. Bank staff and managers interviewed by IEG often stressed the importance of
“twinning” DPOs with investment loans wherever possible to ensure greater likelihood of
their effectiveness, because each instrument offers its own strengths. Prior investment
lending can help to build the relationships, trust, political and technical knowledge of the
country and sector, and institutional capacity that are needed to support a policy dialog and
reforms. Parallel or subsequent investment lending can help to support implementation of
policies. For example, in a climate change DPO in Indonesia, more progress was made in
renewable energy and disaster risk management in part because of stronger prior Bank
institutional engagement in those areas, supported by ongoing or expected investment
lending projects. Whereas in the same series, forestry actions made less progress in part
because of tensions and lack of engagement between the Bank and the forest ministry,
though powerful competing economic and political interests in the forest sector (absent in
other sectors) also explain much of the difference.

3.5     The DPF instrument has a number of limitations for pursuit of environmental
goals. Although it can help achieve policy changes and bring policy frameworks to the point
where they are ready to be implemented (such as by identifying the necessary enabling
regulations and authorizations), it has seldom been used in the environment sector to improve
enforcement. It can rarely achieve substantial results in a short time because policy reform
can be a slow process with many potential obstacles and/or layers of approvals. It is limited
by the constraints of country capacity and political economy. It is not the best instrument for
supporting long-term capacity building. It should not be used with the expectation of saving
Bank budget: DPOs can still be very costly to prepare.

4. Political economy in DPF
There is a need for a clear political theory of change

4.1     The policy lending instrument can be most effective when there is a clear
understanding of the underlying theory of change for the operation by the Bank. There are
two related but distinct results chains within an operation design. One is technical, relating to
how the specific policy actions supported in an operation will lead to the desired
development outcomes (this is discussed in chapter 5 below). But the other is political,
relating to how the existence of a Bank DPO would lead to changes in what would occur in
the absence of the operation. A political theory of change will identify how the DPO is
intended to have a particular desired impact, and how it will influence stakeholders to
support this impact. This political theory of change may not be explicitly documented, given
political sensitivities, but should be clearly understood and identified by the Bank task team
to inform a strategy for maximum potential influence. This theory is key to ensuring that
policy lending leads to development or environmental impact. Political economy analysis
(PEA) may help to provide knowledge on the political feasibility of reforms and to identify
                                                11



risks and mitigation actions; an IEG review of the use of formal PEA notes that this tool may
be under-used by the Bank (IEG 2016c).

4.2       A DPO political theory of change can include impacts through a number of channels:

         Change occurs because of a policy reform that would not otherwise happen without
          DPO.
         Technical quality of reform is improved owing to Bank support through DPO.
         Timing of reform is accelerated by Bank financing of DPO.
         Sequencing of reforms is improved because of Bank DPO engagement.
         Stakeholder buy-in of reform is strengthened by Bank DPO engagement.
4.3     Policy reforms that would not otherwise happen can sometimes occur in cases when
government needs substantial technical advice from development partners in the design of an
intervention strategy. In other cases it can occur because the large quantity of budget support
funding means that the Bank can elevate existing reform agendas in line ministries
(especially weak environment ministries) up to finance and planning ministries or other
senior decision makers. Sometimes there are cases where a government intends to support
particular reforms, but has struggled to get them done, outside support and pressure from a
DPO can provide needed impetus. For example, in Morocco a green growth DPO helped win
the approval of a regulation on coastal zone management. The regulation had been drafted in
1996, but had not previously been of high enough priority to be formally adopted; the
presence of the Bank DPO helped to put the policy on the agenda of senior decision makers.
But it need not be the case that planned reforms would not happen without the Bank; there
are many other ways in which the Bank can have a positive impact by influencing when and
how reforms occur.

4.4     Policies might be of higher technical quality because of Bank technical assistance
(TA) and policy dialog. The Bank can help governments to set priorities and thus help some
reforms happen earlier than they would otherwise. It can influence the timing or sequencing
of reforms, to ensure that necessary prerequisites are in place. It can act as a relatively neutral
third party to bring confidence to governmental and nongovernmental stakeholders in joint
policy consultation and formulation. An energy and environmental DPO series in Turkey
demonstrates several of these pathways (Box 1).

 Box 1: Political economy in energy and environmental policy lending in Turkey

 The Bank supported a three-operation programmatic series in Turkey on energy policy
 (especially in the power sector), climate change strategy, and environmental policy. On
 energy policy, the operation had a clear theory of change. The country had strong
 ownership of its reform agenda; it was not the case that reforms would not occur without
 the Bank’s DPO series. But the Bank added value by helping the Treasury and senior
 officials to prioritize the most critical electricity sector reforms and to add impetus to a
 reform agenda that was country-owned but was stalling. The high level of financing
                                                12



 (roughly US$2.1 billion) also helped to get the attention needed on electricity policy
 reforms from top government officials, including the cabinet and the high planning
 council; and the need to complete particular actions by a deadline in order for loans to
 proceed helped to apply pressure to implement reforms in a timely fashion. The Bank was
 well respected in government and the private sector, and Bank support for the reforms
 encouraged investor confidence by helping to reassure investors that market rules would be
 fair. The Bank also influenced reform sequencing, helping to ensure that privatization of
 distribution companies and energy market development would be done before privatization
 of generation companies, so that potential bidders for generation assets would know that
 there would be a commercial market with economic pricing for their product.

 However, an IEG evaluation concluded that the political theory of change was weaker for
 most of the environmental policy prior actions. The evaluation noted that on many
 environmental regulations the government had been motivated primarily by the
 requirements of harmonizing Turkey’s environmental regulations with the EU acquis and
 by its own priorities rather than by the Bank’s policy lending or dialog, and that, except in
 water resource management, the Bank was not very involved in the design of policies,
 concluding that the Bank DPO had only modest impacts on improving environmental
 management.

Source: IEG PPAR case study (see Appendix B).

4.5     A range of other political change theories have been successful. The Bank may help
to convince politicians that policies supported by their civil service are of high quality and
that international best practice is being followed. It can give political traction to reform
agendas supported by line ministries. The Bank can help to ensure the robustness of a policy
framework, making sure that it contains all elements necessary for implementation. In
improving air quality management in Brazil, the Bank helped to ensure that the policy
framework included an appropriate legal authorizing environment, and that it established
clear accountability elements identifying responsibilities.

A strategy for achieving institutional buy-in can resolve political economy challenges

4.6     Bank task teams argue that the main political economy issues of environmental DPF
have been those within and between government agencies, rather than risks from private
sector lobbying. (Important exceptions are reforms in the forest sector and for energy
subsidies, where private sector political economy issues are central.) Some teams note cases
where private industry, wanting to reduce ambiguity in rules, has been supportive of
environmental policy reforms with Bank involvement. Clear rules and regulations help to
reduce investment uncertainty and help prevent governance challenges common in
discretion-based systems.

4.7     Finance and planning ministries are the primary counterparts for the Bank for DPF,
but significant line ministry engagement is also required. Policy lending provides general
budget support which is attractive to finance ministries. But line ministries can be reluctant
to embrace the DPF instrument because they do not receive direct financial support yet
                                               13



remain tasked with implementation responsibilities, leading sometimes to an attitude of
“What’s in it for me?” This perception can be particularly strong when the Bank switches
from investment lending to policy lending in a given sector. Environment ministries can
sometimes feel threatened by environmental reform efforts that shift the focus away from
their traditional areas of influence and expertise toward reforms in water, energy, and
transport that are outside of their control.

4.8      Bank teams have found some useful strategies for mitigating this challenge by
highlighting the advantages to line ministries of the instrument. Strong personal and
institutional relationships between the Bank and line agency leaders can help them realize
that they retain substantial influence and control over the agenda. Agency leaders can be
helped to recognize that the DPF modality allows them to use the Bank to obtain greater
attention from senior government decision makers for their own priorities. Bank DPF and
policy engagement sometimes convinces finance or planning ministries that additional
budget for line ministries is required. Provision of TA directly to line agencies can help to get
agencies on board by making them feel that they are getting tangible support directly from
the Bank. In multisector environmental DPOs, where there are policy spillovers across
sectors, agencies may be more disposed to buy in when they realize that the DPO offers them
the opportunity to pursue policy reforms that promote their agendas but require the
cooperation of other ministries. For example, in a green growth DPO series in Morocco, the
choice of specific policies helped to motivate institutional buy-in for the larger program.
Every action in the policy matrix was supported by at least one government agency, but most
required support and input from other agencies as well. The environment ministry was
willing to buy into a water law reform and pollution investment fund driven mainly by the
water ministry, because the environment ministry needed support from the water ministry on
coastal zone management reform. Moving forward on these reforms in parallel at a similar
pace helped to boost cooperation because of mutual advantage.

4.9     Earmarking budget support funds directly to line ministries or agencies is not an
effective strategy. The temptation may arise to try to gain the support of line ministries by
explicitly or tacitly supporting the direct channeling of DPF lending to those ministries or
their agencies. A background paper for the Bank’s most recent Environment Strategy
conducted a stakeholder assessment on environmental DPOs and found that most officials in
client environment agencies criticized the absence of earmarking of sectoral funding in Bank
policy lending (World Bank 2010). But DPF is intended to provide general support to the
overall government budget; Bank guidance advises staff that DPF funds cannot be earmarked
to a specific sector. Finance ministries are welcome to use DPF proceeds however they wish,
including to increase financial support for environmental or other agencies, which may be
desirable when done through regular budgeting processes. But if the Bank is seen as involved
in a specific channeling of resources to line agencies this can have negative consequences. It
can insert the Bank into the relationship between the finance ministry and the line ministries
and their agencies, hampering normal interactions around budget allocation processes. If
agencies become heavily reliant on donor budget support, then there are risks to the
sustainability of their operations when sector budget support operations are closed. Finally, it
can serve to undermine the Bank’s approach to managing risks of adverse environmental and
social effects in DPF, which focuses exclusively on the effects of policies rather than on the
                                              14



impacts of financing. This notwithstanding, IEG has identified cases where a degree of
earmarking appeared to have occurred in Brazil, Cameroon, Ghana, and Vietnam (IEG
2015a) and have triggered some of these consequences.

4.10 One of the most commonly cited lessons is the need for reform champions in
government and political buy-in from key decision makers. Bank staff and evaluations
emphasize the need for support from not just a senior figure with authority, but that of other
secondary officials across ministries. An effective champion is one who can use influence
strategies to achieve change by building coalitions within government. One of the most
substantial operational risks for DPF is that of the loss of key champions; this is a common
reason for unsuccessful or discontinued programs. Mitigating this risk requires building a
broad support base, and recognizing that cases where reforms depend on a single champion
face an inherent operational risk. In Ghana, the finance minister during the design phase was
a major supporter, but his death early in implementation was a factor in the lack of progress.
In Indonesia likewise, a key champion was the finance minister who then left that position. A
decline in government commitment that followed (and had a number of causes) meant that
the planned programmatic series did not proceed beyond the first operation, though some
policy dialog was continued. In Himachal Pradesh, the Bank team argued that the stable
presence, throughout the series, of key senior officials was a major factor behind successful
implementation. Stable institutional political economy in the civil service has proved helpful
in helping to sustain government commitment through a change in government.

5. Lessons on results frameworks
Designing policy areas, actions, and related objectives involves tensions and tradeoffs

5.1     Policy areas and prior actions are the core of the DPF instrument. The decisions
around selection of these actions are arguably the most important in determining the impact
of the operation. Policy areas and their associated sub-objectives define the scope of the DPO
and establish the structure of the results framework.

5.2       In choosing policy areas there can be tradeoffs between depth and breadth.

         As noted in chapter 3, the ability to support environmental policy reforms across
          multiple sectors can be a strength of environmental DPF, especially in pursuit of
          climate change or green growth goals. A broad design allows many areas to be
          addressed through a common environmental lens.

         In several cases, one of the most substantial contributions of a Bank environmental
          DPO has been to establish a platform for cross-sectoral cooperation. Often line
          agencies are deeply siloed, and a DPO has set up working groups and workshops at a
          policy or strategy level that enabled previously unseen levels of interaction across
          ministries.

          Bank teams interviewed by IEG had mixed views on the effectiveness of intersectoral
          working groups. They have been very powerful when it helps agencies to improve
                                           15



    how they manage cross-sectoral issues, and can have spillover effects well beyond
    those of the specific policies supported by the policy lending operation. In Ghana, a
    DPO covering forestry, mining, and environmental management greatly improved
    coordination across the relevant agencies, for example on the environmental impacts
    of mining, and on resolving disputes around mining in forest areas. In Colombia,
    improved cooperation between ministries was one of the most significant impacts of
    an environmental DPO series.

    But working groups were less effective if they were either at so high a level that the
    group was not a priority for members, or if they were at so low a level that members
    had little authority or influence. In Mexico, inter-sectoral working groups played a
    useful coordination role in early environmental DPOs, but in a third operation the
    process deteriorated as implementation progressed, in part because of a complex
    institutional context driven by the decision to cover six sectors (agriculture, energy,
    forestry, housing, tourism, water).

   There are thus risks from program designs that are too broad. A larger number of
    policy areas typically increases the number of agencies involved, which can
    dramatically increase coordination challenges. It also increases the risks of non-
    completion of the series: the more agencies and policy areas there are, the greater the
    likelihood that failure to complete a particular prior action will delay or even derail
    the process. Implementation of policy reforms often requires engagement with sub-
    national agencies, which further increases coordination challenges.

   In Morocco, reducing the number of agencies to work with was a deliberate strategy
    in the process of simplifying the policy matrix. In the first environmental DPO series
    in Brazil, the complexity of the operation, which covered 15 different policy areas
    across many different government agencies, was overly ambitious, and contributed to
    the inability of the series to advance beyond the first operation. A climate change
    resilience DPO in Mexico supported a strategy for sustainable tourism in three states,
    but had implementation difficulties because of a lack of collaborative relationships
    between states and difficulty in engaging with a plethora of entities at the municipal
    level. Too many policies can make a program too complicated, and with a fixed level
    of staff and budget resources can reduce the ability of the Bank to provide detailed
    support in each area. There is a risk that multi-sectoral DPO operations can become
    “Christmas tree” operations that seek to undertake too many things, and then dilute
    the effectiveness of the Bank’s engagement—for example there may not be strong
    synergies between combining environment and education in same program.

    Coordination is a particular challenge when mixing authorities from different levels
    of government (for example, national versus state, province or municipal
    government). Challenges in managing the different responsibilities of federal versus
    state agencies for aquifer water complicated implementation of a DPO supporting
    climate change adaptation in the water sector in Mexico.
                                            16



      The breadth of design can be dependent on factors such as the degree of
       centralization, hierarchy, capacity, and others. It is easier to operate a multi-sectoral
       DPO in a country with a high degree of top-down centralization. In more
       decentralized cases the larger number of agencies that must be engaged to implement
       a reform makes this more difficult. The Bank supported multisector climate change
       DPOs in both Indonesia and Vietnam. Progress was slower in Indonesia, where
       various levels of public administration needed to be mobilized to properly implement
       specific policy actions, as compared to more centralized Vietnam.

5.3     Within each area, the Bank and government jointly select the specific policy actions
to be supported. In selecting policy actions, a number of factors should be considered.

      The primary concern is to choose the actions that fit the technical theory of change
       and results chain of the operation: the supported actions should collectively lead to
       the desired objectives. Specific prior actions in environmental DPF have often been
       too weak to make a major contribution to achievement of their associated policy area
       objective. The actions should be policy changes, not merely production of other
       outputs. A common process is to start with a large number of potential actions, and
       then work with government through a process of winnowing. This process requires
       intensive engagement and debate with relevant line ministries and agencies. It can be
       useful to consider a number of criteria and tradeoffs that may inform this process.

       Selected actions may be those reforms that are highest priority or have the most
       impact. Or they may be those where the Bank presence will make the most difference
       – not necessarily the most important reforms, but those where the existence of time-
       sensitive disbursement conditions are more likely to have an additional effect relative
       to what would occur without the operation, or those where the Bank has the greatest
       ability to improve the technical quality of the policies.

      The choice of actions will often involve tradeoffs between ambition and realism.
       More ambitious actions will increase the potential impact of the reforms. The Bank
       wants to choose policies that are difficult to achieve—otherwise the country would be
       able to do so on its own. There is a risk that reducing ambition too much can dilute
       the impact while still requiring substantial financing. But overly ambitious actions
       may not be feasible to implement, especially in the foreseen timelines. The Bank can
       increase impact by gently pushing government agencies slightly outside their comfort
       zone, but not so far as to overwhelm agency capacities or seriously damage client
       relationships. This inevitably involves making informed judgment calls based on the
       information available at the time.

      Discussions on the selection of actions involve inherent and, preferably, productive
       tensions. Government agencies may seek to commit to less as a way to minimize the
       burden on them and the potential for failure. Bank quality review processes tend to
       push teams to seek stronger actions in order to increase the potential impact and
       justify financing commitments. A degree of customization and compromise based on
       the client relationship is needed. Sometimes the Bank will have to accept that some
                                           17



    needed reforms cannot be achieved in a planned operation. In Mozambique, the Bank
    initially wanted to include a policy reform on forest carbon in a climate change DPO
    series, given that forests played a major role in domestic energy supply, timber
    exports, livelihoods, and environmental services. Yet despite significant efforts the
    Bank did not manage to bridge the gap between the agriculture and environment
    agencies (which bore responsibility for forests and climate change and reducing
    emissions from deforestation and degradation (REDD), respectively) and so
    concluded that the policy area had to be dropped.

   There can sometimes be tensions between additionality and ownership: The Bank
    wants to ensure that reforms have strong ownership from government agencies, but if
    strong ownership already exists in all government parties then potentially a Bank DPF
    is not needed, and the reforms would occur on their own or could be supported by
    standalone TA. If the Bank or other development partners push too hard for reforms
    that government had not planned on making or does not believe in, then this can lead
    to low government ownership and makes the reforms unlikely to succeed. In some
    cases Bank teams have deliberately not chosen policies that might generate
    substantial public opposition when there were concerns that this might affect the
    sustainability of those measures. Policies that are highly partisan can face substantial
    risk of being reversed. A green growth DPO in Colombia illustrates one approach
    where the Bank has made a meaningful additional impact on government-owned
    reforms. The specific policy actions were already present in the government’s
    national development plan. The Bank added value not by coming up with new
    policies, but by helping the government to identify and prioritize the most critical
    issues, and by helping it to put specific regulations and plans in place to make legal
    changes implementable.

   There are sometimes incentives for Bank task teams to select policy actions that are
    convenient, rather than high-impact. This can lead to an operation that proceeds and
    disburses, but does little to advance the program objectives. Selection of policies that
    have been completed before the preparation of the DPO (or are so well advanced that
    the Bank cannot make a meaningful contribution) should be avoided. An IEG
    evaluation of an environmental management DPO in Brazil concluded that there was
    little evidence that the Bank’s DPO made a contribution to significant progress on
    environmental reforms undertaken by the Brazilian government, because many of the
    operation’s prior actions had been completed long before preparation of the loan even
    began—sometimes years before. In this case IEG found that it was implausible that
    the Bank DPO had a causal impact on adoption of the reforms.

   Prior actions should also be framed in a way that is clear. For example, in some cases,
    operations have included prior actions to approve a particular regulation or order
    referred to by number, without including a description of what that measure actually
    was. Though it is clear and specific, this formulation lacks transparency: observers
    not familiar with the details of the operation are unlikely to understand what is being
    supported. Overall, DPF documentation could be improved; sometimes program
                                            18



       documents and ICRs make high-level general statements without clearly describing
       the actual contents of supported policies or how they would achieve their objectives.

In 2015, IEG produced a Learning Product on results frameworks for DPF operations (IEG
2015b). The main findings of this review are relevant to designers of environmental DPF
(Box 2).

 Box 2: Main findings from IEG Learning Product on DPF results frameworks

 Some DPOs suffer from lack of clear statements of objectives and outcomes. Their results
 frameworks lack explicitly stated outcomes, while results indicators in many cases fall
 short of meaningfully measuring a DPO’s impact. Some straightforward solutions are
 available to improve the results framework presentation, and DPO results orientation and
 evaluability.

 The quality of prior actions is critical for the robustness of the results frameworks of
 DPOs. The review highlights recent improvements in prior actions and suggests further
 steps to improve their quality:
 •       Avoid actions that do not support significant policy changes, such as draft
 regulations at early stages of preparation (before approval by governments), agency-level
 actions with little or no tangible implication for overall policy, statements of intentions,
 repeated prior actions on recurrent government functions that lack additionality, and
 “pilot” actions without a clearly defined scaling-up strategy.

 •       Avoid policy actions unrelated to Bank engagement with the client country, which
 are contrary to the Bank’s approach to budget support and undermines the additionality of
 DPOs. The report suggests formulating guidance and standards on prior actions to improve
 the results orientation of DPOs.

 •       Excessive use of flexibility in a programmatic series can compromise a DPO’s
 focus on results. Dropping essential triggers or accepting partially met triggers that do not
 capture the true character of intended reforms may substantially undermine the quality of
 results frameworks. Although maintaining flexibility in DPOs is important, in many cases
 a better balance between flexibility and rigor would improve a DPO’s focus on results. The
 review also notes that recent changes in the presentation of medium-term reform programs
 in a programmatic series have improved the clarity of results frameworks.

Source: IEG 2015b

5.4    IEG informally uses four criteria for considering the quality of prior actions (Table
2). These provide a useful framework for thinking about how to produce a strong results
framework. Table 3 describes examples of policy actions taken from environmental DPOs,
assessed against these criteria.
                                                    19



Table 2: IEG Criteria for assessing the prior actions (PAs) of development policy
operations


 Criterion               What Does IEG Look for?
 Relevance              The extent to which PAs are relevant to objectives and associated
                        outcomes.
 Institutional depth    The extent to which PAs are sufficient to achieve policy changes or
 and criticality        reforms, as compared to those that will mean many subsequent steps
                        to generate and outcome. Policy actions that are excessively process-
                        oriented, easily reversible, or that only indicate intentions should be
                        avoided.
 Additionality          The extent to which the World Bank adds value to the specific PA
                        relative to a counterfactual without the DPO.
 Measurability          The extent to which the expected impact of PAs is measurable. This
                        largely depends on the quality of the M&E framework and the links
                        between results indicators and PAs.


Source: IEG 2015b
Note: M&E = monitoring and evaluation; PAs = prior actions.
                                            20



Table 3: Examples of prior action
 Policy action                                         Assessment on criteria

 Made satisfactory progress in the negotiations with   Making “satisfactory progress” in
 the European Union on a voluntary partnership         negotiations does not have high
 agreement concerning the “Forest Law                  measurability or criticality. It is
 Enforcement, Governance and Trade” initiative,        quite subjective and so difficult to
 and has defined the elements of such agreement by     assess completion or noncompletion,
 December 2007. (Ghana)                                and follow-up actions are required
                                                       to reach an agreement.

 Prepared, through the Recipient’s Minerals            This prior action did not have high
 Commission, a proposal for new guidelines on          criticality; preparation of a
 social responsibility in mining activities, which     proposal for guidelines
 takes into account, inter alia experiences with       accomplishes little by itself. Two
 alternative livelihood programs and community         subsequent prior actions in the
 development schemes in the mining sector, for         series were required to get to
 consultation with relevant stakeholders. (Ghana)      issuance of the (nonbinding)
                                                       guidelines.

 Forest legal framework strengthened through the       This prior action had little
 enactment of three key legal acts: Public Forest      additionality, because the laws in
 Management Law which promotes forest                  question had been passed years
 management in public land; Atlantic Forest Law        before the design of the operation,
 which promotes conservation of this highly            and had been used as prior actions
 endangered biome; and, Resolution 3545 of the         for a previous Bank DPO in Brazil.
 National Monetary Council that regulates bank
 lending to agribusiness (Brazil)

 The bidding process for the first two lots of         The action has high relevance and,
 distribution companies launched by the                criticality– privatizations had to be
 Privatization Administration, with winning bidders    completed, and privatized
 for the first two distribution companies determined   companies had to abide by their
 in July 2008 and for the next two distribution        contracts, which included
 companies in September 2008. (Turkey)                 investment and loss reduction
                                                       targets. Moderate additionality was
                                                       provided by the specific deadlines –
                                                       the Bank DPO helped to ensure
                                                       timely progress.



Monitoring and evaluation systems can be improved

5.5   Policy lending faces inherent difficulties in designing monitoring and evaluation
frameworks and in selecting indicators because of the disconnect between the length of time
                                                21



needed to observe results and the point at which operations are evaluated. Many effects of
policies take years to occur. For example, some policy reforms are designed to influence
downstream behavior; they may alter incentives that will then affect subsequent public
investment and private decisions and so will affect outcomes gradually over a long period.
Operations may support substantial legal or policy shifts at the highest levels that then
require substantial follow-on work in regulation and supportive policies in order to be
implemented. Yet self-evaluations must be finalized a year after closure of an operation or
series, and many DPF operations close shortly after approval and disbursement, so they rely
on data that are generated sometimes only a matter of months after adoption of the policy.
Independent validation systems from IEG rely on the same data sources. Designers thus face
the challenge of designing systems that are deep enough to generate evidence on outcomes or
impact, but also modest in design and focused on the short term.

5.6     Monitoring and evaluation systems for most environmental DPOs have been weak.
For the 31 operations for which IEG has assigned a monitoring and evaluation quality rating,
21 had ratings of negligible or modest, with only 10 having a rating of substantial; none had a
rating of high. IEG desk reviews often note objectives that are imprecise or unclear (and so
are often not meaningfully evaluable), and indicators that did not provide a direct or adequate
reflection of the objectives or sub-objectives with which they were associated. Results
frameworks sometimes end up measuring processes rather than results or impact. Task teams
interviewed by IEG often report that they struggle with the design of monitoring and
evaluation systems. Indicator selection is sometimes seen more as a compliance burden than
as something that adds value to the operation. Some DPO teams argue that Bank budget for
DPF is concentrated in the preparation phase, which is when most of the work occurs, but
that limited budgets during implementation make it difficult to support an intensive
monitoring and evaluation program. Utilization of monitoring and evaluation is rare; systems
are used largely for reporting purposes and for tracking progress on triggers for future
operations in a programmatic series rather than for assessing the need for course correction.
This lack of interest in monitoring and evaluation by the Bank may have been a contributing
factor to the lack of prioritization, funding, data collection, reporting, or field verification by
governments observed in some operations, and consequently to a missed opportunity to
benefit from monitoring and evaluation systems.

Objectives should be clear and evaluable, and should balance ambition and realism

5.7     The choice of program objectives is important both for helping to create a storyline
and vision for a program and in establishing goals against which progress will be assessed.
The Bank’s self-evaluation and independent evaluation systems are objectives-based;
performance is judged against achievement or likely achievement of objectives. These
objectives are the overall program development objectives, not the individual objectives and
targets for specific policy areas.

5.8     As much as possible, objectives should be outcome-oriented; they should capture the
goals that determine environmental and economic wellbeing. Yet in choosing objectives,
there is a tension between the level of ambition and realism as to what can be
demonstratively achieved at the time of evaluation.
                                             22



      If objectives are pitched too high, they may be unachievable and, thus, subject to poor
       ratings from accountability systems. In Gabon, a forestry and natural resource
       management operation had overly ambitious objectives, with a stated goal to
       "increase the contribution of natural resources to national income, and to help reduce
       the country’s heavy dependence on declining oil resources while protecting the
       resource base and improving management efficiency.” These objectives reflected the
       broad goals of the government’s long-term strategy rather than what was realistically
       achievable within an operation that covered the review and cancellation of logging
       permits, forestry company restructuring, and a range of other governance and
       resource management policy measures. More achievable objectives could have
       reflected the real design of the operation—perhaps to improve the sustainability,
       efficiency, and transparency of management of forests and other natural resources.
       Sometimes, moreover, DPO objectives include goals that are not achievable by the
       actual actions supported.

      If objectives are pitched too low, then there comes a problem of insufficient relevance
       or evaluability. Sometimes objectives have been framed in terms that are
       unnecessarily weak, such as “to adopt a policy on X” rather than targeting a specific
       goal directly. The best objectives are those that are an achievable stretch. It is useful
       to ask: what would success or failure look like? If the objective is framed in terms
       such that it cannot fail (for example, by being automatically achieved by the
       completion of prior actions), then it is not meaningfully evaluable, and evaluation
       systems will add little value. Yet it is very hard to evaluate the level of ambition fairly
       ex post; it becomes too easy to assume that anything that wasn’t achieved was
       unrealistic.

5.9     Together with ambition is the level of clarity and evaluability. An IEG portfolio
review for this report found that many objectives were unclear or unevaluable. Even among
clear objectives, many use a passive framing of “to support the government achieve X” rather
than using a more active framing that implies that the operation will lead to concrete
achievements. Many objectives included relatively clear primary objectives buried within
larger statements containing overarching objectives or “by” or “through” statements about
means and methods. Objective statements can be more evaluable if they separate the specific
program development objectives intended to be achieved by an individual operation or
programmatic series from higher-level motivating goals (such as to “balance socioeconomic
development with environmental protection and improvement”), or from statements about
processes or methods. The Bank’s formal objectives need not specifically include higher-
level objectives of a major government program of which the operation supports only a part.
Objectives could be clearer if they can be more specific instead of including language like
“mainstreaming of environment in policy,” “promoting inclusive green growth,” or “greening
physical capital,” which is much harder to usefully assess. Macroeconomic goals that are
driven by the budget support financing aspect of DPF (rather than by the policy reforms)
such as “to support the government’s stimulus program” are usually better avoided as
objectives; they are inputs rather than outcomes and are not meaningfully measureable or
evaluable. Goals such as promotion of “long-term sustainable growth” are not likely to be
                                              23



achievable within the evaluation time frame. Box 3 gives examples of objectives that are
relatively clear and evaluable, demonstrating the feasibility of this approach.

 Box 3: Examples of relatively clear objectives from Environmental DPOs

 “…to develop a lower carbon, more climate-resilient growth path.” (Indonesia)
 The objective makes clear that the goal is to support climate change mitigation and
 adaptation, but without adding the likely unreasonable burden of achieving a reduction in
 greenhouse gas emissions by the end of evaluation.

 “(1) …increasing renewable energy supply, promoting energy efficiency through
 cogeneration, reducing gas flaring and venting, and piloting the reform of the rural
 agricultural electricity subsidy; (2) improving the efficiency of the vehicle fleet and road
 transport operations in Mexico; (3) strengthening the market for energy–efficient housing;
 and (4) mainstreaming climate change considerations into land–use and forestry
 activities.” (Mexico)
 Long lists of sub-objectives are generally undesirable, but some inclusion of some multiple
 objectives may be unavoidable in complex operations that cover many sectors.

 “…to support Samoa in recovering from the immediate impacts of cyclone Evan…and to
 help Samoa build resilience against such shocks in the future.” (Samoa)
 This clearly states and separates the desired goals of immediate support and future risk
 reduction; the challenge is in selecting indicators that can show at the time of evaluation
 that resilience reductions will be likely to be achieved.

 To “…a) enhance energy security; b) integrate principles of environmental sustainability,
 including climate change considerations, in key sectoral policies and programs; c) improve
 the effectiveness and efficiency of environmental management processes.” (Turkey)
 The objective would be clearer still if accompanied by definitions of energy security and of
 principles of environmental sustainability.

 “…to improve the economic, environmental and social performance of the municipal solid
 waste sector.” (Morocco)
 This lays out the three criteria on which success will be judged.

  “…to strengthen public and private efforts to achieve socially-, economically-, and
 ecologically-sustainable use of national forest and wildlife resources.” (Cameroon)
 This clear and outcome-oriented objective was expected to be achievable because the two-
 tranche operation would have substantial time between initial policy actions and closure
 and evaluation.



Indicators can be selected to assess achievements

5.10 Results indicators are useful because they provide evidence on achievement of
desired outcomes, which allows for performance assessment and course correction, and
                                            24



because the systems for reporting tend to create incentives among program implementers to
focus on those metrics that are measured.

      Indicators are most useful when they accurately reflect and are framed in terms of
       outcomes. For many key outcomes it may not be possible to observe changes by the
       time of evaluation, or to reasonably attribute changes in them to a specific operation.
       However, it is often possible to select indicators that measure progress on
       intermediate outcome indicators, and sometimes even for more downstream
       outcomes. Intermediate outcome indicators are most effective if the link between the
       intermediate outcome and the downstream final outcome is strong and
       uncontroversial: for example reducing sulfur content in fuel is highly likely to have
       positive downstream effects on air quality.

      Output indicators can be useful in establishing that a results chain is being
       implemented. They can help to build confidence that policy changes are being
       implemented at an operational level, or that changes in targeted outcomes are the
       result of DPO policy actions. For example, an operation might have a prior action
       related to passing a particular piece of legislation, and then use an indicator to track
       the creation of associated regulations needed to implement the policy as a proxy for
       success in implementation. It can be useful to try to include a measure of quality in
       indicators: for example, to look at the number of hectares of forest under management
       plans complying with Forest Stewardship Council or other similar standards, rather
       than just looking at the number of hectares of forest cover under management plans.
       Box 4 shows some examples of indicators that have been used in environmental
       DPOs to indicate progress on intermediate or actual outcomes. These demonstrate
       that it is possible to have outcome-oriented indicators even within limited timeframes.

Box 4: Selected outcome-oriented results indicators from environmental DPOs
 Percentage of municipal solid waste collected and disposed in sanitary landfills (Morocco)
 This is a good outcome indicator, though other evidence would be needed to demonstrate
 that is attributable to the policy reforms.

 Number of smart [power] meters installed (Poland)
 The link between installation of smart meters and reduction in nontechnical losses is well
 understood, so installation—and utilization—of smart meters would be a reasonable
 proxy. However, nontechnical losses could also be a useful indicator if enough time
 elapses between installation and the point of evaluation.

 Tons of industrial pollution (BOD5) abated per year (Morocco)
 This is a good outcome measure, provided that there is a robust methodology for
 calculating abatement.

 Subsidy expenditures for diesel, gasoline and industrial fuel as a percentage of GDP
 (Morocco) Tracking expenditures on subsidies is a useful way of assessing whether
 changes in subsidy policy were implemented.
                                              25



 Implementation of an integrated public transport network through which at least 90% of
 the households in each of the 10 service areas will be located at less than 800 m from a
 stop served at least by 5 buses per hour and/or a metro line (from 6AM to 10 PM)
 This is a clear and specific indicator that demonstrates completion of a planned network
 system—though a better measure of access would capture whether households were
 actually using the service.

 Percentage of eligible surface that is covered by climate risk insurance (Mexico)
 This tracks expansion of insurance coverage—though a better indicator might track not
 just whether insurance was available but whether it was used.

 Number of water quality monitoring sites established in 13 river basin organizations
 (Mexico)
 Measuring the establishment of sites gives evidence that a policy change has been
 operationalized—but a more useful indicator could be one that captures whether sites are
 reporting data as expected.

 Percentage of district roads that are constructed or upgraded from 2014 onwards that are in
 compliance with revised design standards. (Mozambique)
 This helps assess whether revised standards are being applied in practice, if it is
 accompanied by a verification process that confirms compliance.

 Number of vehicles converted to natural gas and number of service stations in Lima with
 natural gas supply installed and operating (Peru)
 Conversion of vehicles to natural gas is a reasonable short-term proxy for likely
 reductions in emissions.

 Energy savings by heavy industries compared to forecast under business as usual scenario.
 (Vietnam)
 Comparison to a business-as-usual forecast is more meaningful than comparing to an
 initial baseline in sectors where changes are likely occurring even absent policy reform.



5.11 A number of other factors have weakened results framework designs in some
environmental DPF.

       In many cases, results frameworks rely almost purely on outputs, which give little
        confidence that downstream results will be achieved. In some cases outcome
        indicators are so far downstream that it is difficult to know whether or not these
        could be the results of the targeted policy reforms. Some operations have had
        indicators that track the production of prior actions from the same operation; these
        indicators are not useful for assessing progress because, by definition, prior actions
        are completed in order for the operation to be approved and for the indicators to
        come into force. Sometimes indicators are added that track completion of outputs
        that are not related to the policy reforms in question (such as an output from a project
                                            26



        funded by another donor), as a form of soft conditionality. Sometimes indicators are
        chosen with weak, missing, or purely qualitative baselines. Sometimes robust results
        indicators were dropped during the preparation process in sometimes tense
        negotiations with government. Inevitably, a judgment call is required by task teams
        on how far outside of their comfort zone government can be pushed to collect a
        particular indicator.

       Indicators should be clearly identifiable, ideally in quantitative terms. Qualitative
        indicators can be highly subjective and so subject to pressures to provide positive
        spin. For example, an indicator in a natural resource management DPO in Gabon was
        that “Previous progress is consolidated, and further steps enjoy continued political
        backing,” with no definition of what consolidation of progress would mean, or how
        political backing would be judged. Indicators can be more effective if they can be
        measured continuously rather than being binary, so the indicator can be used as a
        measure of incremental progress rather than a blunt “yes/no.” Qualitative indicators
        may be appropriate in some cases, but require clear attention to measurability such as
        by establishing progress benchmarks or developing a scaling system.

       Some operations included too many indicators. In Ghana, the results framework
        contained roughly 60 indicators which were to be assessed and monitored on an
        annual basis; in Cameroon the matrix included roughly 100 indicators, each with its
        own verification measure. The risk in such cases that the resulting monitoring
        process both overwhelms the capacity of client agencies and crowds out meaningful
        policy dialog from Bank-client interactions. The tendency towards too many
        indicators seems to be more common in operations cofinanced by multiple donors,
        where there can be political incentives to add large numbers of indicators
        corresponding to wide-ranging donor priorities, or in operations where potential prior
        actions or triggers considered earlier in the design process are stripped out as formal
        conditionalities but are added as indicators.

       Sometimes it has been a practice to establish DPO indicators based on the indicators
        already being used in country programs. This is understandable, given its relative
        ease when the data are already being generated and tracked; yet if the country
        monitoring and evaluation framework is inadequate then the Bank DPO will also be
        weak. Country program indicators may also have different timeframes from a Bank
        DPO and so may need different indicators.

5.12 It is often easier to select more effective indicators for programmatic series than for
standalone operations. Programmatic series are typically two to three operations over a
multiyear period, and evaluation does not occur until after closure of the final operation.
More time will pass between the adoption of a policy change and the point at which
evaluation occurs, so it is easier to observe changes in more downstream indicators. Task
teams interviewed by IEG strongly argue that it is difficult to have indicators that can
demonstrate changes in environmental outcomes from a standalone DPO. Yet even for
programmatic series the time horizon is relatively short, especially for actions completed
later in the series. Although DPF operations can close shortly after disbursing, in some cases
                                              27



the Bank has deliberately kept operations active for up to a year after approval, to allow more
time for policy engagement and monitoring.

5.13 Monitoring and evaluation systems are not being set up to assess longer-term impacts
of Bank engagement. A fundamental challenge is that the Bank’s monitoring and evaluation
systems are heavily concentrated at the level of the individual operation or series; this leads
us to judge success or failure based on short-term evidence. Formal evaluation systems rarely
support the ability to make judgements of medium- to longer-term impacts. This is a
particular problem for DPF because of the relatively shorter time between production of
outputs and assessment of results. Sometimes the idea is suggested that subsequent
operations can monitor progress, but in the formal system it does not make sense for a project
to monitor results that are not attributable to that project. Information about longer-term
impacts exists as tacit knowledge held by particular staff members who have been working in
a particular country and sector. But this approach poses greater risks of subjectivity and
potential conflict of interest, means that knowledge can be lost as a result of staff turnover,
and makes information more difficult for “outsiders” to access then it would be from a
formal evaluation. This can result in a situation where large sums are being disbursed with a
lack of evidence on overall impact.

5.14 The clearest example of this challenge is in Mexico, where the Bank approved eight
environmental policy lending operations over 11 years, and disbursed more than US$4
billion. Though strategically linked, each operation was formally a standalone operation and
a self-evaluation was produced after each one. So indicator selection was built around the
timeframes of the individual operations. Sometimes there was overlap between indicators in
two adjacent operations (for example, on CO2 emissions), but then the next operation moved
on to a different topic with different indicators; the combined pool of monitoring and
evaluation data is consequently quite heterogeneous. This means that even in aggregate,
Bank documents provide little evidence on which to assess overall improvement in terms of
environment-related physical and human outcomes.

5.15 Thus, there is a risk that the Bank is perpetually living in the short term. The Bank
could work to find opportunities for joint assessments with the country of longer-term policy-
related performance, but this would require data collection on a longer-term basis for a
meaningful assessment. Current Bank systems do not support this approach. A forthcoming
evaluation of the Bank’s self-evaluation systems (IEG 2016a) notes how the Bank Group’s
self-evaluation systems have favored accountability over learning, and recommends that the
Bank expand the use of voluntary evaluations that respond to the learning needs of
management and teams. This approach could include, when warranted, a retrospective
learning-oriented assessment of results from large clusters of operations in a given country
and sector, such as for environmental interventions in Mexico.

6. Lessons on DPF preparation
Analytical work and technical assistance are critical underpinnings

6.1    Analytical work plays a central role in DPF design and preparation.
                                         28



   Up-front analysis can help to identify the most critical environmental issues faced by
    a particular country. It can play a key role in supporting policy dialog with senior
    officials and in advocacy by the Bank of appropriate strategies. It can help to provide
    the evidentiary base needed to convince decision makers. In particular, the Country
    Environment Analysis (CEA) can play a major role in supporting policy dialog:
    CEAs have helped to establish environmental priorities, carry out institutional
    analysis, and support cost-benefit analysis (World Bank 2008). DPOs are required to
    draw on analytical work under Bank operational policy, and all DPOs cite lists of
    prior studies; but, in practice, the degree to which existing analytical work actually
    meaningfully informs program design is uneven.

   The technical quality of analytical work is sometimes a major part of the Bank’s
    comparative advantage. Sometimes government agencies lack the expertise to do
    high-quality analytical work on their own. In other cases, higher-capacity
    governments have a wealth of analytical work and expertise that can serve as the
    basis for reform; the Bank needs to make sure not to consider only Bank-produced
    analytic work in informing design. If analytical work is done in a collaborative way
    with clients and drawing on their own work, then this can increase ownership and
    uptake within government, as occurred in Colombia.

   In some cases analytical work has directly informed DPO design. In Ghana, analytical
    work and a CEA on the economic costs of natural resource degradation played a key
    role in galvanizing the finance minister and senior finance ministry officials to
    support policy reforms on natural resource and environmental governance. This also
    helped to shift the scale of Bank action from a proposed single action in a
    multisectoral budget support operation to a freestanding environmental programmatic
    series covering forestry, mining, and environmental management. Analytical work
    also produced specific recommendations, most of which mapped directly into policy
    actions in the DPO series. Similarly, in Morocco, analytical work showing the client
    the benefits of green growth (with work covering water, fisheries, energy, pollution,
    and climate change) was central to convincing the government to support the
    operation.

   In other cases the connection between analytical work and specific policy actions has
    been indirect but still substantial. In Colombia a high-quality CEA identified
    environmental health issues (such as those from indoor and outdoor air pollution) as
    the most costly forms of environmental degradation, falling most heavily on the poor.
    Dissemination of this analytical work at a critical time helped to get environmental
    issues onto the country’s policy agenda by influencing politicians and public opinion.
    The Bank was thus able to have a significant influence on environmental policy
    reform, despite a relatively modest prior engagement in environmental investment
    lending. A CEA likewise helped to inform design of a climate change series in
    Indonesia; and a study on climate-resilient development emphasizing the Bank’s role
    was also important in Vietnam. In Mozambique, the Banks’s country study on the
    economics of climate change adaptation raised the profile of the issue and established
    the need for action, convinced decision makers, and influenced the government’s
                                              29



       thinking and agenda. Government then chose sector priorities and proposed policy
       actions based on this goal.

6.2     Yet sometimes preexisting analytical work is not relevant. It can be difficult to rely
on the existing base of analytical work that was not designed with the goal of informing
policy lending. Bank staff argued that quality of CEAs has been often excellent but
inconsistent in quality: for example, only a few of the early CEAs supported detailed analysis
linking environmental priorities to poverty reduction, assessed political economy constraints,
or analyzed resource flows or transparency (World Bank 2008). Resource constraints mean
that fewer CEAs are now produced than in the past (as documented in IEG 2015a). New
tools such as the comprehensive Systematic Country Diagnosis (SCD) cannot be expected to
provide relevant analytical support; of necessity the SCD is a much broader document, with
many sectors and issues competing for space.

6.3     Technical assistance is often critical in supporting design and implementation of
policy reforms.

      TA can contribute technical knowledge on international best practice that may be
       lacking. TA can support the country’s own processes and cycles for decision making,
       and can finance parts of the policy development process which may not be well
       covered by existing agency budgets. TA accompanying a DPO can have strategic
       influence beyond that of standalone TA support. For example, it can improve buy-in
       and commitment from ministries implementing reforms. Conversely, a lack of
       accompanying TA can have a serious effect on the ability of governments to
       implement policy reforms on expected timetables. Interviews with Bank staff suggest
       that insufficient or low-quality TA can be major causes for poor performance of DPF.

      Care needs to be taken that TA is provided to the right institution. In Mozambique,
       TA was originally provided to a weak institution that lacked decision-making power
       and influence, which meant the support had little impact. Recipient-executed TA is
       not always what is needed: Bank staff note that ministries are sometimes too slow to
       make hiring decisions, and reluctant to pay higher prices for international expertise.
       TA may be insufficient to support institutions that are extremely weak.

      TA should also not be expected to substitute for a lack of institutional commitment or
       client ownership. In Indonesia, parallel sector TA by other donors in the
       implementing agencies was not sufficient to support implementation of some policy
       actions in a timely manner, because of the lack of agency buy-in.

6.4    Bank staff working on DPF are nearly universal in their call for substantial analytical
work and TA. Yet often they note that what occurs is insufficient. Why? Several answers
have been suggested.

      One constraint on analytical and advisory work has been that of budget resources.
       Bank budget availability is tight and has continued to tighten over recent years. Bank
       staff report that budget decisions have tended to prioritize preparation and
                                               30



          supervision, meaning that analytical work is often what is cut. TA and analytic work
          have often been reliant on trust funds, which have been valuable for both their
          financial support and flexibility. But many of these resources have declined over
          time; for example, trust funds for Country Environment Analysis and Strategic
          Environmental Assessments were exhausted in 2012, and so the number produced has
          declined. Some trust funds have shifted toward climate change goals, which do not
          always meet client needs. The ad hoc nature and timing of trust fund resourcing also
          creates challenges; often Bank teams will apply for funding, but most proceed with
          appraisal without knowing whether the resources will be forthcoming. Bank teams
          emphasize that greater predictability and reliability would assist them in effective
          operational planning.

         A second constraint has been that of timing. Often there are strong pressures for rapid
          preparation and disbursement of a DPO, but this means that it is very difficult to
          undertake new analytical work to support operational design; hence, most often the
          operation must rely on whatever work existed at the time of conception, which may
          not have been undertaken with policy lending in mind. Analytical work prepared
          without a DPF in mind may focus on filling knowledge gaps but may not be relevant
          for the areas where political will for policy reform exists that might be supported by a
          DPO. Sometimes timing constraints have meant that analytical work was not
          completed until after a DPO operation was approved, and so largely too late to
          influence policy design. These challenges argue for an approach to DPF that
          emphasizes greater advance planning rather than opportunism: for example if a CPF
          identifies the opportunity for environmental policy lending then it could also ensure
          that the necessary analytical work was programmed in advance.

         A third has been unwillingness of governments to borrow for TA, sometimes seeing
          these as unproductive investments. Governments are rarely willing to spend funds
          from the budget support on TA; high-quality TA sometimes requires expensive
          international consultants. The Bank has limited leverage with which to induce
          governments to adopt TA, because it cannot credibly threaten not to proceed with the
          operation in the absence of TA. However, the Bank could do more to demonstrate
          how appropriate TA leads to better results.

         Some staff argue that the Bank’s internal incentives are a barrier to prioritizing
          knowledge work. They note that there are few perceived rewards for strong analytical
          or other knowledge work and that internal incentive systems (performance reviews,
          management attention and visibility, and promotion possibilities) are driven by loan
          approvals and disbursements.

Programmatic series over advantages over standalone operations

6.5       Programmatic series offer a number of advantages over standalone operations.

         Bank staff argue that the structure of a programmatic DPO series, which explicitly
          ties future budget support to achievement of particular policy triggers, increases the
                                           31



    leverage of the Bank to obtain sustained commitment for more ambitious reforms,
    and helps to provide needed incentives for continued reform impetus. This can be
    particularly important for environmental policy reforms, which often take a long time
    to develop and to achieve outcomes. The structure can help to support a more
    forward-looking policy dialog. And the longer timeframe can allow for more effective
    monitoring and evaluation.

   However, there are risks from a programmatic series design that postpones the most
    substantial reforms to subsequent operations. If all planned operations in the series do
    not proceed, then the Bank may disburse substantial funds with relatively little
    impact. In two separate environmental DPOs designed as programmatic series in
    Brazil, one reason for their limited impact was that many of the most significant
    environmental reforms were left to the second and third operations. When each series
    lapsed after the first operation (and after disbursing US$500 million for the first series
    and US$1.3 billion for the second), this left the series with modest impacts. In a
    programmatic series on climate change in Indonesia, major actions on energy subsidy
    reform were left to the second operation, which never occurred.

   Programmatic series have typically included operations spaced one year apart, but
    this is not a formal requirement. Sometimes environmental DPF series have struggled
    with designs that spaced operations one year apart, because of the difficulty of
    completing complex reforms within a year. In Ghana, the single year between
    disbursement of one operation and assessment of triggers for the next meant that only
    moderate progress could be made under each operation. Combined with the large
    number of outputs and targets being tracked, much of the supervision process focused
    on verification rather than client support and engagement. A short program time
    horizon also led to selection of very intermediate outcomes for program development
    objectives, which meant that the program framework and monitoring and evaluation
    progress were not focused on addressing the main outcomes of concern in the sector
    (resource degradation, environmental damage, etc.) because of the limits to which
    reforms could be accomplished in a single year.

   Programmatic series can offer flexibility between operations by adding, modifying, or
    removing triggers; however, this requires careful consideration. If the Bank is too
    willing to drop any trigger that might not be completed, then the credibility of the
    instrument is undermined and conditionalities can become meaningless. Yet
    sometimes particular triggers really are unachievable, and it may not be worth
    cancelling an entire DPO series because of one failed trigger. The Bank has to make a
    judgment call on whether any dropped triggers are really infeasible, and on whether
    they are of sufficiently marginal importance to the program that it can proceed
    without them. Two cases illustrate this tension. In Turkey, the Bank dropped actions
    on Strategic Environmental Assessment and on amendments to a gas market law,
    judging that these were not achievable. There was pressure to drop a third action on
    approval of an energy efficiency strategy, but the Bank resisted because the action
    was seen as critical, and the strategy approval was then completed in time. In
    Indonesia, a climate change programmatic series was left incomplete after failure to
                                              32



       achieve some triggers. The Bank held firm in insisting on compliance with that the
       triggers established for the proposed second loan, judging correctly that it would be
       difficult to achieve the program objectives without them.

Other design and preparation factors influence implementation

6.6      Consultations. Consultation with stakeholders is formally a responsibility of the
client, but the Bank can play a role in supporting and increasing the credibility of
consultation processes. Extensive consultation and engagement contribute to better design
and generate goodwill on the part of the client. Two series of environmental DPOs in Brazil
helped to contrast different extremes in this case: in the first series, the Bank team carried out
a long-term high-quality technical engagement with government ministries and sectoral
agencies, and made a concerted effort to consult with an array of civil society organizations.
In a second series, a rushed preparation process meant that little consultation was carried out,
which contributed to design weaknesses, limited effectiveness and ownership in government,
and raised opposition from civil society. Many civil society groups do not understand the
Bank’s policy lending instrument and how it differs from investment lending; engaging them
can be a means of getting them to contribute to the process rather than to act as opponents.
Civil society groups are familiar with consultation processes around investment lending, but
frequently find DPF design to be a black box, where little information is made public until
the operation is approved and the reforms have already been implemented.

6.7     Environment and social risk management. An assessment of environmental and
social risk management in environmental DPF is beyond the scope of this report. An IEG
learning product published in 2015 (IEG 2015a) examined implementation of the
environmental and social requirements for all DPF during 2005–14 and identified
opportunities for improving the systems for managing these risks. But it is important to note
that these risks apply across many types of DPF operations, and issues in implementing
environment and social risk requirements identified in the report are not specific to
environmental DPF.

6.8     DPF offers the opportunity for the Bank to help countries improve their country
systems for managing environmental and social risks, or to make sure that mitigation
measures are built into supported policies. For example, in Himachal Pradesh, one
consequence of Bank involvement in plans for water resource management reform
supporting hydropower development was to improve how environmental and social effects
were managed. In particular, the Bank helped the government to establish a local area
development fund (financed out of dam construction costs) to support communities affected
by dams. This reportedly made a significant difference in changing the social acceptability of
hydropower projects. In Colombia, the Bank used a green growth DPO as an opportunity to
support a strategic environmental assessment to consider a range of downstream impacts and
identify options for improvement, which influenced the risk assessment of the operation.

6.9     Bank staff note that concerns about environmental and social risks have hindered the
ability of the Bank to conduct policy reforms in areas such as forestry. These areas do have
significant potential for adverse environmental or social effects, especially on vulnerable
                                              33



groups such as indigenous peoples and other traditional forest users. Outcomes depend in
part on the robustness of enforcement programs and site-level social conflicts, and on
activities in the informal sector, which may be difficult to influence with policy lending.
Similarly, concerns about potential resettlement have hampered the Bank’s ability to engage
on land use planning policies, which are critical for disaster risk management and effective
climate change adaptation. The Bank could work to find ways of using DPF to support
improvements in country systems and capacity for managing these risks.

6.10 Team composition. Bank task team leaders (TTLs) with DPO experience argue that
team composition is a major determinant of program success.

      They note the need for the team to include people with policy experience, institutional
       knowledge, and understanding of the country and language. Some staff called
       specifically for greater use of environmental economists. As with other instruments,
       soft skills and the ability to manage client relationships and influence institutions are
       critical. Some Bank staff argue that the recent and rapid expansion of environmental
       DPF has meant that there are at present relatively few environmental staff with
       substantial expertise in policy lending even though the number of environment-
       related DPOs have increased in recent years. Most environment specialists have
       experience primarily with investment lending and many are specialized in specific
       environmental areas where the Bank has been traditionally active, such as
       biodiversity conservation, but feature less in the DPF portfolio. This means that
       training and learning on DPF could be a priority. Some staff suggested that the Bank
       should establish a global solutions group for environmental DPF or policy.

      Multisector environmental DPOs will benefit from drawing on staff from the relevant
       global practices. These staff can bring specialized technical knowledge, greater
       political buy-in within the Bank, and access to sector-specific trust fund resources.
       Staff from other practices may be attracted to an environmental DPF task team by the
       opportunity to engage in policy dialog if previous Bank engagement in that country
       was largely limited to investment lending. Some staff perceive that the Bank’s new
       structure can make it more difficult to work across silos because there is competition
       for resources and leadership. This was somewhat easier in the previous structure
       where there was a single Sustainable Development Network Director in each region.

      Turnover in staff, especially team leaders, can cause problems. Meaningful policy
       dialog requires trust, which requires personal relationships between key development
       agency and government officials. Implementing agency officials have sometimes
       found it difficult to work with new people from development agencies whom they
       perceive as not understanding the background of the program or respecting
       agreements made already. Improvements in handover processes and replacement of
       experts by staff with similar expertise could ameliorate the problem of staff rotation
       and turnover.

6.11 Working with other donors. The Bank has often tried to harmonize policy lending
with other development partners, either through cofinancing, parallel financing, or other
                                                34



coordination mechanisms, but has also often chosen to work bilaterally with the government.
Harmonization has advantages in increasing the leverage and visibility of the agenda,
improving coordination, reducing wasteful duplication, and reducing transaction costs and
compliance costs for clients.

          The Bank can play a convening role in multi-donor budget support, increasing the
           willingness of other donors to be involved by mitigating their risk perception of a
           policy lending operation, or helping to coordinate other donors and develop
           agreement on a set of shared priorities.

          If donors are not well coordinated then their actions can have unintended
           consequences on each other. In Indonesia, one of several reasons that the Bank’s
           programmatic series did not go past the first of four planned operations was the
           prospect of a US$1 billion grant for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and
           Forest Degradation (REDD+) from the Norwegian government. This shifted
           incentives and meant that the Bank’s joint policy lending with France and Japan was
           no longer a priority for the government.

          In some cases, other development partners have provided the majority of funding. In
           such cases the Bank can still exercise positive influence on program design while
           recognizing the need to compromise and collaborate with other donors’ priorities. In
           the multi-donor climate change DPO series in both Indonesia and Vietnam, the Bank
           joined already existing budget support programs from other donors, but was able to
           improve the operations by making the policy reform triggers more ambitious. For
           example in Indonesia, the Bank only agreed to join the program after the government
           accepted the inclusion of politically more difficult policy measures with respect to the
           reduction of energy subsidies and improved forest governance. In some other cases
           the Bank appears to have joined existing budget support of other donors with little
           additional impact. Attribution can be unclear, where multiple donors are trying to take
           credit for an entire set of reforms. Sometimes the same actions are used to satisfy
           conditionalities for multiple parallel policy lending operations by different donors.

6.12       Working with partners can also involve tradeoffs, complications, and delays.

           Harmonization can be challenging when other donors do not share the Bank’s view
            of policy lending instruments. Sometimes other donors are willing to accept as
            disbursement triggers weaker actions that are not really reforms, such as the
            publication of a study. The Bank has more intensive processing requirements and
            preparation than most other donors, especially because of the need to seek Board
            approval for each subsequent stage of a programmatic series. Other partners can
            come to regard the Bank as difficult to work with; however, they also sometimes
            value the Bank’s quality assurance and review process as offering significant design
            improvements and quality assurance.

           In Ghana there were tradeoffs associated with donor harmonization. Collaboration in
            the design phase was strong, and parallel financing of a common program and policy
                                             35



        matrix strengthened and elevated environmental agendas. Yet coordination partially
        broke down during supervision, in part because of high staff turnover among the
        Bank and other donors. Parallel financing efforts were introduced in some
        subsectors, and some development partners tried to add items to the program that
        were outside the main objectives. The need for consensus among all development
        partners and government agencies made it extremely difficult to implement any
        changes. In Indonesia, though Bank policy dialog with government continued after
        the end of the jointly financed programmatic series, donor coordination broke down
        in the absence of an alternative mechanism.

       Other development partners have advantages and disadvantages relative to the Bank.
        Other donors can be a valuable source of grant funding for TA. Sometimes bilateral
        donors are not in a position to provide financing support at the scale of the Bank, but
        can provide TA on more favorable terms than the Bank can muster. Yet expectations
        that other development partners will provide needed TA have not always been met,
        as other donor priorities can change based on their internal institutional issues. In
        Ghana, the lack of accompanying TA was a major drawback, and may explain why
        agencies struggled to implement reforms on the planned timetable. Sometimes other
        donors, especially bilaterals, may not have the level of specialist technical expertise
        and knowledge that the Bank can command. Bank staff sometimes argue that
        bilateral agencies are relatively more concerned with disbursements and processes,
        and lack the Bank’s focus on results.

6.13 Interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) should be seen as a
standard part of any budget support, including environmental DPF. A separate IEG learning
product on macro-fiscal frameworks in DPF noted that weaknesses of certain elements of
macro fiscal frameworks were more likely in the absence of substantial collaboration with
the IMF (IEG 2015c).
                                            36




7. Conclusions
7.1      Policy lending offers many advantages for pursuing environmental goals.
Environmental challenges are often driven by externalities where policy interventions are
needed to reach efficient outcomes. Environmental issues often span multiple ministries, so
the ability of policy lending to act as a platform for change across multiple sectors is very
valuable. And environment ministries are often relatively weak, so the ability to elevate
critical environmental development issues to senior decision makers in finance and planning
ministries is critical. Yet these characteristics also make issues of institutional political
economy of high importance, so operations benefit from a clear political theory of change
and a strategy for achieving institutional buy-in. And they increase coordination challenges
and the risk of stretching an operation too thinly by covering too many policy areas and
agencies.

7.2      Environmental policy reforms are often highly complicated and require significant
time to design; – therefore it can be difficult to support significant environmental policy
reforms under emergency circumstances. There is a risk that operations prepared in those
circumstances may select policy actions that have already been completed or otherwise offer
little ability for the Bank to influence, in which case the DPO may have little impact beyond
that of the fiscal transfer.

7.3     As in other sectors, environmental policy lending is heavily reliant on effective
analytical work and TA. Although Bank teams are in near-universal agreement on the
importance of these factors their provision is viewed as inadequate. Bank staff argue that this
has been to the result of insufficient budget allocation for analytic work, tight Bank budgets
across the board, a decline in the availability of trust funds such as for CEAs, timing
difficulties related to the pressures for rapid disbursement, clients’ unwillingness to borrow
for TA, and incentives in the Bank that do not favor knowledge work.

7.4     The lessons generated from the Bank’s ICR evaluations of environmental DPF have
focused on design and process issues around use of the DPF instrument rather than on sector-
specific technical issues, rarely contributing on the wide range of subsectors in which the
Bank has supported environmental reforms. This is a potential missed opportunity for
improving the knowledge base on sector-specific experiences.

7.5     Finally, the Bank could consider strategies for improving the quality of results
frameworks, including monitoring and evaluation systems. There are inherent difficulties in
demonstrating impacts from DPF on outcomes in a limited time frame, but there are
opportunities for Bank teams to select program objectives that are clear and evaluable and to
use performance indicators that give evidence of early implementation effectiveness. The
Bank could also consider mechanisms for assessing longer-term results, separate from the
“short-termism” of the project-based evaluation system.
                                                  37


References
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group) .2015a. Managing Environmental and Social Risks in Development
        Policy Financing. Washington, DC: World Bank.
________. 2015b. The Quality of Results Frameworks in Development Policy Operations. Washington,
       DC: World Bank.
________. 2015c. Quality of Macro-Fiscal Frameworks in Development Policy Operations. Washington,
       DC: World Bank.
________.2016a. Behind the Mirror: A Report on the Self-Evaluation Systems of the World Bank Group
       (ROSES). Washington, DC: World Bank.
________. 2016b. Cluster Country Program Evaluation on Small States: Pacific Island Countries Program
       Evaluation (FY05–15) Volume II. Washington, DC: World Bank.
________. 2016c (Forthcoming). The Role of Political Economy Analysis in Development Policy
       Operations. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2008. Strengthening Policy Dialog on Environment: Learning from Five years of Country
       Environment Analysis.” Environment Department Papers, Institutions and Governance Series, No.
       114. Washington, DC: World Bank.
________. 2010. The Role of Environmental DPOs in Supporting Environmental Sustainability Assessing
       Experience, Learning Lessons. Unpublished. Washington.
________. 2012, “Toward a Clean, Green, Resilient World for All”, World Bank Washington DC
________. 2013. World Bank Group Strategy. Washington, October 2013.
________.2013b, “2012 Development Policy Lending Retrospective: Results, Risks and Reforms”, World
       Bank Washington DC
________. 2015. 2015 Development Policy Financing Retrospective: Results and Sustainability .
       Washington DC: World Bank.
                                                    38


Appendix A. The Environmental DPF Portfolio

The following are the 64 operations identified under the working definition of an environmental
DPO; those policy lending operations either mapped to the ENR GP, or had an environment and
resource management or natural disaster management theme as their primary or secondary theme.

Annex Table 1: Operations mapped to the ENR GP, with a published ICR:

                                                                      Approval
 Project ID   Name                                        Country     FY
 P057927      ENV/PRIV SUPPORT SAL                        Bulgaria    2000

 P070196      GA-Natural Res Mgmt DPO (FY06)              Gabon       2006
 P074539      MX Programmatic EnvSAL                      Mexico      2003
 P079748      MX ENVDPO II                                Mexico      2006
 P080829      BR 1st. PRL for Environmental Sustainab.    Brazil      2005
 P081397      CO Prog Dev Policy Ln for Sust. Dev         Colombia    2005
 P095205      BR 1st Prog. DPO for Sust. Env Mgmt         Brazil      2009
 P095510      MX Environmental Sustainability DPO         Mexico      2009
 P095877      CO 2nd Sustainable Dev DPO                  Colombia    2007
 P101301      CO 3rd Sust. Dev DPO                        Colombia    2009
 P102971      GH-Environmental Governance (FY07)          Ghana       2008
 P110849      MX Climate Change DPO/DDO                   Mexico      2008
 P113172      GH-NREG DPO                                 Ghana       2009
 P118188      GH:Natural Resources Env Governance DPO3    Ghana       2010
 P120313      Indonesia Climate Change DPO                Indonesia   2010
 P126449      BR MST Piaui Green Growth and Inclus DPO    Brazil      2012


Annex Table 2: Operations mapped to the ENR GP, with no ICR
                                                                       Approval
 Project ID    Name                                      Country       FY
 P101471       PE DDO First Prog. Environ DPO            Peru          2009

 P115101       MXSupplement to Env Sustain. DPO          Mexico        2009
 P116152       PE 2nd Prog. Env DPO                      Peru          2010
 P118713       PE 3rd Prog. Environmental DPO            Peru          2011

 P122667       VN-Vietnam Climate Change DPO             Vietnam       2012
 P124041       IN: HP DPO Green Growth                   India         2013
 P127201       VN-Climate Change DPO II                  Vietnam       2013

 P127956       MA-Inclusive Green Growth DPO             Morocco       2014
 P128434       MZ:Climate Change DPO                     Mozambique    2013
 P131775       VN-Climate Change DPO III                 Vietnam       2014

 P143032       DPO 2 - Inclusive Green Growth in HP      India         2014
 P146398       Second Climate Change DPO                 Mozambique    2015
                                                  39

                                                                         Approval
Project ID     Name                                       Country        FY

P146981        BR Piaui Productive and Social Inclusion   Brazil         2016
P149747        MA- Inclusive Green Growth DPO2            Morocco        2016
P150475        Colombia DPO for Sustainable Development   Colombia       2016


Annex Table 3: Operations mapped to other GPs, with published ICR
                                                                            Approval
ProjectID    Name                                         Country           FY
P071103      KH-Poverty Reduction and Growth-1 (DPO)      Cambodia          2008

P074073      TZ-PRSC2 (intermediate)                      Tanzania          2005
P082412      CL -Santiago Urban Transport Adj             Chile             2006
                                                          Congo,
P091990      DRC - Transitional Support Credit (DPO)      Democrat          2006

P095575      SL-GRGG (DPG 1)-Programmatic Series          Sierra Leone      2007
P104937      MA-SOLID WASTE SECTOR DPO                    Morocco           2009
P104990      RW- PRSG 4 DPO FY08                          Rwanda            2008
P105287      VN - PRSC 7                                  Vietnam           2008
P115608      MX Framework for Green Growth DPO            Mexico            2010
P121651      ESES DPO 3                                   Turkey            2012
P065351      COAL ADJ 2                                   Poland            2002
P070656      CM-Forestry & Env DPO (FY06)                 Cameroon          2006
P073020      CM GEF Forest & Env DPO (FY06)               Cameroon          2006

P095840      MA-Water Sector DPO                          Morocco           2007
P101724      Vietnam PRSC 6                               Vietnam           2007
P112625      ECONOMIC RECOVERY DPO                        Moldova           2010

P115426      ENERGY EFFICIENCY DPO                        Poland            2011
P117651      ESES DPO2                                    Turkey            2010
P120134      MX DPO Adapt. Climate Change in WtrSct       Mexico            2010

P120170      MX Strengthening Social Resilience to CC     Mexico            2012
P121800      MX MEDEC Low-Carbon DPO                      Mexico            2011
P076830      Jamaica Emergency Recovery Loan              Jamaica           2002

P118636      Economic Crisis Recovery Support Credit      Samoa             2010




Annex Table 4: Operations mapped to other GPs, with no ICR
                                                                     Approval
 ProjectID   Name                                         Country    FY
 P117279     LR- RRSP 3 - Budget Support                  Liberia    2011
 P127955     MA-Solid Waste Sector DPO3                   Morocco    2013

 P147166     HT Strengthening Governance                  Haiti      2014
 P150941     BI Eight Economic Reform Support Grant       Burundi    2015
 P148083     RS:Strengthening Fiscal & Water Mgmt DPO     Brazil     2014

 P148642     MA-Solid Waste Sector DPO4                   Morocco    2015
                                                40


 P144377    Samoa Development Policy Operation          Samoa     2014

 P150751    BO DRM DPC and DPO                          Bolivia   2015
 P147152    1st Programmatic Resilience Building DPC    Grenada   2014
 P151821    Grenada Resilience Building DPC 2           Grenada   2016



A portfolio review of prior actions carried out for this product developed a typology of
policy actions (Annex Table 5).

The review also developed a typology of the types of lessons offered by self-evaluations,
desk validations, and field-based evaluations (Annex Table 6).
                                                                      41


Annex Table 5: Prior actions supported by environmental DPOs, FY 2000–16

                                                                                                       Number of        Number of
                                                                                                      prior actions    prior actions
                                     Type of policy                                                  in operations    in operations
                                                                                                       mapped to        mapped to
                                                                                                         ENR GP         other GPs
                                     Climate change strategy and action plan                              12                4
      Climate change




                                     Climate change mitigation: LULUCF                                    14                7
                                     Climate change mitigation: energy, demand side                       6                 8
                                     Climate change mitigation: energy, supply side                       10                9
                                     Climate change mitigation: transport and urban                       15                0
                                     Climate change adaptation: general                                    2                9
 adaptation
  Climate
   change




                                     Climate change adaptation: urban and infrastructure                   1                1
                                     Climate change adaptation: agriculture                                4                3
   disasters
    Natural




                                     Disaster risk management
                                                                                                          9                5
                                     Pollution: general                                                   9                0
      Pollution




                                     Pollution: industry and mining                                       6                5
                                     Pollution: sanitation                                                12               12
                                     Environmental protection: general                                    40                2
   Environmental
     protection




                                     Environmental protection: coastal and marine resources               12                1
                                     Environmental protection: water resources                            24                8
                                     Environmental protection: land resources                              4                4
                                     Institutional strengthening: environmental and climate
   strengthening




                                     change cross-sectoral coordination and financing
    Institutional




                                                                                                          13                1
                                     Institutional strengthening: monitoring systems and tools            6                 3
                                     Institutional strengthening: social impact, social inclusion,
                                     and public consultations                                             15               9
      Sector reform and governance




                                     Sector reform and governance: agriculture, aquaculture               5                14
                                     Sector reform and governance: oil and mining                         8                4
                                     Sector reform and governance: water and sanitation                   2                12
                                     Sector reform and governance: energy                                 4                4
                                     Sector reform and governance: transport and logistics,
                                     telecom                                                               5                5
                                     Sector reform and governance: forestry                               10              15
          Sector reform and governance: tourism                                                           3                0
 Non-environmental policies                                                                               16              115
Source: IEG portfolio review.
                                                                   42


7.6

Annex Table 6: Lessons from self-evaluations and independent
validations/evaluations of closed environmental DPOs, FY 2000–16

                                                                                                          Number
                                   Type of lesson
                                                                                                          of cases
                                   Government ownership and leadership: champions, support by top-level
                                                                                                            16
                                   officials, political support
                                   Government ownership, institutional support, and interagency
                                                                                                            29
                                   coordination
      Political economy




                                   Embedding policy reforms in the government agenda                        7
                                   Government involvement in monitoring progress                            5
                                   Reform continuity, consistency, and dialog (Bank-Government)             15
                                   Stakeholder involvement, transparency, communication                     12
                                   Working with subnational governments                                     3
                                   Need for a strong implementation agency                                  7
                                   Earmarking of DPF funds to line agencies                                 3
   strengthening
    Institutional




                                   Need for institutional capacity and importance of capacity building       9

                                   Building a culture of legal compliance                                    1
           Synergy of bringing sectors and institutions together                                             6
           Need to focus on key reforms, limit complexity in terms of policies and
                                                                                                            12
           agencies involved
           Importance of flexible approach                                                                  7
           Pilots and phasing approach useful for large operations                                          3
      DPO design and preparation




           Cooperation between the Bank and the IFC                                                         1
           Multi-donor involvement and coordination                                                         13
           Analytical work and knowledge-based policy design                                                9
           Technical assistance needed to support DPF                                                       18
           Investment operation vs. DPF or to complement DPF                                                9
           Results framework and M&E issues                                                                 22
           Ex-post evaluation and supervision                                                               6
           Programmatic series vs. single operation                                                         10
           Mainstreaming climate change across sectors                                                      4
           Design issues in programmatic series                                                             6
           Resource requirements of DPF                                                                     2
 Project-specific lessons and "other" lessons                                                               23
Source: IEG portfolio review. A “case” is for a single standalone operation or programmatic series.
Note: M&E = monitoring and evaluation.
43
                                                44


Appendix B. Case studies
B.1: Natural Resource and Environmental Governance in Ghana

Ghana’s growth is heavily reliant on natural resources, many of which have suffered from
significant resource degradation, particularly in the forest sector. Resource degradation had
occurred because of a history of poor governance and management of natural resources, weak
environmental protection, and limited community involvement. The World Bank had been
involved in previous efforts to improve natural resource management in Ghana in the late 1990s
and early 2000s, but these were not successful and the World Bank withdrew from the sector.
One reason for the poor performance of investment projects was the number of policy barriers, so
the Bank with other development partners decided to re-engage in the sector with a Development
Policy Operation: the Natural Resources and Environmental Governance Program (NREG). The
operation represented an innovative attempt to bring a new approach to a set of challenging
subsectors and to do so in a harmonized manner with other major development partners.

The Program Development Objectives of the US$40 million programmatic series were to
a) Ensure predictable and sustainable financing for the forest and wildlife sectors and effective
forest law enforcement; b) improve mining sector revenue collection, management, and
transparency; c) address social issues in forest and mining communities; and d) mainstream
environment into economic growth. Though relevant to the broad goals of the Country Assistant
Strategy and the Government’s goals for the program, the objectives focused on inputs, outputs,
and intermediate outcomes, which reduced their relevance. Setting achievable objectives that
were sufficiently relevant was a difficult challenge when the expected duration of the program
was three years.

The program supported efforts to improve environmental and natural resource management under
three policy areas: forest and wildlife, mining, and environmental protection. Major elements
included increased revenue collection from forestry royalties, creation of a system for tracking the
legal origin of timber consignments, benefit-sharing schemes with land users and investors, a
mining revenue task force, mine audits, mining regulatory reform, more collaborative forest
management, a social conflict tracking tool, increased use of environmental impact assessment
and strategic environmental assessment tools, and development of a climate change strategy.
Though program documents did not always identify a clear theory of change, the elements of the
program contributed to the program objectives. However, the design did little to address informal
forestry and mining, it did not address land tenure issues that were a barrier to private sector
investment in forestry, and it was not clear how program activities would reduce social conflict.

The operation was largely implemented as designed, and prior actions and triggers were
completed (except for one that was dropped). Changes in government and elections led to some
delays but did not disrupt the overall program. Implementing agencies were highly committed to
the program, and improved their cooperation and coordination. A critical issue in management of
funds was the decision to keep them in a ring-fenced account, and to earmark them specifically to
the implementing agencies. This decision was made by the government, but arguably with the
tacit support of the Bank and other development partners. The decision had three significant
negative consequences: It acted to insert the Bank and other development partners into the
relationship between government and agencies, and led agencies to hold development partners,
rather than the government, responsible for providing sustained financing. It undermined the
ability of the operation to contribute to a mature budget dialog between the finance ministry and
line ministries. And it encouraged the government to effectively delegate responsibility for
carrying out the program to the implementing agencies.
                                                45


Progress was made in a number of areas. Policy changes and internal investments increased
revenue collection by the Forest Commission. Forestry policies and plans were revised, but
competitive bidding for timber permits has stalled, and private investment in plantations has been
less than was hoped. Planned increases in forestry royalty rates were blocked by the forestry
industry. Significant progress has been made on a wood tracking system, but as of 2014 it had not
yet been completed and no export licenses had been issued. Informal forestry remains a
significant problem and strategies for managing it remain at the pilot stage. Though overall forest
cover is increasing, forest degradation continues.

Changes to mineral royalties increased the revenue generated from the mining sector, though
increasing production and rising gold prices were also major causes. A commitment to
transparency for large mining company revenues through the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative existed prior to the program, but incremental progress was made in expanding
transparency. Little support was provided to small-scale miners, because planned mining
cooperatives on new sites were not established.

There were significant improvements in relationships between government and civil society on
natural resource management. Consultation and collaboration with forest communities was
increased, and royalty payments to traditional authorities and district assemblies were published.
A social conflict tracking tool and guidelines on social responsibility for large mining companies
were established. But monitoring and evaluation systems did not track social conflict, and a
planned social assessment was not carried out, so it is difficult to assess whether social conflict
has declined.

Incremental improvements were made to the environmental impact assessment process. Strategic
environmental assessments were carried out in a number of sectors and these have fed into policy
development in some cases. A national climate change strategy was established and climate
change was required to be considered in key national and local-level policies. But capacity
limitations mean the ability of these policies to have an impact is unclear.

The choice of a Development Policy Operation instrument was justified, but there were a number
of problems with the way it was implemented, caused in particular by the earmarking of funds,
and the decision to use single-year operations within the series combined with a complex design
with many actions to be achieved and a lack of supporting technical assistance. The operation had
no clear exit strategy for what would occur to line agency funding once the program ended. The
decision to harmonize budget support with other development partners was positive, but
harmonization was incomplete and partially broke down during implementation. The Bank’s
participation after the original approval consisted primarily of assessment of the large number of
targets and triggers at the expense of ongoing policy and technical advice.

Monitoring and evaluation systems were weak, focusing largely on recording production of
outputs rather than on assessing progress on outcomes. Many indicators were vague, and
baselines were weak. The system was improved during implementation but the core problems
remained.

The experience of NREG offers a number of useful lessons about using development policy
operations for sectoral interventions, about donor harmonization, and about natural resource
management. These include:

• Earmarking funds to specific agencies can undermine the rationale of a development policy
operation by inserting the Bank into the relationship between the finance ministry and the line
                                                 46

ministries and their agencies. When agencies are heavily reliant on donor budget support, then
there are risks to sustainability if there is no long-term plan for addressing what will happen at the
end of the program.

• There is a risk that in sectoral development policy operations with one-year operational cycles,
policy and technical advice to the client can be crowded out by processing requirements.

• Sectoral development policy operations may need complementary technical assistance and
support.

• Donor harmonization has tradeoffs: it can help to provide a unified platform for sector reform,
but can reduce the flexibility of programs, and differences in rules and expectations across
agencies pose significant challenges.

Source:
http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/Ghana_NRM_PPAR_889590PPAR0P1000Box38528
5B00PUBLIC0_0.pdf
                                               47


B.2 Energy sector and environmental sustainability series in Turkey

The World Bank has had a long engagement in the energy sector in Turkey, with support through
investment lending and policy dialog. The government of Turkey has pursued an agenda of
market-oriented electricity sector liberalization since 2001. In the mid-2000s, analytic work
showed that Turkey faced the prospect of electricity shortages as early as 2009–11. The Bank
aimed to help the government to alleviate these shortages by supporting an increase in the pace of
the reforms, which were intended to increase private sector investment in electricity generation
and distribution and energy efficiency.

The Programmatic Electricity Sector Development Policy Loan, approved in June 2009 as the
first in what was intended to be a two-operation programmatic series, was intended to provide this
support and to serve as a platform for continued policy engagement. The objectives of this
operation were to “address the projected electricity supply-demand imbalance”. The design of
the programmatic series was highly relevant to this objective, with a coherent design of mutually
reinforcing prior actions covering electricity sector market development, pricing reform,
renewable energy development, distribution company privatization, energy efficiency, and other
measures.

After 2008, the government gave higher priority to environmental issues, particularly after the
opening of the environmental chapter of the European Union acquis and accession to the Kyoto
Protocol. The government requested World Bank assistance on environmental policy through the
electricity programmatic DPO series. The design of the series was expanded from two operations
to three, a number of new prior actions and triggers on environmental issues were added, and the
objectives of the series for the Second Environmental Sustainability and Energy Sector
Development Policy Loan and the Third Environmental Sustainability and Energy Sector
Development Policy Loan were to a) enhance energy security; b) integrate principles of
environmental sustainability, including climate change considerations, in key sectoral policies
and programs; c) improve the effectiveness and efficiency of environmental management
processes. The energy sector objective increased its relevance by expanding to cover energy
security beyond the electricity sector, but the environmental objectives were less relevant,
because the main weaknesses in environmental management were in implementation rather than
policy.

The electricity sector design remained strong, but relatively little was added to address energy
issues outside of the electricity sector. The design of the climate change pillar was relatively
strong, because a national climate change strategy and action plan were important steps in
addressing climate change. But there were weaknesses in the design of the environmental pillar.
Some individual prior actions were relatively minor policy changes, and many prior actions may
have had little additional impact because these changes were already being pursued by Turkey
motivated by EU harmonization. The main environmental challenges in Turkey were due to
weaknesses in implementation and enforcement rather than policy, and so a DPO might not have
been the right instrument for environmental engagement, especially absent parallel technical
assistance.

The series was implemented largely as designed, though triggers on strategic environmental
assessment and on gas market law amendments were dropped. An important trigger on energy
efficiency, which was at risk of being dropped, was preserved and the policy was adopted.

The reforms played a major role in addressing electricity supply-demand imbalances. The
government’s strategy of using policy reforms to encourage private sector investment in
electricity generation has been generally successful, and the Bank DPO played an important
                                                 48

supporting role. However, there have been some wintertime power shortages, driven in part by
gas supply shortages, and there has been less progress on energy efficiency. The electricity
reforms led to increased electricity supply security, but there was little impact on other aspects of
energy security, including natural gas supply. The climate change strategy and action plan
supported under the operation are important steps, though the climate change strategy involves
substantial increases in greenhouse gas emissions, particularly from coal power development, in
the medium term. However, the effects on improving the effectiveness and efficiency of
environmental management were smaller, because many of the prior actions supported by the
DPO were relatively modest, or were motivated by EU harmonization goals with little additional
impact from the Bank’s involvement. In particular, little progress has been made on increasing
the degree of public participation in environmental decision making.

There were a number of weaknesses in the design of the monitoring and evaluation system. Many
of the indicators were designed in a qualitative manner that made judging their fulfillment
ambiguous or subjective, and many indicators tracked outputs rather than outcomes. The actual
measured values did not track the targeted indicators in some cases, and there were no indicators
for some key outcomes.

The program offers a number of lessons:

       The Bank can maximize its development impact by concentrating its strategic
        engagement including its lending and advisory support in sectors with track records of
        success.

       A well-designed programmatic DPO can be a key instrument in the Bank's long-term
        engagement that leverages the Bank’s strengths on technical quality, convening power,
        and credibility to help support sectoral reforms that can yield substantial impacts.

       Prior actions should focus selectively on those reforms that are critical to achieving
        project objectives but are difficult to undertake because of political or institutional
        resistance. Prior actions should also ensure that they are additional to what would occur
        in the absence of the DPO operation.

       DPOs can achieve good outcomes when they serve as the culmination of a process of
        engagement rather than the initial engagement in a new sector.

       A comprehensive yet well-integrated set of market reforms can provide credible signals
        and incentives to private investors.

       Changing laws and regulations may not have much impact on environmental outcomes
        when environmental management agencies are weak and lack implementation and
        enforcement capacity.

Source: http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/PPAR_-
_Turkey_1st_Programatic_Electricity_DPO.pdf
                                                    49




B.3 Climate change policy loan in Indonesia

Indonesia is the third largest emitter of greenhouse gases in the developing world after China and
India. These emissions stem largely from deforestation, peatland conversion, and associated fires,
together with electricity generated by coal-fired power plants and the consumption of fossil fuels in
the energy and transport sectors, also associated with high fuel subsidies and rapid urbanization.
Comprising more than 13,000 islands, Indonesia is also one of the most vulnerable countries to the
rising adverse impacts of global climate change, including extreme weather events—tropical storms
and droughts—and sea level rise, particularly on account of the concentration of much of its
population in lowland areas.

In recognition of this, in 2007 the Indonesia government developed a National Action Plan for
Addressing Climate Change. Even prior to that, it had signed an agreement with the Government of
Japan that resulted in a multi-year policy-based loan to support Indonesian efforts to deal with climate
change, based on the National Action Plan. The French Government joined this initiative shortly
thereafter, but even though the World Bank participated in some of the initial meetings and provided
technical and analytical support for this program, it decided not to cofinance it during the first two
years of its implementation. The main reasons for this were that the agreed policy matrix was
considered to be too fragmented and insufficiently ambitious with respect to forest governance and
energy subsidy reform.

The Bank agreed to participate in the funding of the second phase of the ongoing climate change
policy loan program in 2010 after the Government agreed to incorporate more significant policy
reforms and after a presidential pledge that the country would reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by
26 percent by 2020. The Bank approved an initial DPO of US$200 million alongside contributions
from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the French Development Agency
(AFD) of US$300 million in both 2009 and 2010. This was the first of what was expected to be a
four-loan programmatic series to support what the Bank denominated the Indonesia Climate Change
(CC) DPO Program, whose objectives were to support the government’s efforts to develop a low-
carbon, climate-resilient growth path. A number of prior actions were recognized in three main policy
areas—mitigation, adaptation and disaster preparedness, and cross-sectoral and institutional issues—
and 11 subareas to justify approval and disbursement of the first loan. Four triggers and other
“indicative” policy actions were agreed by the government and the development partners for the
second loan, as well as tentative indicative actions for the third and fourth ones, expected to occur in
2011, 2012, and 2013, respectively.

For a variety of reasons, the Bank DPO series did not extend past the initial loan. According to
government officials interviewed by IEG, the program failed to go forward because of a presidential
decision not to borrow for climate change, even though the resources transferred by the Bank and the
Japanese and French governments were for general budget support and were not used to support
investments to address climate change per se. This decision was reportedly taken in response to a
“consensus” at the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) that
developing countries should only receive grant money, rather than loans, to address climate change,
although in practice it was also a reflection of several other factors.

These factors included: (i) the loss of critical program “champions” within the Indonesian
government when the Minister of Finance departed and other high-level personnel changes occurred
within the National Development Planning Agency, which was responsible for program coordination;
(ii) the availability of budget support finance from alternative sources, including the Bank, through
                                                 50

other DPOs; and (iii) the near-simultaneous offer by the Norwegian government to provide up to
US$1 billion in grant funding for implementation of Indonesia’s incipient Reduction of Deforestation
and Degradation (REDD) program, which was also being supported by the Climate Change DPO. In
addition, the government had failed to meet two of the four triggers previously agreed for the second
loan, while achievement of a third had been substantially delayed.

Consequently, only one of the four anticipated operations was presented to the World Bank Board.
The Japanese and French Governments also ceased their funding for the policy-based program after
2010, though the other development partners, especially JICA, continued to provide TA grants to
some of the line ministries responsible for implementing parts of the original program. Although one
of the triggers for the second loan was met in a timely way, two others were not met in the form
originally envisaged in the Program Document, the fourth was delayed, and the experience with other
indicative actions for planned operations two, three, and four was mixed. Several of the expected
results could not be assessed because the needed baseline surveys were not carried out or the agency
responsible for their monitoring discontinued collection of the required data, while others were only
achieved in part. Some results indicators, moreover, only partly reflected the policy actions that were
to be taken.

Although performance in some policy subareas, such as those related to renewable energy, water
resource management, and natural disaster risk management, was generally positive, this was less true
in others, especially those concerned with peatland conservation, REDD (now REDD+, which
includes conservation, sustainable forest management, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in
addition to the reduction of deforestation and forest degradation), and forest governance. Nor was it
possible to establish an intergovernmental fiscal transfer mechanism to provide incentives for local
governments to take priority climate change actions, including the strengthening of forest
management activities, which had been one of the triggers for the second loan.

More generally, available data suggest that Indonesia’s greenhouse gas emissions have continued to
rise in recent years, at least through 2012, because of persistently high rates of deforestation, peatland
conversion, and fires, as well as growing fossil fuel-based energy consumption. Electricity subsidies
were finally reduced somewhat as of late 2013 and geothermal energy investments increased, in part
with financial support from the World Bank and the Clean Technology Fund. However, the share of
renewables in Indonesia’s energy mix remains very low (about 3 percent) and is expanding very
slowly; coal and oil continue to strongly predominate. Forest and land use management also persist as
major challenges, while REDD+ implementation has advanced very slowly and had very limited
results on the ground to date.

Several of the triggers for the proposed second loan proved overly ambitious, given the strong
institutional and political economy constraints encountered by the program. The latter included the
frequent tendency of subnational governments to fail to implement central government decisions
when they went against local vested economic and political interests, such as those related to peatland
use, palm oil concessions, and curbing fires and deforestation, together with strong public resistance
to cutting energy subsidies.

Government commitment in the Ministry of Finance and Planning agency was initially strong, but it
declined significantly after the changes in top-level personnel; commitment in the various line
ministries and agencies involved in DPO implementation was uneven from the start and remained so
throughout the brief life of the second phase of the program. A joint evaluation by AFD and JICA,
issued in June 2014, observed that even the additional TA grants provided by these donors to some of
the participating ministries proved to be an insufficient incentive for them to proactively implement
some of their sector-specific policy obligations, while others were effectively impeded by
uncooperative local governments, empowered by the country’s recent decentralization.
                                                   51


Despite these frustrations, the Indonesia CC DPO experience provides a number of important lessons.
Among them are:

•        Both a strong “champion” and broad institutional commitment are needed for DPO policy
actions to be effectively implemented; it is, thus, important to fully understand the incentives
involved for the various government entities that are to be engaged in DPO implementation. In this
regard also it is essential to fully understand the potential political economy, as well as the
institutional, constraints that can impede or delay policy implementation; this has implications for the
up-front risk analysis and the DPO appraisal process more generally.

•       This is especially important in DPOs with environmental, including climate change
objectives, which are inherently cross-sectoral or multisectoral in nature, and, therefore, tend to
depend on a broader range of participating institutions, both at the national and subnational levels,
than single-sector or macroeconomic/fiscal DPOs.

•       Programmatic DPOs can encounter many of the same obstacles to development effectiveness,
including varying and changing levels of government and implementing agency commitment and
implementation delays, as can be met with in investment loans.

•        DPOs for climate change and other complex development challenges are more effective as
part of a broader targeted multi-instrument Bank assistance strategy, including the use of investment
loans and TA, as a way of ensuring greater Borrower interest and ownership and establishing a
longer-term relationship and policy dialogue.

•       Even when a DPO is unsuccessful in terms of its own expected results, it may play a positive
and strategically important role as part of an evolving longer-term Bank-Borrower partnership to help
address an emerging complex development challenge such as climate change


Source: http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/PPAR_Indonesia.Clmt_.ChgDPO.pdf
                                               52


B.4 Environmental management in Brazil

Brazil Programmatic Reform Loan for Environmental Sustainability (2004)

The First Programmatic Reform Loan for Environmental Sustainability (Env PRL) was the first
World Bank budget support program in Brazil with a purely environmental policy objective, and was
part of a set of environmental policy loans to countries in the Latin America and Caribbean Region
that were some of the first in the World Bank. The Env PRL was designed as a programmatic series
of up to three loans to the Federal Government for a total of approximately US$1.2 billion. The first
loan, for US$502 million, was approved in August 2004 and disbursed in a single tranche and closed
in December 2004. Only the first PRL was completed; the second and third loans did not materialize.
An Environmental Technical Assistance Loan (Env TAL) was prepared to accompany the Env PRL
and provide support through studies, workshops, and other capacity-building activities. However, this
loan did not become effective until 2006, nearly two years after the approval of Env PRL 1.

Brazil faced a variety of environmental challenges associated with deforestation and the need to
combine agricultural growth, environmental protection, and sustainable development. Increases in
urbanization and industrialization had brought additional environmental challenges. Finding a balance
between economic development and sustainable management of the environment was therefore a key
national priority for Brazil, and for the World Bank’s program. The principal objective of the Env
PRL was “to support Brazil’s goal of balancing economic growth with social development and the
maintenance and improvement of environmental quality.” The program also had two specific
objectives: 1) increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of Brazil’s environmental management
system (EMS), including a green, brown and blue agenda, and 2) mainstreaming environmental
sustainability in selected sector policies and programs. These objectives were necessary for achieving
the principal objective but were unlikely to be sufficient, particularly on the social side.
The Env PRL was designed with 15 different policy areas and multiple government agencies in
addition to the official implementing agencies—the Ministry of Finance and the central Ministry of
Environment. The general approach under the Env PRL series, drafting laws and strategies under the
first operation, approving legislation under the second, and implementing the reforms under the third
is causally linked and logically correct in most—though not all—cases. However, a risk of
noncompletion was created by predominantly targeting the federal level with “backloaded” reform
agendas that would not be fully implemented until the second or third operation.

The Env PRL is credited with contributing to the raising of the profile and agenda of the Ministry of
Environment and associated agencies, resulting in improved engagement with other important parts of
the government, such as the Ministry of Finance. This was of high importance for advancing the
sustainability agenda in Brazil. The reduction of deforestation in the Atlantic Forest and the
introduction of a system for water charges were also important achievements. In other areas, such as
the protection of the Cerrado Forest, improvement of the environmental licensing process, and
improved management of hazardous chemicals, evidence suggests that significant challenges
remained.

Some of the reforms supported by the Env PRL are credited with making substantial contributions to
environmental mainstreaming. This is particularly true with regard to the impressive progress that
Brazil has made in reducing deforestation in the Amazon, which is a signal achievement of great
importance for Brazil and for the global environment. In the area of environmental sanitation, there
has been some progress through the innovative “payment-for-results” sanitation program, and zoning
in the Amazon, though with little apparent impact on the ground at the time of evaluation. In other
policy areas such as energy and tourism, the planned mainstreaming reforms were never carried out.
The failure to introduce a Strategic Environmental Assessment approach into river basin and
                                                  53


hydroelectric investment planning, and the lack of results in mainstreaming environmental
sustainability in financial institutions, were missed opportunities.

Although the second and third operations in the Env PRL series did not materialize as planned, Env
PRL 1 and the accompanying Env TAL gave impetus to the reform agenda, resulting in the
continuation of many of the reforms and important contributions to improved environmental
management and mainstreaming of environmental sustainability in Brazil. Those included the
essential strengthening of the Federal Ministry of Environment, and the significant reduction in
deforestation of the Amazon and Atlantic Forests. Reforms in some other areas did not achieve results
as planned. The Brazilian government continued to make progress on many—but not all—of the
policy areas under the Env PRL program, indicating good commitment to the overall environmental
management and mainstreaming agenda.

The World Bank team that prepared the Env PRL was praised by both government counterparts and
civil society representatives for the quality of the preparation process, including the extensive and
long-term engagement of the World Bank team with the Brazilian environmental policy reform
agenda and with stakeholders both inside and outside of government during preparation. On the other
hand, the design of the Env PRL was highly ambitious, involving too many policy areas and
associated agencies. There is also a question as to whether a three-loan series was the best design
option. Although the Borrower continued with a number of the reforms after the Env PRL 1, this was
more serendipity than good planning on the part of the Bank. The preparation of the Env TAL that
was meant to accompany the Env PRL lagged behind that of the Env PRL.

Supervision of the Env PRL series was not adequate. After Env PRL 1 was disbursed and closed,
there was inadequate attention to continuing the dialogue and engagement from the World Bank side
to ensure that the programmatic series would continue as planned for a second and third operation.
Monitoring and evaluation under the Env PRL were particularly weak. The Bank did not evaluate the
Env PRL with a full ICR for the series, so despite the large size of the loan, its innovation, and its
potential implications for a subsequent environmental DPO, there was little accounting of what
worked and what did not under the Env PRL, what the outcomes were, and what lessons could be
gleaned for future operations.

Brazil has made significant progress in improving environmental sustainability in certain areas—
particularly the signal achievement of reducing deforestation in the Amazon. There is evidence that
this had much to do with actions taken by the Brazilian government, particularly the strengthening of
“command and control” enforcement measures under the Amazon deforestation prevention program
supported by the Env PRL. The government also took steps to strengthen the environmental
management system and central institutions in the country by restructuring, raising the profile of, and
increasing staffing for the Ministry of Environment. Despite the cancelation of the second and third
operations under the Env PRL series, the Brazilian government also continued to make progress in
mainstreaming environment in some of the other sectors. At the same time, the government made
little progress in other key policy areas described under the Env PRL, such as improving the
performance of the environmental licensing system overseen by the Brazilian Institute of
Environment and Natural Resources, integrating a Strategic Environmental Assessment approach into
hydroelectric investment planning, and mainstreaming environmental sustainability in financial and
fiscal policies. There was also no progress reported in the planned mainstreaming of environment in
the tourism sector. The cancelation of the Env PRL series adversely impacted the functioning of the
high-level Management Committee composed of representatives of the seven ministries involved.
The Brazilian government also reportedly resisted the associated Env TAL loan, which was an
important complement to the Env PRL.
                                                54

This assessment includes a number of lessons, which are summarized below:

•   Risks associated with not completing the required ex-post evaluation of an operation could
    influence the quality and effectiveness of subsequent operations. The World Bank did not
    prepare the required full ICR for the Env PRL series. As a result, there was no proper accounting
    for the Env PRL, and there were adverse impacts on the subsequent First Programmatic
    Development Policy Loan for Sustainable Environmental Management (SEM DPL)
    environmental DPO series as well. The World Bank should have ensured that the evaluation of
    the previous series was completed before embarking on preparation of a new series in the same
    sector.

•   Extensive engagement and consultations by the World Bank in preparing a DPO contribute to
    better design and generate goodwill on the part of the client. The team that prepared the Env PRL
    was praised for its long-term, high-quality technical engagement with government ministries and
    sectoral agencies, and for its efforts to consult with an array of civil society organizations.

•   It is important to be selective and realistic about what can be achieved in the context of a sectoral
    DPO. Considering that this was the first DPO series in Brazil focused on the environment, the
    complexity of the issues, and the many government agencies that they involved, the World Bank
    and the Borrower needed to be more cautious about program design and policy reform priorities,
    in order to avoid being overly ambitious, as was evident with the 15 different policy areas of the
    Env PRL.

Source: http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/brazil-env-prl-ppar.pdf
                                                  55


Brazil Sustainable Environmental Management Development Policy Loan (2009)

NOTE: The following is based on an IEG field-based project evaluation. The findings were disputed
by World Bank management and the government of Brazil. See the full document available at
http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/brazil-sem-DPO-ppar.pdf for the Bank management
response and Borrower government comments.

The First Programmatic Development Policy Loan for Sustainable Environmental Management (SEM
DPL 1) was designed as a programmatic series of two loans to the Federal Government of Brazil for a
total of approximately US$2 billion. The first loan was for a total of US$1.3 billion divided into two
tranches of US$800 million and US$500 million on International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD) terms. The loan was approved in March 2009, became effective in June 2010,
and was disbursed in June and December 2010 and then closed. The planned second loan in the
series, SEM DPL 2, did not materialize and was eventually canceled.

It is important to understand the history and evolution of the operation and the context in which it was
prepared. The operation was initially proposed as a “BNDES PAC-Env DPO”—a development policy
loan to the Brazilian National Bank for Economic and Social Development (BNDES) to support the
government’s scaling-up of infrastructure investments while also improving BNDES’s environmental
and social policies, which was considered a significant challenge. The Brazilian government and the
World Bank next concluded that BNDES was not eligible for a DPO. Instead, preparation began on a
US$1 billion Financial Intermediary Loan—a type of investment loan—to BNDES called the
“BNDES Environmental and Social Sustainability Project,” with 99 percent of the funds going to
finance BNDES investment operations and 1 percent for technical assistance to strengthen BNDES’s
environmental and social safeguards. Internal World Bank reviewers expressed serious concerns
about BNDES’s ability to comply with requirements on environmental and social safeguards, interest
subsidies, financial management, and procurement.

At the time of the global financial crisis in 2008, an agreement was reached to change the design of
the operation again by transforming it into an environmental DPO to the federal government. The
reformulation incorporated some of the reform agenda contained in an earlier World Bank–financed
environmental DPO—the 2004 First Programmatic Reform Loan for Environmental Sustainability
(Env PRL). The Ministry of Environment was added as an implementing agency, the objective was
framed at a national scale, and the size of the program doubled to US$2 billion to create the SEM
DPL. BNDES remained an implementing agency and a major focus of the policy actions. BNDES
was also on-lent the entire amount of the DPO funds from the federal government.
The evolution of this operation—including significant changes to the financing instrument, the
objectives, and the implementing agencies—created issues with the project logic, the delay in
effectiveness, and the Bank’s reputation.

The objectives for the SEM DPL series were stated as follows: “The SEM DPL series supports the
GOB’s [Government of Brazil’s] concerted efforts to strengthen environmental management, with
particular attention to: improvements in the overall environmental management system, sustainable
management of agricultural lands, forests, and water resources; reduction of deforestation in the
Amazon; reduction of the environmental degradation of land and water resources that are key
determinants of the well-being of the poor; and, promotion of renewable energy.” The objectives of
the SEM DPL could have been clearer but they were undoubtedly relevant, given Brazil’s tremendous
environmental wealth of global importance, its rapidly developing economy that is highly dependent
on commodities, and the challenges it has faced in balancing the tradeoffs between the two.
The design of the operation suffered from disjointed project logic. This is likely a consequence of the
rapid change in direction from preparing a loan to BNDES to preparing the broader SEM DPL, and
                                                56

the limited opportunities for the Bank to engage on the broader reform agenda with government
agencies and stakeholders outside of BNDES, given the speed with which the operation had to be
prepared. The series of three policy actions and the associated outcome indicator for each policy area
inconsistently combined national-level policies and actions and outcomes specific to BNDES. For
example, for the sub-objective “Improve sustainability of natural resources management,” the First
Tranche Prior Action was to strengthen the federal legal framework by enacting specific forest
management laws (for example, for managing the Atlantic Forest); the Second Tranche Release
Condition was focused exclusively on BNDES forest programs and guidelines; and finally, the series
outcome indicator was a general measure of the surface area of public and private forests sustainably
managed, with no direct link to BNDES or the Atlantic Forest.

The SEM DPL had major shortcomings in the achievement of its objectives. For a loan—including a
DPO—to be effective in achieving its objectives, it should successfully achieve not only the outputs
represented by the various policy actions, but also the associated outcomes for the series to which
those outputs are designed to contribute. Moreover, these outputs and outcomes should be attributable
to the World Bank’s related engagement under the loan with the client on the reforms. Although
Brazil has made substantial progress in strengthening environmental management in some areas, there
is little evidence that the SEM DPL contributed to this progress, because results instead were rather
part of an environmental reform process that has been active for decades. Many of the SEM DPL’s
prior actions were implemented before preparation of the loan even began—in a number of cases,
years before—and so are clearly not attributable to the operation. Some are the same as policy actions
supported by the Env PRL DPO approved in 2004. Details on assessing the efficacy of the loan are
provided in the full evaluation.

The operation also had a number of other weaknesses. The World Bank carried out no analytical work
on the critical area of BNDES’s environmental and social management system. There was also little
collaboration or coordination with partners—particularly the International Finance Corporation
(IFC)—which had been working with BNDES to improve its approach to environmental and social
management by adopting the Equator Principles before the SEM DPL was prepared. World Bank
supervision did not ensure the implementation of the promised monitoring and evaluation system, or
provide the promised technical assistance to BNDES. Monitoring and evaluation was weak. The
Bank’s ICR provided no information on feedback from stakeholders, and no beneficiary assessment.
The 13-month delay in effectiveness of the operation undermined part of the rationale for a DPO as
fast-disbursing budget support, and was not dealt with in a timely manner. According to the World
Bank ICR, the delay was mainly owing to the government having forgotten to include the loan in its
budget, and to an “extraordinarily lengthy” senate approval process. The cancelation, after the first
loan, of an environmental DPO series that the government had committed to—for the second time in
a matter of years—combined with the lack of progress on a number of environmental policy areas,
indicates uncertainty and a degree of lack of commitment by the government to the SEM DPL reform
agenda.

The earmarking of DPF funds to BNDES potentially undermined the approach of the DPO instrument
to management of environmental and social risks. This approach considers only environmental and
social effects of specific policies supported by the operation, on the grounds that financing is being
provided for general budget support and not for specific investments. However, in this case evidence
gathered by IEG from multiple sources confirmed that the US$1.3 billion were then on-lent by
Brazil’s Treasury to BNDES with the express intent of financing BNDES’s investment projects.
Because this was done in the context of DPF, World Bank investment lending safeguards were not
applied. High-profile investments financed by BNDES—including hydroelectric dams in the Amazon
rainforest—continue to experience an array of environmental and social problems, and a lack of
transparency on safeguards by international standards.
                                                  57



The assessment includes a number of lessons, which are summarized below:

• Particularly for DPOs focused on reforms in a sector—rather than on macroeconomic stability—the
impacts of the actions supported can often not be adequately perceived within the short timeframe of
the loan, and the tight deadline for submitting an ICR after closure often does not allow for additional
outcome evidence to be available and collected. It would be preferable to require that DPO operations
wait a reasonable period either before closing or before producing an ICR—at least one year—so as
to allow for adequate monitoring and evaluation.

• Back-loading of reforms in a DPO programmatic series can increase the risk of later loans in the
series being canceled without full realization of the objectives of the series.

• In the future, when attempting to support reforms in state-owned banks like BNDES that finance
both public and private sector investments, it will be important to take a “One World Bank Group”
approach. The program would have benefitted from closer collaboration between IFC and World
Bank. IFC had been working with BNDES to improve their environmental and social standards
before the SEM DPL, but their efforts were later sidelined.

• The level of government targeted by DPO reforms should be consistent with the outcomes intended
and the client country’s institutional structure. In Brazil, although many national-level laws and
policies are approved by the central government, implementation often depends in large part on states
and municipalities. But the SEM DPL limited itself to the federal-level implementing agencies.


Source: http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/brazil-sem-DPO-ppar.pdf
                                               58


Appendix C. Methodology
World Bank operations are mapped to a Global Practice (and prior to the Bank’s 2013 restructuring
were mapped to a Sector), and are assigned a percentage weighting across sector and theme codes
based on their content.

For the purposes of this review, environmental DPOs were defined to be any policy lending operation
mapped to the Environment and Natural Resources Global Practice or the Environment Sector Board,
or any other policy lending operation with an environmental or disaster risk management theme as the
primary or secondary theme. That is to say, operations where the theme with the highest or second
highest percentage weighting was either Biodiversity (80), Climate Change (81), Environmental
Policies and Institutions (82), Land Administration and Management (83), Pollution Management and
Environmental Health (84), Water Resources Management (85), Other Environment and Natural
Resources Management (86), of Natural Disaster Management (52) were included. This definition
identified 64 operations since FY2000, including four operations prior to FY2005 which formally
were sector adjustment loans or structural adjustment loans rather than development policy
operations.

This definition excludes cases where a small number of environment-relevant policy actions were
covered in larger policy lending operations. The rationale for this was to remain focused on a core
portfolio of limited scope, where environment issues played a major role in the operation and where
lessons were thus more likely to be relevant. However, this approach does create a bias in coverage
toward large middle-income countries that have had standalone environmental operations. It also
means that the learning product is unable to address the question of the relative effectiveness of
putting environment actions into large multisector policy lending operations versus standalone
environment-focused operations. The definition also deliberately excludes Catastrophe Deferred
Drawdown Operations, which are somewhat different from other policy lending operations and will
be covered by other forthcoming work from IEG on drawdown options.

The Learning Product is designed to look at environmental DPOs as a case study of sectoral DPO
operations. The product draws largely on existing evaluative material but with some new analysis.

Specifically, the review drew on:

    1. A portfolio review of all 64 Environmental DPOs over 2000–16, with the focus on the 39
       operations that are closed and evaluated.

    2. A synthesis of lessons from existing self-evaluations and IEG validations (ICRs and ICR
       Reviews).

    3. Detailed case studies based on already completed evaluations with field visits (PPARs) for
       operations in Brazil, Ghana, Turkey, and Indonesia. A new desk-based case study with
       additional analysis and interviews was carried out for DPOs in Mexico

    4. Document analysis and interviews with Bank staff for active and un-evaluated operations.

    5. 25 Bank staff and managers were interviewed, in addition to those interviewed for the field-
       based project assessments.

This portfolio review developed a typology of prior actions and lessons supported by
operations, and identified the analytic underpinnings, use of technical assistance,
                                              59


coordination with other related operations, presence of other donors, and quality of
objectives.
60
