Integrated thinking and reporting <IR>
Focusing on value
creation in the
public sector
An introduction for leaders
    Contents
    Introduction                                                                     3

    Overview                                                                         4

    Section 1: Why <IR> for the public sector?                                       7

    Section 2: What is Integrated Reporting?                                         13

    Section 3: The <IR> journey - case studies of organizations implementing <IR>    20

    Glossary                                                                         30

    Resources                                                                        32



    This introductory guide to integrated thinking and reporting has been produced by the
    International Integrated Reporting Council, and the Chartered Institute of Public Finance
    Accountancy with support from the World Bank.




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                 2
    Quotes inside front cover
    Bertrand Badre, Former CFO, World Bank:

    “The pillars of Integrated Reporting resonate with what the World Bank Group is aiming to
    achieve. We believe that better information can help to improve governance, accountability, and
    rebuild trust in a post-crisis global economy where raising capital and promoting sustainable
    growth are essential.”

    Rob Whiteman, CEO, CIPFA:

    “Through giving a much clearer view of how and where public resources are used, as more and
    more public sector organizations from across the world take up the transformational challenge of
    Integrated Reporting, the understanding and trust of citizens can only increase.”

    Professor Mervyn King, Chairman, IIRC:

    “Public sector organizations are increasingly challenged with maintaining or improving outcomes
    within the same or reducing resources. Communicating how, and how well prepared they are, to
    achieve this is critical to public accountability.”




    Introduction
    This introductory guide has been developed by the International Integrated Reporting Council
    (IIRC), the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (CIPFA) with the support of the
    World Bank to explain to public sector leaders and their teams how integrated thinking and
    reporting can help the sector consider how make the most of resources, encourage the right
    behaviours and demonstrate to stakeholders how they are achieving the strategy and creating
    value over the short and longer term.

    The Guide outlines the fundamental concepts at the heart of Integrated Reporting (<IR>) and
    provides case studies of entities and organizations implementing <IR> to help them achieve the
    outcomes they are aiming for. It illustrates the impact <IR> has had.

    Further information about integrated thinking and reporting is available, in particular the
    International Integrated Reporting Framework (<IR> Framework), the Integrated Reporting
    Examples Database and further case studies can be found at www.integratedreporting.org

    Further practical guidance on implementation of the <IR> Framework in the public sector will be
    available from CIPFA later in 2016 www.cipfa.org

    To find out more and have your questions answered, please contact the IIRC:
    info@integratedreporting.org




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                         3
    Overview: the case for change
    Focusing on value creation in the public sector
    Never before have there been so many constraints on time and resources. We are living in an
    age of increasing organizational complexity – and none more so than in the public sector where
    there are some of the largest reporting entities in the world. There are more and more
    demands for scrutiny and transparency to demonstrate the efficient use of resources and value
    for money. We have reached a tipping point in which public sector investment can no longer be
    accounted for in a series of financial transactions on a balance sheet.

    Around one third of global gross domestic product (GDP) is made up by the public sector and this
    is being invested in ensuring there is efficient infrastructure, good education opportunities and
    reliable health care. In many ways it is this investment by the public sector that is helping to
    create the conditions for wealth creation and preparing the way for the success of this and future
    generations. Public sector leaders are looking for tools and frameworks to help them
    demonstrate effective resource allocation, and accountability - communicating not just for the
    sake of ‘being transparent’ - but to ensure all stakeholders understand how their organization is
    creating value in the short, medium and long term.

    How can public sector organizations demonstrate the value they are creating?

    In an age of resource constraints, public sector organizations need ways of broadening the
    conversation about the services they deliver and the value they create, not only to meet short-
    term demands but for the longer term. Integrated Reporting is a model for achieving this and for
    promoting trust and confidence with key stakeholders. Traditional reporting frameworks, focused
    only on historic financial information, are not fit for purpose for modern, multi-dimensional public
    sector organizations.

    Integrated Reporting is shaped by a diverse global coalition of regulators, business and public
    sector leaders, standard setters, investors, the accounting profession and NGOs – they are driving
    a global evolution in reporting that supports sustainable development and financial stability.
    Public sector organizations participated in a global pilot programme that helped to develop and
    test the International Integrated Reporting Framework, which was released in December 2013
    and is now used by over 1,000 organizations worldwide to communicate their value creation
    story.

    What is Integrated Reporting (<IR>)?
    Integrated Reporting is not “another reporting initiative”: it is part of an evolution in the mind-set
    of leaders. Its effect, as the evidence is starting to show, is to refocus decision-making on value
    creation over the short, medium and long term; it is about managing the complex
    interconnections between people, ideas, finance and the natural environment. It delivers
    openness and transparency with a purpose.

        <IR> is integrated thinking and reporting based on the International <IR> Framework,
         which is enhancing the way organizations think, plan and report on how they create
         value.
        <IR> helps organizations to think holistically about their strategy and plans, make informed
         decisions and manage key risks to build stakeholder confidence and improve future
         performance.
        Integrated thinking brings all the resources and relationships an organization depends on




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                              4
         (called capitals in the <IR> Framework) into everyday decision-making. It looks at the
         broader social and natural impacts of decisions, as well as the effect on the financial bottom
         line.
        An integrated report is the outcome of this integrated thinking within the business – it is a
         concise communication about how an organization's strategy, governance, performance
         and prospects, in the context of its external environment, lead to the creation of value in
         the short, medium and long term.
        To make <IR> easy to embrace and consistent across organizations, the International <IR>
         Framework has been developed to explain the fundamental concepts alongside guiding
         principles and eight practical content elements for the report. The Framework enables an
         organization to bring these elements together through the concept of 'connectivity of
         information', to explain how it creates value.
        The primary purpose of an integrated report is to explain how an organization manages its
         resources and relationships (or ‘capitals’) to create value over time. All the capitals that an
         organization uses or affects should be considered – financial, manufactured, intellectual,
         human, social and relationship, and natural capitals – but only those that are material to the
         business need to be included in the integrated report.
        An integrated report, through quantitative and qualitative information, looks at how the
         activities and capabilities of an organization transforms the relevant capitals into outcomes
         for the organization and for others.



    Integrated thinking and decision-making

    Focusing on outcomes is important in the public sector and by using the multi-capital
    International <IR> Framework public sector organizations can demonstrate that their strategy is
    delivering not only the outputs, but the outcomes they were aiming for. Integrated Reporting is a
    process based on integrated thinking – the report is just the physical output of this evolution in
    the way organizations think, plan and report on their organization. Through integrated thinking
    everyone has a common understanding – they are speaking the same language. The result is that
    silos are minimised and effective information flows are created within the organization.

    The <IR> Framework is principles-based, which allows organizations to innovate and develop their
    reporting in the context of their own strategy, goals and objectives. This means organizations
    move away from the box-ticking, compliance-only approach to reporting and are encouraged to
    really understand and communicate how the organization creates value. The Framework is also
    the umbrella that can help bring together different reporting requirements and initiatives, so that
    the metrics and data provided to stakeholders are those that are most relevant (and clearly
    linked) to the particular capitals the organization relies on and the strategy it is pursuing.

    How does Integrated Reporting help?

            It provides a framework to focus reporting on the entity’s principal objectives.
            It helps entities explain their strategies, operational models and governance, and demonstrates
             performance against these strategies.
            It shows how the (often conflicting) needs of different stakeholder groups are being addressed
             and balanced.
            It offers the opportunity to align reporting with risks and opportunities and management
             accountability.




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                5
    Realizing the benefits in the public sector

    Public sector leaders are discovering a range of benefits through adopting Integrated Reporting,
    which are explored in greater detail later in this paper. In summary, these were some of the main
    impacts reported by 60 organizations implementing <IR>, according to Black Sun research
    “Realizing the benefits”:
      92% said it increased understanding of performance and value creation at leadership level
        and employee level, as well as with the growing external stakeholder base
      79% reported improvements in decision making to deliver sustainable outcomes, largely
        because of improved management information (84%)
      87% of organizations that publish an integrated report believe providers of financial capital
        better understood their strategy
      96% saw better connections across the organization and broader, longer-term perspectives
        while delivering in the short term

    These benefits come from a shift in focus from the short term to developing a business model
    and strategy that is viable in the short, medium and long term and delivers the desired
    outcomes.

    The starting gun was fired on a range of initiatives in 2015 that has focused people around the
    world on delivering in ways that are financially viable and sustainable over time. Initiatives such
    as the Sustainable Development Goals and COP21 have demonstrated that private and public
    organizations will need to work together to deliver many of the outcomes the world needs in
    these volatile times. Changes in reporting practices may not be the answer to all of the
    challenges that are facing us in the 21st century. But the International Integrated Reporting
    Council, which includes organizations such as the World Bank, is a market-led response to
    support organizations of all shapes and sizes around the world to begin to make the incremental
    changes that are necessary.

    Call to action
    We invite you, as leaders in the public sector, to explore how integrated thinking and reporting
    can support your organization with delivering its strategy and ensuring stakeholders understand
    the value that your organization creates and the outcomes it achieves - not just for people today,
    but for the longer term as well.

    The Public Sector Pioneer Network (the Pioneer Network) has been set up for those public sector
    organizations who wish to explore <IR> in their own reporting. For more information, see the
    IIRC website (www.integratedreporting.org) or e-mail (info@theiirc.org).

    [ADD further quotes from Public Sector organizations where available and appropriate]
     “Our stakeholders are gaining new insights from the information
    that we are producing in our report. For the first time, they are
    seeing an easy to understand, holistic view of the whole business”
    Dawn Baggaley, Group Sustainability Manager at New Zealand Post




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                           6
           1. Why <IR> for the
              public sector?
    Public sector entities are tasked with delivering high quality services in a financially,
    economically, socially and environmentally sustainable manner. Communicating how they
    achieve this, and how well prepared they are to continue doing so, is critical to public
    accountability and transparency. However, conventional reporting only tells us a limited story
    about the impact that governments or public service organizations are having and how well
    equipped they are to meet future challenges. <IR> seeks to address these limitations by
    providing a framework for connected thinking and reporting. It helps management to gain
    more insight, resulting in more cohesive strategies, better execution of programmes, greater
    efficiencies and profound effects on outcomes.


    “Public sector entities are some of the largest, if not the largest, reporting entities in the world,
    so…transparency…is of importance to us all. Integrated Reporting would enable governments
    and their stakeholders to gain a better understanding of resources available and help them to
    manage these more effectively.”
    Betrand Badre, Managing director and Group Chief Financial Officer at the World Bank Group



    Multiple challenges facing the public sector
    Public sector organizations face many challenges. These arise from the complex activities public
    sector entities undertake, their many different stakeholders, the need to plan for the longer term,
    and the wide definition of the value they create.

    Serving and being accountable to a wide stakeholder base
    Public sector entities work in the public interest in a range of ways: enacting legislation or
    regulations, delivering services, redistributing income through mechanisms such as taxation or
    social security payments, or controlling assets or entities such as state-owned enterprises.
    Governments also have a role in promoting fairness, peace and order, and sound international
    relations.

    Such activities make public sector entities accountable to a wide range of stakeholders, including
    taxpayers, users of services, legislators and markets. They are increasingly expected to be open
    and transparent, particularly around how, and by whom, decisions are taken. They are also
    generally required to demonstrate not just that they use resources efficiently and effectively, but
    also that they maintain the highest standards of trustworthiness. Such accountability is all the
    more important given that, in most jurisdictions, public expenditure forms a significant part of



Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                             7
    gross domestic product, with public sector entities acting as substantial employers and major
    capital market participants.

    Providing integrated services with sustainable outcomes
    Governing bodies of public sector entities often face difficult strategic decisions when
    determining the right mix of interventions needed to achieve intended outcomes. Conflicting
    interests can arise when seeking to achieve a number of economic, social, and environmental
    benefits. Public sector entities therefore need robust decision-making mechanisms to ensure they
    achieve their defined outcomes in a way that provides the best trade-off between available
    resources and the consequences (intended or otherwise). They also need to establish effective,
    efficient and sustainable operations.

    Maintaining a longer-term perspective, while delivering in the short term
    Many public sector responsibilities are longer term, so entities need to define and plan the
    delivery of outcomes carefully and make sure that operations will be sustainable. The
    intergenerational nature of finances means that decisions taken today can impose burdens on
    future taxpayers and service users. Future generations of citizens will want to inherit well
    maintained services and well managed public finances.

    Demonstrating the sustainable value of services provided beyond finance
    The primary objective of most public sector entities is to deliver services to the public, rather than
    to make profits and generate a return on equity to investors. Consequently, their performance
    can only partially be evaluated by examining their financial position, financial performance and
    cash flows. Current reports only tell us a limited amount about how well a public entity is
    equipped to deal with the challenges ahead and to continue delivering services and supporting
    communities.

    How <IR> can help meet these challenges
    <IR> has certain qualities and strengths that enable it to support public entities in addressing the
    challenges they face. These include the range of stakeholder interests it addresses, its ability to
    take account of multiple inputs of different kinds, its focus on long-term value creation and its
    appreciation of the importance of non-financial value.

    Supporting accountability to a wide stakeholder base
    Integrated Reporting can help to address diverse, and often conflicting, public accountability
    requirements. An integrated report provides insight into the nature and quality of the
    organization’s relationships with its key stakeholders, including how and to what extent the
    organization understands, takes into account and responds to their legitimate needs and
    interests. An integrated report therefore benefits all stakeholders interested in an organization’s
    ability to create value over time, including employees, customers, suppliers, business partners,
    local communities, legislators, regulators and policymakers.

    Delivery of sustainable outcomes
    The <IR> Framework encourages reporting on outcomes. From a public sector perspective these
    are the internal and external consequences (positive and negative) that the organization’s
    activities and outputs have for its resources and relationships. An integrated report provides
    insight into an organization’s strategy and how it uses resources and relationships in a holistic
    way, demonstrating understanding of their interrelatedness and dependencies.

    Maintaining a longer-term perspective



Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                              8
    At the heart of an integrated report is the ability to look beyond the 'now' to the 'near' and then
    to the 'far'. It requires disclosure of how an organization’s governance structure supports its
    ability to create value in the short, medium and long term. Those responsible for governance are
    encouraged to articulate how the organization balances short, medium and long-term interests.

    Demonstrating value beyond the financial
    Integrated Reporting helps entities to create a more complete picture of the resources they use
    and their value creating activities. Recognizing that the concept of value is highly subjective, the
    <IR> Framework does not suggest or require 'monetizing' value. It highlights that value created
    for the organization is linked to value created for others, including key stakeholders and society at
    large.


    “Transparent, responsive, and accountable institutions are a vital part of what it takes to
    improve people’s lives and implement a sustainable development agenda”
    Helen Clark, Administrator at UNDP



    <IR> supports long-term planning for sustainable benefits
    The longer-term nature and impact of many of the public sector’s responsibilities mean that it
    needs to define and plan sustainable outcomes. Governing bodies need to take decisions that
    further the entity’s purpose, contribute to intended benefits and outcomes, and remain within
    the limits of its authority and available resources.

    To achieve outcomes in a sustainable way, jurisdictions and individual entities of all types,
    including cities, towns, and even villages, are required to make decisions on:
        a) levels of income generation (taxes, fees, etc) and public expenditure;
        b) levels of performance sought in terms of, for example, service delivery or the
           maintenance of infrastructure; and
        c) how to manage and account for their assets and liabilities, including public debt.

    In addition, they must manage expectations about the services they can provide with the
    resources available to them. Resource allocations among different levels of government and
    individual public sector entities are determined in many ways, depending on both constitutional
    arrangements and legal and institutional structures (de facto and de jure). These, in turn, drive
    delivery management and accountability frameworks, which can be articulated through
    mechanisms such as fiscal rules, budget frameworks, and input, output, and outcome targets.

    Public sector entities therefore need to consider the combined economic, social, and
    environmental impact of their policies, plans, and decisions—for example, by taking demographic
    factors into account - when making decisions that have long term impact (e.g., social policy
    commitments).

    Integrated Reporting provides a Framework to help public sector organizations meet these
    complex challenges in a structured and insightful way. We look at how it does this in Section 2.




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                             9
    “Integrated reporting has provided us with a framework to measure and report on the
    extensive non-financial capital that as a state owned enterprise we have built over the years...
    Our stakeholders are gaining new insights from the information that we are producing in our
    report. For the first time, they are seeing an easy to understand, holistic view of the whole
    business "
    Dawn Baggaley, Group Sustainability Manager, NZ Post



    “We have developed a new approach to business strategy incorporating integrated thinking,
    materiality and our business model. Material issues have to be part of a business planning
    process, in order to address the things that will impact our business.”
    John Lelliott, Finance Director, The Crown Estate




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                        10
                                                                                                                                    <IR>: Why it matters in the Public Sector




    <IR> Benefits
    Early adopters of <IR>, including many public sector organizations, have identified a number of benefits. A survey of the <IR> Pilot Programme
    participants conducted by corporate communications agency Black Sun found that integrated reporting impacts and benefits all levels of an organization,
    from the operational level to the board level, as well as investors and other stakeholders.

          Figure 1: Extract from the IIRC/Black Sun Report ‘Realizing the benefits: The impact of Integrated Reporting’




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                                                                         11
    Conclusion: growing demand for better information and
    reporting
    There is growing demand in all sectors for more user-friendly information that combines financial
    and non-financial performance indicators to support better decision making. Adopting integrated
    thinking and reporting <IR>, which incorporates both financial and non-financial information, can
    help public sector entities address the challenges they face and gain greater understanding of the
    ways in which they create value.

    <IR> can also help enhance governance, transparency and accountability through more holistic
    disclosures and a focus on explaining how sustainable outcomes will be delivered for a range of
    stakeholders over time.

    Through <IR>, leaders, employees, government officials and tax payers can all gain insight into
    how organizations are performing against their strategies, and what resources and relationships
    are needed to contribute to their current and future success.




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                          12
         2. What is Integrated
             Reporting?
    Integrated Reporting helps public sector organizations to understand and explain how they
    create value in the widest sense. It is based on the International <IR> Framework that
    encourages integrated thinking across the organization. Organizations that adopt <IR> work
    towards producing an integrated report: a concise communication about how an entity’s
    strategy, governance, performance and prospects, in the context of its external environment,
    lead to the creation of value over the short, medium and long term.

    Integrated thinking underpins <IR>
    Integrated Reporting begins with integrated thinking. Integrated thinking is the active
    consideration by an organization of the relationships between its various operating and functional
    units and the resources and relationships that the organization uses or affects. Integrated
    thinking leads to integrated decision-making and actions that consider the creation of value over
    the short, medium and long term.

    Many public sector organizations already emphasize the importance of integrated thinking. <IR>
    reinforces this message and helps entities to embed integrated thinking and encourage closer
    working across departments. In this way, organizations are better placed to consider the interests
    of their many stakeholders and respond to changing expectations, opportunities and threats.

    The benefits of integrated thinking include:

      A more cohesive approach to decision-making which focuses on value creation in the short,
       medium and long term
      A more robust and integrated strategy and objectives
      Better strategic perspectives and a wider view of risks and opportunities
      Deeper understanding of business processes and identification of gaps in processes
       More connected internal and external communication

    Integrated thinking brings all the resources and relationships an organization depends on (called
    capitals in the <IR> Framework) into everyday decision-making. It looks at the broader social and
    natural impacts of decisions, as well as the effect on the financial bottom line.

    The more that integrated thinking is embedded in an entity, the easier it is to prepare an
    integrated report, and the higher the quality of the report produced.




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                          13
    An integrated report results from integrated thinking
    An integrated report is the portal through which an entity communicates a holistic view of its
    current position, where it’s going, and how it intends to get there in a clear, concise, and
    understandable way. The integrated report enables readers to make an assessment of the entity’s
    ability to create value in the future for both the entity and for others.

    An integrated report may be prepared in response to existing compliance requirements, and may
    be either a standalone report or be included as a distinguishable, prominent and accessible part
    of another report or communication.

    Many organizations already publish a large amount of information, but often in isolated reports
    prepared by a range of departments:

           Finance and accounting functions prepare financial reports
           Those involved in sustainability and environmental management report on the sustainability
            impacts of an organization
           General and legal counsel report on regulatory and compliance disclosures
           Those in planning and risk management report on risk issues

    Meaningful integrated reports are not created by merely bolting together information from these
    and other internal and external reports. Instead they stem from the integrated thinking within the
    organization. They are generated from the information used by internal decision makers,
    meaning that <IR> should lead to better – not necessarily more – disclosure.

    .........................................................................................................................................................

    Case study extract: Eskom Holdings SOC Ltd

    One key outcome of <IR> is a move towards integrated internal business reporting. Eskom has
    applied <IR> principles to the quarterly report submitted to the South African Government (as its
    shareholder) and uses the same teams, processes and systems to produce the quarterly
    shareholder report and the interim and integrated reports. This has led to the shareholder report
    being more streamlined and focused on material items with a move away from divisional silo
    reporting and duplication of content.

    ........................................................................................................................................................

    The International <IR> Framework
    Integrated Reporting is based on the International <IR> Framework, which was published in
    December 2013 by the International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC). Public sector
    organizations played an important part in the thinking that underpins the <IR> Framework, taking
    part in the pilot programme and experimenting with the reporting model. For example, the South
    African State Owned Company Transnet, New Zealand Post, the World Bank, the UK’s National
    Health Service and the city of Johannesburg all made important contributions to the Framework’s
    development, ensuring its relevance for public sector entities of all kinds. The IIRC continues to
    work closely with public sector entities as experience of applying the Framework grows.




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                                                                 14
    The purpose of the <IR> Framework is to establish Guiding Principles and Content Elements (see
    Figure 2) that govern the overall content of an integrated report, and to explain the fundamental
    concepts that underpin them. The <IR> Framework takes a principles-based approach, aiming to
    strike an appropriate balance between flexibility and prescription. This recognizes the wide
    variation in the circumstances of individual organizations, while enabling a sufficient degree of
    comparability to help users of integrated reports.

    The <IR> Framework identifies information to be included in an integrated report for use in
    assessing the organization’s ability to create value. It does not prescribe specific key performance
    indicators, measurement methods, or the disclosure of individual matters, but does include a
    small number of requirements that are to be applied before an integrated report can be said to
    be in accordance with the <IR> Framework.

    Figure 2: Summary of the <IR> Framework's Guiding Principles and Content
    Elements




    Source: Diagram from Deloitte's report: 'Integrated Reporting as a driver for Integrated Thinking? –
    Maturity of <IR> in the Netherlands 2015’




    The value creation process
    An integrated report aims to provide insight about how an organization creates value through
    making use of resources and relationships – collectively referred to as ‘the capitals’ in the <IR>
    Framework. The IIRC has defined six different types of capitals that represent stocks of value that
    are increased, decreased, or transformed through the activities and outputs of an organization.
    These capitals are: financial, manufactured, intellectual, human, social & relationship, and
    natural.




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                            15
    Not all capitals are equally relevant or applicable to all organizations. While most organizations
    interact with all capitals to some extent, these interactions might be relatively minor or so
    indirect that they are not sufficiently important to include in integrated thinking (and therefore
    value creation) and, ultimately, in an integrated report.

    The value creation process is different for public and private sector entities. Nevertheless the key
    concepts of the value creation process as portrayed in the <IR> Framework (see Figure 3) have
    direct application for both public and private sector organizations.

    Figure 3: The value creation process




    Source: www.integratedreporting.org


    The external environment, including economic conditions, technological change, societal issues
    and environmental challenges, sets the context within which the organization operates. The
    mission and vision encompass the whole organization, identifying its purpose and intention in
    clear, concise terms. Governments generally have broader powers than private sector
    organizations, including the ability to establish and enforce legal requirements, and to change
    those requirements. Accountability is not only to shareholders but also to other parts of
    government, citizens, and the global community.

    At the core of the organization is its business model, which draws on various capitals as inputs
    and, through its activities, converts them to outputs (products, services, by-products and waste).
    The organization’s activities and its outputs lead to outcomes in terms of effects on the capitals.
    The capacity of the business model to adapt to changes (e.g., in the availability, quality and
    affordability of inputs) can affect the organization’s longer-term viability.

    A closer look at the capitals
    Public sector entities depend on a variety of resources and relationships for their success: the six
    ‘capitals’ in the <IR> Framework. These six categories, whether belonging to an entity itself, to
    other entities, or to society more broadly, provide the inputs needed to achieve that entity’s
    outcomes. They are increased, decreased or transformed through the activities of the
    organization in that they are enhanced, consumed, modified or otherwise affected by those



Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                            16
    activities. For example, an organization’s financial capital is increased when it makes a
    surplus/profit and its human capital is increased when employees become better trained.

    As already noted, not all capitals are equally relevant or applicable to all organizations. The <IR>
    Framework therefore allows other terms to be used where this is more appropriate. Initial
    experience in the public sector indicates that while the types of capital described in the <IR>
    Framework will broadly be applicable to some extent, it may be helpful to modify the terminology
    used. For example, ‘manufactured’ capital might be more appropriately termed ‘infrastructure’ .
    Table 1 provides examples of the various capitals in the public sector context.

    Table 1: Examples of capitals in the public sector context

 <IR> Framework capitals and (where
  different) public sector ‘resource’                                    Examples
            interpretations

                                          The pool of funds available to an organization for use in the
                                          production of goods or the provision of services which are obtained
               Financial
                                          through financing, such as debt, tax or grants, or generated through
                                          operations or investments.
                                          Physical objects (as distinct from natural physical objects) that are
                                          available to an organization for use in the production of goods or the
            Manufactured
                                          provision of services, including buildings (such as schools, hospitals
          e.g. infrastructure
                                          and offices), equipment and infrastructure (such as roads, ports,
                                          bridges, and waste and water treatment plants).
                                          Organizational, knowledge-based intangibles, including intellectual
                                          property, such as patents, copyrights, software, rights and licenses,
              Intellectual
                                          and ‘organizational capital’ such as tacit knowledge, systems,
                                          procedures and protocols.
                                          People’s competencies, capabilities and experience, and their
                                          motivations to innovate, including their alignment with and support
                                          for an organization’s governance framework, risk management
                Human
                                          approach, and ethical values along with the ability to understand,
                                          develop and implement an organization’s strategy and loyalties and
                                          motivations for improving processes, goods and services, including
                                          their ability to lead, manage and collaborate.
                                          The institutions and the relationships within and between
                                          communities, groups of stakeholders and other networks, and the
                                          ability to share information to enhance individual and collective
                                          wellbeing. Social and relationship capital includes shared norms, and
                                          common values and behaviours, key stakeholder relationships, and
  Social and relationship e.g. societal
                                          the trust and willingness to engage that an organization has
                                          developed and strives to build and protect with external stakeholders.
                                          Also, intangibles associated with the brand and reputation that an
                                          organization has developed. An organization’s regulatory license to
                                          operate.
                                          All renewable and non-renewable environmental resources and
                                          processes that provide goods or services that support the past,
                Natural
                                          current or future prosperity of an organization. It includes air, water,
                                          land, minerals and forests, along with biodiversity and eco-system
                                          health.



Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                      17
    Key reported content
    Integrated Reporting enables organizations to address the material factors that influence value
    creation over time, so that they are either quantified or reported on in narrative form, or both.
    Public sector entities don’t have to explain all the complex relationships between all the various
    capitals that would be necessary to reflect a complete picture of an organization’s overall effect
    on the world’s stock of all the capitals. However, it is important to report on material trade-offs,
    including:

        Between capitals or between components of a capital (e.g., creating employment, which
         increases human capital, through an activity that negatively affects the environment and
         therefore decreases natural capital)
        Over time (e.g., choosing a course of action when it is likely that a different course would
         result in a greater capital increment but not until a later period)
        Between capitals owned by the organization and those owned by others or not owned at all.

    In such ways <IR> offers the opportunity to consider and review the interconnectedness of
    complex multi-service delivery and to clarify goals and identify preferred outcomes within the
    wider context of promoting public wellbeing.


    <IR>’s place in the corporate reporting landscape
    The corporate reporting landscape contains a variety of reporting frameworks, standards and
    related requirements. The <IR> Framework is not intended to replace these. Instead, <IR>
    provides an umbrella that can encompass other standards and frameworks to help provide a
    more complete and coherent picture of value creation by an organization.

    Getting to grips with the range of existing frameworks and standards can still be challenging,
    triggering calls for greater coherence, consistency and comparability. In response, the IIRC
    convened The Corporate Reporting Dialogue (CRD) to bring together organizations (see Table 2)
    with significant international influence on the corporate reporting landscape.

    Table 2: Participants in the Corporate Reporting Dialogue
    CDP (formerly the Carbon Disclosure Project)      International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)

     Climate Disclosure Standards Board (CDSP)        International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC)

    Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)      International Organization for Standardization (ISO)

          Global Reporting Initiative (GRI)           Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB)



    The Dialogue has developed an online mapping tool to show the links between participants’
    reporting initiatives to help organizations navigate the different standards. See
    http://corporatereportingdialogue.com/landscape-map




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                             18
    Integrated Thinking: An Exploratory Survey by SAICA
    In its 2015 paper - Integrated thinking: An exploratory survey - the South African Institute of Chartered
    Accountants (SAICA) shared the South African experience of how implementing Integrated Reporting is
    having an impact on and contributing to integrated thinking. The study focused on establishing if
    organizations in South Africa were embracing integrated thinking and if they saw it to be of benefit.

    The extract below highlights the main drivers of integrated thinking identified in the report:




    The project has highlighted that many aspects of integrated thinking are not yet understood but, looking to
    the future, organizations will increasingly recognise the significant benefits of integrated thinking to
    enhance their competitiveness and support their sustainability from all perspectives.

    Source: SAICA report: Integrated Thinking - An Exploratory Survey.



    Putting <IR> into practice
    Many organizations have now begun applying the <IR> Framework, seeing how its principles and concepts
    can help improve internal decision making as well as internal and external reporting. Their experiences can
    help other organizations just beginning their <IR> journey, which we consider in Section 3.




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                   19
               3. The <IR> Journey
    The experience of implementing <IR> will differ between entities depending on their governance
    structures, processes and the information they currently collect. Although the details will vary, the work
    programme or ‘journey’ for any entity will often involve five steps:

        Deciding to adopt integrated thinking and reporting
        Planning the process
        Gathering the information
        Preparing Integrated Reporting
        Learning the lessons

    Throughout all five stages, communication with key internal and external stakeholders is essential. The
    information provided must be determined by what is material for the specific stakeholder group.

    The <IR> Framework can be applied, adapted as necessary, by public sector and not-for-profit
    organizations. There is no one 'right way' to go about this, as illustrated by the varied experiences of five
    entities are shared in this section. Further case studies are available at www.integratedreporting.org



    Deciding to adopt <IR>

    The first stage in the <IR> journey is the decision to adopt. Organizations adopting <IR> do so because they
    value the ‘umbrella’ framework it provides, enabling them to focus their reporting on the issues that are
    most material to the entity and its stakeholders. Through <IR> they can present an integrated picture of
    their organization’s activities, rather than producing standalone reports that address isolated issues.

    Although the IIRC’s long-term vision is that <IR> becomes the corporate reporting norm, this does not mean
    that it will replace other forms of reporting. These remain important for providing specific stakeholders
    with particular, detailed information. They also provide much information relevant to <IR>. This is
    particularly the case with sustainability reports, which many public sector entities already produce, either
    voluntarily or as a result of policy and regulation. Entities applying the GRI 4 and SASB initiatives will find
    that these cover at least three of the six capitals within the <IR> Framework. Sustainability reporting can
    therefore provide a platform for gathering the sustainability data needed in an integrated report.
    Organizations with experience in sustainability reporting are also more likely to have the systems and
    assurance processes in place to give comfort to senior management that there is robust ‘non-financial’ data
    to support the development of an integrated report.

    Gaining senior backing

    It is important that the decision to adopt <IR> and the resulting programme of work are backed by the
    highest governing body. This is because the process requires breaking down silos, collaboration, resources
    and agreement on how capitals are used for value creation – the integrated thinking highlighted in Section
    2.



Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                       20
    The decision makers and other key stakeholders for <IR> will vary according to whether the reporting entity
    is operating at the federal, region or municipal level or is an SOE. Factors to consider when identifying
    decision makers and key stakeholders include the specific operational responsibilities of chief executives
    (heads of department, agencies or other entities), the extent of scrutiny by legislative committees, and
    ministerial accountability.




    “Integrated reporting has provided us with a framework to measure and
    report on the extensive non-financial capital that as a state-owned
    enterprise we have built over the years."
    Dawn Baggaley, Group Sustainability Manager, NZ Post




    Case Study: New Zealand Post
    The New Zealand Post was the first business in its country to use Integrated Reporting – a particularly bold
    decision given that it was simultaneously launching an organization-wide change programme.

    With the support of its CFO, NZ Post’s first step in its <IR> journey was to join the IIRC's Pilot Programme. It
    then formed an internal stakeholder group in order to gain broader organizational support. The group
    discussed the merits of NZ Post adopting the <IR> Framework and how it would do so. The steering group
    brought together departmental representatives from legal, communications, finance, investor relations,
    strategy and sustainability, as well as business representatives from Kiwibank and the Mail and Logistics
    businesses. This group became the IR Steering Group, sharing responsibility and demonstrating corporate
    support for formal adoption of the <IR> Framework for the Annual Report when this was proposed to the
    Board.

    “Reporting was seen as just something that we had to do and a compliance exercise with limited additional
    value,” says Dawn Baggaley, Group Sustainability Manager, NZ Post. “We faced a huge change programme
    where we had to fundamentally restructure the business. <IR> helped us to take stock of the value of all
    our assets (financial and non-financial) and consider how the change might impact them. Integrated
    reporting has provided us with a framework to measure and report on the extensive non-financial capital
    that as a state-owned enterprise we have built over the years."

    Dawn believes the switch to <IR> has not only benefited stakeholders, but NZ Post people too. “Our
    stakeholders are gaining new insights from the information that we are producing in our report,” she says.
    “For the first time, they are seeing an easy to understand, holistic view of the whole business. Our
    commitment to <IR> has changed the look and feel of the report we now produce. We have split it into
    two, with reporting on the six capitals at the front and the required financial information in the second
    volume.

    “The six capitals model is also helping our people understand the long-term material issues affecting our
    business and the non-financial impacts of certain decisions. It is also easier for them to contribute to the
    report and we are finding that there is a growing feeling amongst our senior leaders that the integrated
    reporting process is creating something of value to stakeholders.

    “IR has helped us break down silos and take stock of everything we have achieved and accomplished as a
    business.”


Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                        21
    Planning the process
    Planning for an integrated report should cover all aspects of the process. It helps to work backwards from
    the date on which the report has to be released and to include in the timetable dates for the governance
    approval procedures. Setting clear instructions with firm timelines will help the smooth running of the
    reporting process.

    The following questions can help focus attention on key decisions, actions and timings:

    Table 3: Questions that can assist with planning
                          Who?                                                    What?


       Who are the intended readers / external              What report/reports should be produced
        stakeholders?                                         (integrated annual, financial etc)and will they be
       Who will develop and distribute the reporting         printed or only published on the website or both?)
        system / documentation, and is training              What information will be included in the integrated
        required for those involved?                          report?
       Who will write the integrated report?                What gap analysis will be undertaken?
       Who, of the senior managers, will review the         What information will be assured – internally
        report before it is submitted to the executive        and/or externally – and when will this take place
        team?                                                 and what are the requirements?
       Who will approve the final report (audit             What is the budget for the reports (consider any
        committee or sustainability committee before          cost saving measures on design, printing, etc.)?
        going to the board)?
       Who will design, typeset and print (internal,
        external or a combination)?
       Who will provide the budget?

                           How?                                                   When?


       How will the information for the report be           When will the core team meet (to schedule
        collated (pay specific attention to multiple          meetings in advance)?
        divisions/subsidiaries) and is it a standard or      When will interviews with senior management and
        individual process of collating?                      the board be scheduled?
       How will the report be structured?                   When will the material matters be approved?
       How will the material matters be identified?         How long will it take to compile the information for
       How will the report be released?                      the report?
       How will the quality/accuracy within the report      How long will it take to write the report?
        be ensured?                                          When will the report be released?



    Identifying stakeholders

    Identifying key stakeholders will be one of the key challenges of the planning process. Stakeholders are
    defined as those groups or individuals that can reasonably be expected to be significantly affected by an
    organization’s business activities, outputs or outcomes, or whose actions can reasonably be expected to
    significantly affect the ability of the organization to create value over time. Stakeholders may include
    providers of financial capital, employees, customers or service users, citizens, suppliers, business partners,
    local communities, NGOs, environmental groups, legislators, regulators and policy-makers.



Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                      22
    Understanding the perspectives and views of such stakeholders is useful to the organization in many ways.
    Insight from stakeholders can be helpful when identifying the organization’s risks and opportunities and
    developing its strategy. An external focus is a critical starting point for identifying and articulating how
    value is created and destroyed. Input from all groups of stakeholders, including citizens, service users, and
    institutional stakeholders, is vital to successfully balance competing demands when determining priorities
    for the organization’s finite resources. It also helps to identify the material matters to be covered in the
    integrated report.

    Ongoing stakeholder engagement should be a part of usual business activities and can take place in a
    variety of ways, including day-to-day liaison, meetings, roundtables, surveys and interviews. Guidance on
    ways to engage is available, such as the AA1000 Stakeholder Engagement Standard (AA1000SES). Figure 4
    shows the typical stakeholders considered when determining the boundary of an integrated report – the
    content it needs to address in relation to risks, opportunities and outcomes.

    Figure 4: Entities/stakeholders considered in determining the reporting boundary




    Source: The International <IR> Framework

    The reporting entity’s board (or equivalent) requires regular feedback so that directors are kept informed
    of key stakeholders’ legitimate and reasonable needs, interests and expectations and how the organization
    is responding to them (or not). Similarly, key stakeholders need to understand what the organization
    expects of them.




    Case Study: ROSATOM
    Russian State Atomic Energy Corporation (ROSATOM) started its Integrated Reporting journey in 2009. For
    the company there were three main reasons to do so:



Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                     23
        1. ROSATOM is a big organization which consists of about 350 enterprises situated in Russia and
           abroad. The activities of these enterprises are wide ranging – from uranium mining to nuclear
           power plant construction. The integrated report helps to create a single, big picture (profile) of the
           company in a short, consistent form and contributes to ROSATOM’s brand recognition.
        2. Nuclear industry development is sensitive to public opinion. An integrated report is a tool for
           communicating with the company’s stakeholders that can build trust and demonstrate
           accountability.
        3. As a global company ROSATOM needs to compete globally and demonstrate appropriate use of
           international standards, including those in the field of corporate reporting (i.e. GRI, International
           <IR> Framework).

    In ROSATOM’s experience, key elements that helped establish successful reporting practices were:

    Tone from the top: It is important to get the support of senior management. In the case of ROSATOM it
    was the CEO’s decision to start public reporting.

    Establishing a permanent working group: This group was responsible for preparing the report, supported
    by a group of middle-level managers which co-ordinated the report preparation and made proposals for
    the report’s content. In ROSATOM’s case, the Working Group was positioned within the Communications
    Department and also the Public Reporting Committee, which was chaired by the CEO’s deputy and
    consisted of representatives of finance, strategy, nuclear and radiation safety, operations, investment and
    other departments.

    Sustainability of reporting practices: For reporting to not be a one-year special project, it’s crucial to think
    in advance about how to sustain the initiative. ROSATOM adopted a corporate policy and standards which
    set the requirements for the public reports of ROSATOM and its subsidiaries. To monitor and control the
    quality of the reports, ROSATOM holds an annual corporate public reporting award (about 50 ROSATOM
    organizations participate in this competition) and arranges training for employees involved in public report
    preparation to improve their skills.

    Engagement with stakeholders: This is vital for public report preparation. ROSATOM follows international
    standards (AA 1000, GRI, <IR>) and tries to use all possible ways of communication (questionnaires, surveys
    of opinion among key stakeholders, public dialogues, presentations, interviews, communication on the
    base of the report’s web-version etc.).

    As a result of adopting the <IR> Framework as the overarching architecture of its public reporting, many
    readers of ROSATOM’s report say that they use it as a source (or the “reference book”) of verified
    information about the Russian nuclear industry.




    Gathering the information
    To decide what information to gather for an integrated report, organizations need to consider materiality
    (see 'Preparing the Report' later in this section). They also need to look at how existing reporting processes
    and reports (such as internal reports, sustainability reports and financial statements) will fit into the
    integrated reporting process so as to avoid duplication and overburdening resources.

    The value of quantitative data

    Quantitative indicators, such as Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) and monetized metrics, and the context
    in which they are provided, can help to explain how an organization creates value and how it uses and
    affects various capitals (resources and relationships). While quantitative indicators are included in an
    integrated report whenever it is practicable and relevant to do so, it is important to note that the ability of
    the organization to create value can best be reported through a combination of quantitative and qualitative


Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                        24
    information. It is not the purpose of an integrated report to quantify or monetize the value of the
    organization at a point in time.

    Gap analysis

    New preparers often undertake a ‘gap analysis’ between their current reporting and the <IR> Framework
    help decide what information (quantitative and qualitative) to include in their integrated report and to
    identify new KPIs where the entity has previously not set them or has only used financial KPIs. The
    following four questions can help this analysis:

        What is the entity’s strategy and what are the priorities?
        What information is required internally?
        What information is required externally?
        What information is currently available i.e. sustainability reports?

    Once the gap analysis has determined the information that already exists in the entity and what is required,
    decisions can be made on how quickly the gaps can be bridged, with the most critical information being
    prioritised.




    Case Study: The Crown Estate
    The Crown Estate is a UK-based independent, commercial business, created by an Act of Parliament and
    returning all its profit to the Treasury. It has an extensive portfolio of assets, including London’s West End,
    regional retail, rural land, half the foreshore and the UK seabed.

    The Crown Estate’s first integrated report focused on the business model, material issues, connectivity, and
    the benefits of integrated thinking. Its second placed more emphasis on setting out its vision and strategic
    objectives, understanding the markets it works in and the relationships and resources it relies on to create
    value. The organization emphasises the quality of information over quantity, and its second report was
    more concise than the first. “<IR> is using smarter non-financial information and KPIs and integrating these
    with the financial data to understand the full value that we create,” says John Lelliott, Finance Director.

    In order to understand, measure and communicate how it creates value (to its business and society)
    beyond financial return, The Crown Estate has adopted an approach called Total Contribution. Since
    launching its initial Total Contribution report in 2013, it has been working to evolve the approach into a
    useful tool for decision-making, as-well as a measure of positive impact. It has:

        Deepened the classification of data falling under the headings of Economic, Social and Environmental
         to align with all six of its Resources and Relationships (its capitals) - financial resources, physical
         resources, natural resources, its people, know-how and networks.
        Increased the number of performance indicators from 12 to 62 to enhance its understanding of the
         impact it has and improve the balance of its data.
        Worked towards Total Contribution becoming one of its key performance indicators, allowing it to
         measure its relative performance against a firm baseline and understand whether it has made a
         positive impact in the UK by:
                o Putting a monetary value on each performance indicator to provide some means of
                    comparison between the positive and negative impacts. This also enables The Crown Estate
                    to use Total Contribution internally as a decision-making tool, enabling it to better
                    understand the effects of choices and value the resources and relationships beyond the
                    pure financial.




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                       25
                    o    Developing an approach, working with Route2Sustainability Ltd1, to calculate Total
                         Contribution, called Adjusted Gross Value Added (aGVA). This goes beyond economic
                         contribution (GVA) by encompassing the net contributions from all of its resources and
                         relationships, thereby providing a fuller picture of the contribution that it makes to the UK.

    The Crown Estate has found there are important steps involved in integrated thinking and integrated
    reporting, as illustrated in Figure 5.

    Detail on the evolution of The Crown Estate approach to <IR> and Total Contribution is available on request
    from Jane Baptist, Deputy Head of Sustainability (jane.baptist@thecrownestate.co.uk).

    Figure 5: Pictorial representation of the steps from integrated thinking to
    integrated reporting




    Source: The Crown Estate




    Preparing the report
    The <IR> Framework has seven Guiding Principles that underpin the preparation of an integrated report,
    giving guidance on content to include and how to present information. These are supported by eight
    Content Elements that describe the required content of an integrated report:

        Organizational overview and external environment
        Governance
        Business model
        Risks and opportunities
        Strategy and resource allocation
        Performance
        Outlook
        Basis of preparation and presentation

    Because the precise content of an organization’s integrated report will depend on its individual
    circumstances, the Content Elements are presented in the form of questions rather than as checklists of

    1
     Route2Sustainability Ltd are corporate advisors utilizing and evolving a Total Capital Accounting framework that widens the risk lens and
    positions companies for long-term financial sustainability.




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                                                  26
    specific disclosures. This enables flexibility in the way that entities tell their story.

    The eight Content Elements all link to and affect each other. They aim to encourage integrated
    performance management based on integrated thinking. The Content Element questions also serve as a
    completeness check – that is, does your report provide answers to each question? The <IR> Framework
    offers suggestions on what information could be covered by each content element.

    Neither the <IR> Framework nor its Content Elements prescribe the structure of an integrated report. This
    is determined by the entity’s unique value creation story and by the information to be included.
    Experienced reporters have structured their reports in a variety of ways, for example, around their strategic
    objectives, strategic themes, the capitals, their value chain, etc. Regardless of the chosen structure, they
    still ensure that all relevant Content Element information is included.

    Focusing on material matters

    If an integrated report is too long, it won’t get read, so entities need to restrict themselves to covering
    material matters only. This improves internal and external decision-making by eliminating extraneous
    information and focusing disclosures on the core issues managed by the organization. As explained in the
    IIRC/IFAC publication - Materiality in <IR>: Guidance for the preparation of integrated reports - deciding on
    report content involves:

         Establishing parameters for the materiality determination process
         Filtering matters by identifying their relevance, evaluating their importance and prioritizing them
          based on their relative importance
         Setting the reporting boundary
         Determining disclosures

    The interpretation of materiality varies across report forms due to differences in audience, purpose and
    scope. In <IR>, a matter is material if it could substantively affect the organization’s ability to create value in
    the short, medium or long term. The process of determining materiality is entity specific and based on
    industry and other factors, as well as multi-stakeholder perspectives.

    Embedding the materiality determination process into management processes can enhance the efficiency
    and effectiveness of decision-making and reporting. The extent to which integrated thinking underpins the
    materiality determination process, and is linked to board and management discussions, is also important.

    Role of the audit committee

    The audit committee has a significant role in overseeing reporting processes, related risks and
    accountabilities across all forms of disclosure. Under <IR>, that role has a greater focus on the importance
    and credibility of a broader set of information, some of which may not previously have been subject to the
    oversight of the board and its audit committee.

    The audit committee can ensure that key information for the organization (across all the material capitals)
    moves towards the highest level of quality by establishing and maintaining effective risk management and
    internal control over the relevant reporting processes and systems.



    Case Study: Singapore Maritime Ports Authority (MPA)
    The Singapore Maritime Ports Authority (MPA) initially set out to develop sustainability reporting, forming
    a Sustainability Office in 2014. However, this quickly evolved into a broader <IR> initiative.

    When starting its <IR> journey, MPA went back to basics to determine who its stakeholders were, the
    materiality considerations, capitals, activities and how these aligned to the outcomes the authority wanted


Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                           27
    to achieve. After several focus group discussions, it became clear that the <IR> journey required a stocktake
    of the MPA internal strategy map. As well as reporting on its sustainability initiatives, MPA decided to use
    the <IR> Framework to propagate its “Future ready” narrative. This brought the various Divisions - which
    perform their separate but important functions - together within a common strategy.

    What began as the development of an externally focused report was therefore transformed into an
    internally focused report as well. Thus, it was decided that half would be written for MPA’s external
    stakeholders such as customers, suppliers, vendors, other government agencies and the public, while the
    second half would be for employees.

    One critical success factor was the tenacity of the handpicked team that worked tirelessly to contribute the
    various elements of the report. There were many rounds of drafts involving discussions, disagreements,
    confusion, clarifications, fine tuning, internal clearance, design, infographics and photo selection. Through
    the process, MPA identified gaps in its strategy, activities not aligned to outcomes and outdated KPIs which
    needed revision. Although individually each could be seen as a challenge, the final outcome was a more
    robust view of areas for improvement and the strengths that MPA should continue to focus on. Cost-saving
    initiatives were also identified.

    Ultimately, the <IR> process allowed MPA to refocus on its value proposition – and be clear about what, as
    a public agency, it was set up to do.



    Learning the lessons
    Holding a Post Implementation Review (PIR) is best practice when introducing any new process, service or
    product. The introduction of <IR> is no exception, particularly as it is likely to involve collecting new sources
    of information and combining information in new ways through new reporting approaches and formats.
    Experience shows that organizations learn many lessons along the way.

    By conducting a PIR, entities can make their <IR> reporting process more efficient and effective. They can
    also share insights into the benefits that <IR> brings. Because <IR> is a journey, organizations are likely to
    continue learning as their approach develops and matures over a number of reporting cycles.

    Learning from experience

    Insights gained from organizations that are already experimenting with <IR> suggest that certain things
    have a significant impact on the speed of progress and the benefits for the organization. These include:

        Strong Leadership: to provide focus and energy and ensure the benefits of adopting <IR> are realized.
        Formation of a steering group: <IR> initiatives are more likely to make good progress if members are
         drawn from across the organization – for example, they often include: finance (which tends to play a
         key role), sustainability, strategists, internal audit, legal, communications, and people with particular
         expertise. Individuals with a comprehensive knowledge of the entity from cross-disciplinary functions
         are also valuable members.
        Accountability allocated to a senior executive: someone from the executive team who will ultimately
         be responsible for the report, helped by the steering group.
        Engagement with stakeholders: including employees and functional units across the organization to
         encourage and embed integrated thinking so that the organization can improve decision making and
         better understand the value it creates over time.
        External representation: this includes challenging the readability of an <IR> report through use of a
         peer reviewer (whether external consultant, stakeholder panel or internal employee group). Taking
         upfront advice from a ‘critical friend’ when planning the <IR> reporting process can be particularly
         helpful.



Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                         28
    Case Study: Eskom Holdings SOC Ltd
    Eskom, South Africa’s largest state-owned enterprise, provides more than 95% of the country’s electricity.
    It has been reporting on non-financial performance (including sustainability information) for more than 20
    years, and joined the IIRC’s Pilot Programme in 2011. It has just released its fifth integrated report and,
    unusually for the public sector, produces both annual and interim integrated reports. The annual reports
    include detailed information on Eskom’s business model, stakeholder engagement and material matters,
    leadership and governance as well as historic performance and future outlook. The interim reports are
    much shorter, concentrating on changes in the business and performance updates for the interim period.

    Standardising processes and data is one hurdle that Eskom has successfully tackled, although it requires
    constant focus. The company’s <IR> process is overseen by a steering committee which is chaired by the
    Finance Director and includes members of the executive management team. Content is gathered from a
    working group of numerous data and information owners from across the organization.

    Eskom applies a combined assurance approach in the preparation of its integrated report. The report as a
    whole is not externally assured, although KPIs contained in the shareholder pack are assured by the
    external auditors, subject mainly to reasonable assurance, while the internal auditors assure the balance of
    the KPIs and the report as a whole. However, numbers that are externally sourced where Eskom cannot
    verify the data, such as indirect job creation or economic impact, are still proving a challenge, and remain
    an area of focus in its future reporting development.

    Like other <IR> Pilot Programme and Business Network organizations, Eskom has found that commitment
    from the top is imperative. Eskom’s commitment to <IR> and to transparent and balanced repo rting has
    been driven by its executive management, which eased the way for the reporting team. Winning local
    reporting awards, which includes the top SOC for a number of years running, has helped raise the visibility
    of reporting within the organization, and increased involvement.



    How to get involved?
    <IR> is now gaining extraordinary global momentum. With over one-third of global GDP being spent by the
    public sector, the time is right to explore how the benefits already being experienced by businesses
    implementing <IR> can be extended to public sector organizations. The 'Resources Used' section at the
    conclusion of this report highlights a selection of resources that public sector organizations and others will
    find useful in facilitating integrated thinking and reporting.

    In collaboration with the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (CIPFA) the IIRC launched
    the Public Sector Pioneer Network (the Pioneer Network) for those public sector organizations who wish to
    commit to explore <IR> in their own reporting. For more information on how to join the <IR> Public Sector
    Pioneer Network see the IIRC website (www.integratedreporting.org) or e-mail (publicsector@theiirc.org).




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                      29
    Glossary
    For the purpose of this publication, unless stated otherwise, the following terms have the meanings
    attributed below:

            Term                                             Definition
                             The obligation of public sector entities to the citizens and other
        Accountability       stakeholders to account, and be answerable to, democratically chosen
                             supervisory bodies, for their policies, decisions, and actions, particularly
                             in relation to public finances.
                             An organization’s system of transforming inputs through its business
                             activities into outputs and outcomes that aims to fulfil the organization’s
       Business Model
                             strategic purposes and create value over the short, medium and long
                             term.
                             Stocks of value on which all organizations depend for their success as
                             inputs to their business model, and which are increased, decreased or
           Capitals          transformed through the organization’s business activities and outputs.
                             The capitals are categorized in the <IR> Framework as financial,
                             manufactured, intellectual, human, social and relationship, and natural.
                             The categories of information required to be included in an integrated
                             report; the Content Elements, which are fundamentally linked to each
      Content Elements       other and are not mutually exclusive, are stated in the form of questions
                             to be answered in a way that makes the relationships between them
                             apparent.
                             The arrangements* put in place to ensure that the intended outcomes
         Governance          for stakeholders are defined and achieved.
                             *includes political, economic, social, environmental, administrative,
                             legal, and other arrangements.
       Governing Body        The person(s) or group with primary responsibility for overseeing an
                             entity’s strategic direction, operations, and accountability.
                             The principles that underpin the preparation and presentation of an
      Guiding Principles     integrated report, informing the content of the report and how
                             information is presented.
                             The capitals (resources and relationships) that the organization draws
            Inputs
                             upon for its business activities.
                             A concise communication about how an organization’s strategy,
                             governance, performance and prospects, in the context of its external
      Integrated Report
                             environment, lead to the creation of value in the short, medium and long
                             term.
                             A process founded on integrated thinking that results in a periodic
     Integrated Reporting
                             integrated report by an organization about value creation over time and
            (<IR>)
                             related communications regarding aspects of value creation.
                             The active consideration by an organization of the relationships between
                             its various operating and functional units and the capitals that the
     Integrated Thinking     organization uses or affects. Integrated thinking leads to integrated
                             decision making and actions that consider the creation of value over the
                             short, medium and long term.
                             A matter is material if it could substantively affect the organization’s
     Material/materiality
                             ability to create value in the short, medium or long term.
                             The internal and external consequences (positive and negative) for the
          Outcomes
                             capitals as a result of an organization’s business activities and outputs.



Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                             30
                             An organization’s products and services, and any by-products and waste.
           Outputs
                             National governments, regional (state, provincial, territorial)
         Public Sector
                             governments, local (city, town) governments and related governmental
                             entities (agencies, boards, commissions and enterprises).
                             One or more legal bodies managed as a coherent operational entity with
     Public Sector Entity
                             the primary objective of providing goods or services that deliver social
                             benefits for society.
                             Those groups or individuals that can reasonably be expected to be
                             significantly affected by an entity’s activities, outputs or outcomes, or
         Stakeholders
                             whose actions can reasonably be expected to significantly affect the
                             ability of the entity to create value over time.
                             A legal entity that is created by a government in order to undertake
        State-owned
                             commercial activities on the government's behalf, which can be either
       Enterprise (SoE)
                             wholly or partially owned by a government.
                             The capacity of an individual entity, community, or global population to
        Sustainability       continue to survive successfully by meeting its intended economic,
                             environmental, and social outcomes while living within its resource
                             limits.
                             The process that results in increases, decreases or transformations of
        Value Creation
                             the capitals caused by the organization’s business activities and outputs.




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                           31
    Resources used
    The listing below highlights a selection of resources that public sector organizations and others will find
    useful in facilitating integrated thinking and reporting. Cited resources, tools, and articles, can be found
    within the resources section of the on the IIRC website or via the website of the named organization.

    International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC)
          International <IR> Framework http://integratedreporting.org/resource/international-ir-framework/
          IIRC Resources - http://integratedreporting.org/resources/
          <IR> Examples Database - http://examples.integratedreporting.org/home
          Materiality in <IR>: Guidance for the preparation of integrated reports, produced by the IIRC and the
           International Federation of Accountants.
          Assurance on <IR>: Overview of feedback and call to action - summarizes significant matters raised in
           the debate engendered by the IIRC's Assurance on <IR> publications, Assurance on <IR>: an
           introduction to the discussion and Assurance on <IR>: an exploration of issues (July 2014)
           http://integratedreporting.org/resource/assurance/
          <IR> Creating Value series brings together trends, research, market views, and case studies on
           integrated reporting as part of an on-going series of publications highlighting the practical outcomes
           of adopting integrated reporting. http://integratedreporting.org/resource/creating-value-board/
          Realizing the Benefits: The Impact of Integrated Reporting - provides a comprehensive review of
           lessons learned from the experiences of organizations implementing <IR>.
           http://integratedreporting.org/resource/realizing-the-benefits-the-impact-of-integrated-reporting/

    IFAC
          Creating Value with integrated thinking – The role of professional accountants

    International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board® (IAASB®)
          Exploring assurance on Integrated Reporting and other emerging developments in external reporting -
           informs stakeholders about the IAASB’s on-going work on this topic.

    Chartered Global Management Accountant (CGMA)
          CGMA Briefing: Integrated Thinking - provides the business case for integrated reporting and thinking.

    Deloitte
          A directors’ guide to Integrated Reporting - provides guidance on how to unleash the real benefits
           that businesses have seen behind integrated reporting.
          Integrated Reporting as driver for Integrated Thinking – Maturity of <IR> in the Netherlands 2015
           (MVO Nederland)

    EY
          Integrated Reporting, elevating value - a guide to Integrated Reporting through the lens of a multiple
           capital approach to value creation.

    Institute of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales (ICAEW)
          ‘Rethinking Capitals’ web pages provide resources that explore different forms of capital and their
           interactions.

    Integrated Reporting Committee of South Africa
          Preparing an Integrated Report: A starter’s guide - assists new preparers of integrated reports with
           suggestions for planning and preparing an integrated report drawing on the wisdom of some of South
           Africa’s most experienced reporters.



Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                     32
    KPMG
         Integrated reporting collection of publications introduces the benefits of Integrated Reporting and
          how to implement it.

    PwC
         Implementing Integrated Reporting: PwC’s practical guide to a new business language - provides
          guidance on implementing a holistic business management system based on integrated reporting.

    South African Institute of Chartered Accountants (SAICA)
      Integrated thinking: An exploratory survey - examines the benefits that South African companies are
         experiencing using integrated thinking

    United Kingdom Green Building Council
         How to implement Integrated Reporting in your organization - records the outputs from a masterclass
          held in February 2015 to give guidance on how to implement integrated reporting

    UN Environment Programme (UNEP)
         Charter of the Group of Friends of Paragraph 47 reaffirms the Group's intention to contribute to the
          advancement of an international culture of corporate transparency and accountability.




Focusing on value creation in the public sector                                                                  33
www.integratedreporting.org
