Green Incentives
for Climate
Competitive
Industries:
A Practitioner’s Handbook
©2016 The World Bank Group
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

All rights reserved.
This volume is a product of the staff of the World Bank Group. The World Bank Group refers
to the member institutions of the World Bank Group: The World Bank (International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development); International Finance Corporation (IFC); and Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), which are separate and distinct legal entities each
organized under its respective Articles of Agreement. We encourage use for educational and non-
commercial purposes.

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Directors or Executive Directors of the respective institutions of the World Bank
Group or the governments they represent. The World Bank Group does not guarantee the
accuracy of the data included in this work.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of
this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work
promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete
information to the Copyright Clearance Center Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
USA; telephone: 978-750-8400; fax: 978-750-4470; Internet: www.copyright.com.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the
Office of the Publisher, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA;
fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
Acknowledgements

This Green Incentives for Climate Competitive Industries Handbook was prepared by a team led
by Etienne Kechichian and Harald Jedlicka and comprised of Colin Carter, Guy Whiteley, Justin
Yap, and Naz Beykan. The work was carried out under the direction and expert guidance of Ivan
Anton Nimac and Alexios Pantelias.

Substantial inputs were provided by Daniel Forster, Keith Lawton, and Katarina Svatikova.
Guidance was provided by the Handbook’s peer reviewers Roberto Echandi and Erik von Uexkull.

Ricardo AEA provided substantive copy editing, design, and typesetting of the report.



Trade and Competitiveness (T&C)

The Trade and Competitiveness (T&C) Global Practice helps countries achieve the World
Bank Group Twin Goals through rapid and broad-based economic growth, centered on
strong contributions from the private sector. For our clients across lower- and middle-income
countries and fragile and conflict-affected states, integration through trade and a focus on
competitiveness are keys to economic growth. T&C is meeting growing demand for high-impact
solutions that expand market opportunities, enable private initiatives, and develop dynamic
economies. Its country, regional, and global efforts help boost the volume and value of trade,
enhance the investment climate, improve competitiveness in sectors, and foster innovation and
entrepreneurship. This joint World Bank–International Finance Corporation (WB-IFC) team of
over 500 staff members offers world-class technical expertise, an extensive global footprint,
and an updated business model. T&C’s day-to-day business is characterized by intensive
learning-by-doing, strong internal and external partnerships, and a focus on results. The Climate
Competitive Industries work within T&C assists countries with addressing climate action within
the manufacturing sector while supporting the competitiveness of the sector.
Table of Contents

 MODULE 1
 Background Information




 CHAPTER 1 — INTRODUCTION	                                           12
 What is resource efficiency	                                        15
 The importance of resource efficiency for industry	                 16
 Incentivizing resource efficiency in industry	                      17
 About this handbook	                                                18



 CHAPTER 2 — TYPES OF INCENTIVES	                                    20
 Introduction	                                                       23
 Main types of incentives	                                           23
 Combining incentive schemes with other policies	                    47
 Challenges faced by governments in introducing incentive schemes	   49
MODULE 2
Application of Incentive Scheme




CHAPTER 3 — UNDERSTANDING THE CONTEXT	                              54
Introduction	                                                        57
Meeting the government	                                              57
Conducting a diagnostic study	                                       61



CHAPTER 4 — DESIGN OF INCENTIVE	                                    80
Introduction	                                                        83
Selecting an incentive type	                                         83
Design and implementation of an incentive	                           89
Developing and improving incentive administration and management	   102



CHAPTER 5 — INCENTIVE FOCUS	                                        110
Tax on resource use (including tax on proxies)	                     113
Application of trading schemes	                                     120
Application of green finance	                                       125



CHAPTER 6 — BIBLIOGRAPHY	                                           132
List of figures

Figure 1: Implementing an incentive	                                                        53

Figure 2: Establishing working and stakeholder relationships	                               57

Figure 3: Stakeholder engagement process	                                                   60

Figure 4: Conducting a diagnostic study	                                                    61

Figure 5: Selecting an incentive type	                                                      83

Figure 6: Designing and implementing an incentive	                                          89

Figure 7: Developing and improving incentive administration and management	                 102




List of tables

Table 1:	A checklist for assessing the existing regulatory and institutional environment	   71

Table 2: Guidelines for uses of grants and loans (UN REDD-net10, 2010)	                     126

Table 3:	Average grant element on new external debt commitments	                            127

	
List of boxes

Box 1:	 Sample questionnaire	                                                   76

Box 2:	 Template scope of work relevant to diagnosis, targeting, and	           78
	       institutional and policy considerations

Box 3:	 Guiding principles of incentive design	                                 90

Box 4:	 Template scope of work relevant to designing an incentive	              106




List of case studies

Case study 1: United Kingdom — Landfill Tax	                                    26

Case study 2: France — bonus-malus scheme for purchasing private automobiles	   29

Case study 3: Ghana — fuel subsidy reform	                                      37

Case study 4: Tunisia — green financing for solar water heaters	                42

Case study 5: Bangladesh — solar home systems	                                  44
List of abbreviations

ADB	       Asian Development Bank

ANME	      Tunisian National Agency for Energy Conservation

CDKN	      Climate and Development Knowledge Network

CSCP	      Collaborating Centre on Sustainable Consumption and Production

DFI	       Development finance institution

ECA	       Enhanced Capital Allowance

EU ETS 	   European Union Emissions Trading System

EU	        European Union

FDI	       Foreign direct investment

GDP	       Gross domestic product

GHG	       Greenhouse gas

GTZ	       German Agency for Technical Cooperation

IDCOL	     Infrastructure Development Company Ltd

IDS	       Institute of Development Studies

IEA	       International Energy Agency

IMF	       International Monetary Fund

INCE	      International Network for Compliance and Enforcement

LED	       Light emitting diode

LPG	       Liquefied petroleum gas
M&V	             Monitoring and verification

MATTM	           Italian Ministry of Environment, Land and Sea

MRV	             Monitoring, reporting, and verification

MW	Megawatts

NPA	             National Petroleum Agency

OECD	            Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

PMR	             Partnership for Market Readiness

POs	             Partner organizations

REWG	            Resource Efficiency Working Group

RFF	             Resources for the Future

SHS	             Solar home system

SMART targets	 Specific, measurable, achievable, realistic, and time bound targets

STEG	            Tunisian Company of Electricity and Gas

SWH	             Solar water heating

UK	              United Kingdom

UNEP	            United Nations Environment Programme

VAT 	            Value added tax

WTO	             World Trade Organization
                       MODULE 1
                      Background Information




10   1 INTRODUCTION            2 TYPES         3 CONTEXT
4 DESIGN   5 FOCUS   6 BIBLIOGRAPHY   11
                          1
                      INTRODUCTION




12   1 INTRODUCTION       2 TYPES    3 CONTEXT
What is resource efficiency	                                  15
The importance of resource efficiency for industry	           16
Incentivizing resource efficiency in industry	                17
About this handbook	                                          18




      4 DESIGN                 5 FOCUS           6 BIBLIOGRAPHY    13
     What the reader will get from this chapter:

     • an introduction to the concept of
       resource efficiency

     • an understanding of why resource
       efficiency has not occurred as a result of
       market activity

     • guidance on why incentive schemes
       should be considered




14    1 INTRODUCTION      2 TYPES          3 CONTEXT
What is resource efficiency

Resource efficiency is about “using the Earth’s limited resources in a sustainable manner while
minimising impacts on the environment” (European Commission, 2015). It is a term used to describe
a general goal, which may be applicable to a wide range of resources or environmental issues.

A wide range of actions can be applied to help to achieve the goal of resource efficiency. These
actions can be applied at any stage of the life cycle in the production and consumption of goods
and services, from raw material extraction to final use and disposal (United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), no date). Therefore, for some goods and services, the greatest resource-
efficiency gains may be achieved at the resource extraction stage (for example, energy used
as part of the mining process). For others, it may be at the consumption stage (for example,
reducing waste generation).

Resource efficiency is important for policymakers because, without policy interventions, markets
may not deliver an allocation of resources that is optimal to society as a whole, due to the
existence of market failures and other barriers.

For example, the benefit gained by an individual or industry from the consumption and
production of a good may not take into account the social costs (environmental and social
damage) associated with the consumption and production of that good. These social costs are
known as externalities.

Externalities are the impacts of an economic activity on a third party1 that are not reflected in the
market price of the good or service concerned. For example, burning fossil fuels for energy used
in the manufacture of plastics may lead to emissions of pollutants that adversely affect air quality.
These pollutants may lead to wider issues such as human health impacts or contribute to climate
change. However, the social cost of these issues is not reflected in the market price of the fossil
fuels that are consumed.

The existence of these market failures provides the rationale for policymakers to put in place
policies to stimulate increased resource efficiency.


1	 Externalities can be positive, but with environmental externalities the impacts can be taken to be negative.



                4 DESIGN                                    5 FOCUS                                6 BIBLIOGRAPHY   15
     The importance of resource efficiency
     for industry

     Improvements in resource efficiency can lead to direct cost savings and improvements in
     competitiveness. A reduction in the volume of inputs required to produce a good or service
     will typically lead to a proportional decrease in the costs of purchasing these inputs. Likewise, a
     reduction in the volume of waste produced in the production of a good or service will typically lead
     to a proportional decrease in the costs of disposing of this waste. Therefore, resource-efficiency
     actions can lead to direct cost savings for the businesses concerned.

     The greatest potential for savings is often in those businesses, typically in the manufacturing
     industry, that consume large volumes of inputs in their processes, and produce large volumes of
     waste. For example, an analysis of the resource-efficiency opportunities for businesses in three
     industry sectors in Europe (food and drink manufacturing, fabricated metal products, and hospitality
     and food services) identified potential gross benefits associated with improving resource efficiency
     of between 10% and 17% of turnover (Lawton, et al., 2013).

     A further reason why resource efficiency is important for industry is that commodity markets can
     be volatile (Dobbs, et al., 2013). This volatility represents a risk for any industry with a significant
     dependency on specific resources. Therefore, improving resource efficiency can also reduce exposure
     to any market fluctuations.

     Barriers to and drivers for resource efficiency
     While resource-efficiency actions can deliver clear and direct benefits to the businesses concerned,
     these opportunities are rarely fully realized by businesses.

     In particular, the existence of barriers, or weak or non-existent drivers, can create a market
     environment in which resource-efficiency opportunities are not realized. Lawton, et al. (2013)
     presented a list of barriers to and drivers for businesses becoming more resource efficient.




16            1 INTRODUCTION                         2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
The barriers and drivers of particular interest to this handbook are (Lawton, et al., 2013):
•	 barriers:
   –	 inconsistent policies and messages
   –	 lack of clear pricing signals
   –	 lack of external support and assistance
   –	 lack of incentives to invest
   –	 lack of access to capital
•	 drivers:
   –	 consistent policies and messages
   –	 taxes, levies, and charges
   –	regulation
   –	 material and commodity prices
   –	competitiveness
   –	 cost savings and avoided costs

The majority of these barriers and drivers can be influenced in some way by public policy.



Incentivizing resource efficiency in industry

As a result of externalities, and the barriers described above, businesses may not take advantage of the
full potential that exists to improve resource efficiency. This may lead to a competitive disadvantage
for these businesses when compared to businesses that have taken advantage of resource-efficiency
gains. Moreover, the existence of these market failures will likely result in an inefficient overall
allocation of resources for society as whole. For these reasons, policymakers may seek to provide
further stimulus to businesses to improve their resource efficiency through policy interventions.

Policymakers have a range of levers that can be applied to influence resource efficiency. More
traditional regulatory approaches may include setting minimum performance standards (for
example, on energy efficiency). This approach has the advantage of achieving, if adhered to, a
definite environmental outcome. However, regulatory approaches of this kind are less able to
take into account the different costs associated with achieving an environmental standard. Since
different companies will face different operational and capital costs in realizing environmental
outcomes, such “command-and-control approaches” can be seen to be inefficient.




             4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY              17
     In contrast, economic incentives (referred to here as incentives, but also known as market-based
     approaches) utilize the motive of profit generation to achieve environmental outcomes. Existing
     market conditions are adjusted to reflect externalities associated with the economic activity, or to
     overcome other barriers, to make resource-efficiency actions even more attractive economically.

     In the application of an incentive, resource users can pay an additional amount to reflect the social
     cost associated with resource use or receive a subsidy to reflect the social benefit associated with
     reducing resource use. Using these approaches, the externality associated with resource use is
     internalized. In many cases, implementing agencies require less knowledge about a company’s
     operations or a particular technology when introducing an incentive than that required with
     command-and-control approaches. Implementing agencies know less about a business than the
     business itself, a situation known as asymmetric information. Asymmetric information is one of the
     reasons that incentive schemes are favored over command-and-control approaches. In reality, the
     approach facing a policymaker is not as binary as the choice between incentives or command-and-
     control instruments. The optimum solution may involve different combinations of instruments that
     are tailored to the local market context (as discussed in the section “Combining incentive schemes
     with other policies” on page 47).



     About this handbook

     This handbook has been developed to provide instruction on the design and implementation of
     incentives for resource-efficiency purposes. The target audience is World Bank staff and stakeholders
     who are supporting the implementation of a resource-efficiency program in a country on behalf of
     the government, development finance institution (DFI) or other institution.

     It is intended to be applicable to most, if not all, resource-efficiency issues and incentives. However,
     it has a particular focus on energy-efficiency issues as this is the particular focus of the World Bank’s
     Climate Competitive Industries program, and is an area with a high level of interest from industry
     stakeholders.

     This handbook will help practitioners to understand:
     •	 why incentives should be used
     •	 the kinds of incentives that are available




18            1 INTRODUCTION                         2 TYPES                           3 CONTEXT
•	   how incentives can be combined
•	   how to diagnose the resource-efficiency issues and potential for action in the country
•	   what the key considerations are in the selection and design on an incentive
•	   which institutional processes are required to support implementation of an incentive

It sets out the key considerations in designing and implementing an incentive for resource efficiency.
Given the breadth of the potential areas of application, the handbook provides an introduction
to each incentive type and sets out the skeleton approach to implementing an incentive. Further
reading and support will be required at key stages to enable readers to undertake some of the
technical aspects of implementation. For this reason, the handbook should be considered the entry
point for any party considering an incentive scheme for resource efficiency. However, additional
expertise may need to be sought when it comes to the actual design of a specific incentive.



     Further reading
     European Commission. (2015, November 19). Resource Efficiency. Retrieved from European Commission
     Environment website: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/resource_efficiency

     Lawton, K., Carter, C., Lee, J., Tan, A., de Prado Trigo, A., Luscombe, D., & Briscoe, S. (2013). The opportunities
     to business of improving resource efficiency. European Commission.

     GTZ, CSCP, Wuppertal Institute. (2006). Policy Instruments for Resource Efficiency: Towards Sustainable
     Consumption and Production. Retrieved from http://www.scp-centre.org/fileadmin/content/files/publications/
     GTZ-CSCP-PolicyInstrumentsResourceEfficiency.pdf

     UNEP. (2015). Indicators for a Resource Efficient and Green Asia and the Pacific — Measuring progress of
     sustainable consumption and production, green economy and resource efficiency policies in the Asia-Pacific
     region. UNEP.

     UNEP. (no date). Resource Efficiency. Paris: UNEP. Retrieved from http://www.unep.org/pdf/UNEP_Profile/
     Resource_efficiency.pdf




                 4 DESIGN                                 5 FOCUS                              6 BIBLIOGRAPHY              19
                            2
                      TYPES OF INCENTIVES




20   1 INTRODUCTION          2 TYPES        3 CONTEXT
Introduction	23
Main types of incentives	                                23
Combining incentive schemes with other policies	          47
Challenges faced by governments in introducing
incentive schemes	                                       49




      4 DESIGN              5 FOCUS          6 BIBLIOGRAPHY    21
     What the reader will get from this chapter:

     •	an understanding of the key incentive
       types that could be used to tackle resource
       efficiency

     •	an appreciation of the key considerations
       in applying these incentives and
       combinations of incentives




22   1 INTRODUCTION      2 TYPES          3 CONTEXT
Introduction

This chapter introduces the different types of economic incentives that could be used by
policymakers. Case studies are used to illustrate real examples of where the incentive types have
been applied in practice2.



Main types of incentives

Incentive types were discussed in the Investment Incentives Guide (World Bank Group, 2015). In
this handbook, the focus is different (resource efficiency versus investment policy), which means
that some incentives in the Investment Incentives Guide (such as incentives to attract businesses
to a particular location) are not relevant for discussion here. At the same time, other incentives
(such as resource taxes) are more relevant.

There is a range of different incentives that policymakers can use to increase the uptake of
resource-efficiency actions. In all cases, the incentives aim to take advantage of the profit
motivation of businesses, but different incentive types seek to influence this motivation in
different ways. In turn, this influences how suitable they are for different circumstances.

The key characteristics of the different incentives are summarized below. The following incentive
types are explored:
•	 tax on resource use
•	 tax preferences
•	 tariff exemptions for resource-efficient products
•	 grants
•	 vouchers
•	 subsidy reform
•	 green finance (loans and associated instruments)
•	 trading schemes


2	 The OECD database on instruments used for environmental policy provides a useful resource on the global application of
   incentives (OECD, 2014).



               4 DESIGN                                   5 FOCUS                               6 BIBLIOGRAPHY              23
     In each case, the main characteristics are summarized in accordance with the following template.

     •	 How does the incentive work?
        Description of how the incentive promotes the desired behavior.

     •	 How is the incentive typically applied?
        Description of how the incentive is typically applied.

     •	 What are the conditions for successful application?
        Description of the main conditions (for example, institutional factors and economic context)
        that can affect the success of the incentive.

     •	 How cost-effective is the incentive?
        Discussion on the cost-effectiveness of the instrument.

     Tax on resource use (including tax on proxies)

     •	 How does the incentive work?
        Taxation on resource use (such as on fuel sales) or on proxies for resource use (such as new
        passenger vehicles) affects the market price of the resource or the proxy (referred to from here
        onwards as the resource). Since the demand (and associated consumption) for the resource
        will bear a direct relationship to the price of the resource, the change in the price of the
        resource resulting from the tax will lead to a change in demand. In other words, the higher
        the tax, the larger the reduction of demand for the resource taxed. In practical terms, the
        reduction in demand arises as businesses look for opportunities to reduce costs in response to
        the increase in price. This may include short-term behavioral change (for example, improved
        energy management) and longer-term investments in more efficient technologies/processes
        termed structural change (for example, investing in a more efficient heating system).

     •	 How is the incentive typically applied?
        Taxes are frequently applied at the point of sale of the resource or resource-using activity (for
        example, fuel taxes are added to the gross price of fuel). The general principle is that the tax
        should be applied as close as possible to the resource or the activity that is using the resource.
        This provides businesses with the maximum number of options (including technologies) to
        reduce resource use and, therefore, drives the efficiency of the incentives. However, it can be
        more difficult to monitor and implement these types of taxes.



24            1 INTRODUCTION                        2 TYPES                         3 CONTEXT
  In some cases, taxes are applied to a proxy good to the resource (for example, the sale of
  goods that use a resource as opposed to the resource itself). While taxation of the proxy will
  also discourage consumption of the target good, this mechanism is generally considered to
  be a less efficient method of taxation. This is because proxy taxation only discourages one
  particular use of the resource, reducing the options for abatement. However, these types of
  taxes can often be easier to implement due to difficulties in measuring resource use precisely
  (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 2010).

•	 What are the conditions for successful application?
  For taxes to be successful, there are a number of conditions that need to be satisfied
  (German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ)), the Collaborating Centre on Sustainable
  Consumption and Production (CSCP), Wuppertal Institute, 2006):
  –	 rule of law and low corruption levels — ensuring tax revenue is collected and penalties are
     applied
  –	 established and enforced property rights — ensuring businesses have the incentives to invest
  –	 functioning judiciary — allowing fines to be imposed on non-compliant companies
  –	 functioning reporting systems or ability to establish these systems — necessary to ensure
     that the correct amount of tax is being paid
  –	 institutional capacity — governments are required to ensure that the above conditions are
     in place and have the ability to design, implement, and enforce a scheme effectively

•	 How cost-effective is the incentive?
  The cost-effectiveness of taxes will depend on the design of the instrument.

  When taxes can be applied directly to the resource, it is generally more cost-effective than
  applying the tax to a proxy. For example, Greene and Braathen (2014) concluded that energy
  taxes were cost-effective because they provide polluters/consumers with the freedom to find
  their own most efficient way of reducing pollution/energy consumption.

  Cost-effectiveness can also be viewed in the broader context of the overall fiscal policy
  landscape. A review of green taxes by the Green Fiscal Commission (2009) concluded
  that green taxes can be very cost-effective by shifting taxes from areas that society values
  (profits, jobs, and incomes) to areas that negatively impact on society (such as pollution). This
  highlights the importance of considering the role of taxes as part of the whole policy package.




           4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                       6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             25
     Case study 1: United Kingdom — Landfill Tax

     The practice of landfilling carries a number of negative environmental impacts. These
     range from landfill gases that contribute to climate change to the loss of recyclable parts
     from waste products sent to landfill. By the mid 1990s, 85% of all municipal waste in the
     United Kingdom was being disposed of at landfill sites — compared with 55% in Austria,
     30% in France, and only 13% in Sweden. In 1996, the United Kingdom (UK) government
     introduced the Landfill Tax to try to reduce the amount of biodegradable waste going to
     landfill by making other, more sustainable, waste treatment technologies more financially
     attractive in comparison. The tax was also partly driven by the European Union (EU)
     Landfill Directive, which required EU Member States to cut, by 2020, the landfilling of
     biodegradable waste to 50% compared with 1995 levels. The Landfill Tax was levied on
     site operators who, in turn, passed on the costs to businesses that used the landfill sites
     for waste disposal; the amount of tax depended on the weight and category of the waste.
     In addition, in 2010, the United Kingdom started applying an “escalator provision” that
     greatly accelerated the yearly rate of increase in the Landfill Tax; between 2011 and 2014,
     the amount payable per ton rose from £56 to £80. While the UK government abandoned
     the escalator after 2014 for an inflation-based adjustment, the level of the Landfill Tax
     which, in 2016 stands at £84.40, is a significant disincentive against the disposal of waste
     at landfill sites.

     The Landfill Tax is credited with a drastic reduction in the amount of waste going to landfill
     in the United Kingdom. The amount of waste going to landfill fell by 57.3% between
     2000 and 2012, and household recycling rates more than doubled — to 44%. By 2020,
     it is projected that landfill will account for only around 10% of waste treatment and
     disposal in the United Kingdom. Furthermore, a number of innovative waste-to-energy
     initiatives have surfaced that offer sustainable waste treatment and disposal solutions. For
     example, one company is building plants of up to 100 megawatts (MW) that use waste
     or waste by-products to generate electricity. Another company is using steam technology
     to process household waste into biomass. Landfill operators themselves are restructuring
     their business operations to optimize activities (such as the extraction of methane gas from
     landfill sites).




26         1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
However, despite its apparent positive effects — the Landfill Tax is expected to add £20
billion to the UK treasury coffers by 2020 — the Landfill Tax may not be an entirely
unmitigated success. Allegations have surfaced that it has led to an increase in “waste
crime” (for example, the practice of “fly-tipping” where waste is dumped in a field or by
the side of the road, the rise of illegal site operators, and fraudulent reporting practices
by landfill operators). In addition, there have been calls for an incineration tax to further
incentivize recycling over incineration — which is blamed for the release of greenhouse
gases (GHGs) — as the preferred alternative to landfilling. Thus, to further stimulate
sustainable waste treatment and disposal practices, the Landfill Tax might be most
effective if applied in combination with other measures to provide a more nuanced and
environmentally balanced solution.




Sources
Cleantech Magazine. (2010, March/April). UK: Energy from Waste. Retrieved from Cleantech Magazine: http://
www.cleantechinvestor.com/portal/bioenergy/5170-uk-energy-from-waste.html

Environment Agency. (2012). Waste Management 2012. National Archives. Retrieved from http://webarchive.
nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140328084622/http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/research/library/data/150322.
aspx

Environmental Services Association. (2012). Beyond landfill — using green taxes to incentivise the waste
hierarchy. London: Environmental Services Association.

Environmental Services Association. (2016). Landfill & Disposal. Retrieved from Environmental Services
Association: http://www.esauk.org/landfill_and_disposal/

Green Investment Bank. (2014). The UK residual waste market. Retrieved from http://www.
greeninvestmentbank.com/media/25376/gib-residual-waste-report-july-2014-final.pdf

Taylor, S., Jones, P., Ettlinger, S., & Hudson, J. (2014). Waste Crime: Tackling Britain’s Dirty Secret. Environmental
Services Association Education Trust (ESAET).

West, K. (2015, February 27). Waste not, want not: how the rubbish industry learned to look beyond landfill.
Retrieved from The Guardian: http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/27/waste-rubbish-industry-
landfill-recycling-dumps-incineration




            4 DESIGN                                  5 FOCUS                               6 BIBLIOGRAPHY               27
     Tax preferences

     •	 How does the incentive work?
       Tax preferences (as defined by the OECD) operate in much the same way that taxes on
       resource use do — by changing the relative price of resources or activities to promote a certain
       behavior. However, in the case of tax preferences, certain activities are made cheaper as
       opposed to more expensive, as is the case with taxes (Greene & Braathen, 2014). An example
       of a tax preference is the Enhanced Capital Allowance (ECA) scheme in the United Kingdom.
       This policy allows companies to write off the cost of the purchase of (eligible) resource-
       efficient technologies against their taxable profits (Carbon Trust, 2015).

       Tax preferences, although operating through the tax system, can be considered to be indirect
       subsidies. This is because governments are essentially forgoing tax revenues to promote a
       certain activity. Tax preferences are also known as tax expenditures, tax breaks, tax relief, tax
       rebates or tax subsidies (Greene & Braathen, 2014).

     •	 How is the incentive typically applied?
       Tax preferences are applied through the existing tax system (Greene & Braathen, 2014). For
       example:
       –	 reducing tax rates or providing exemptions (for example on sales-related taxes or value
          added tax (VAT), or on specific environmental taxes)
       –	 tax credits against corporate income taxes
       –	 accelerated depreciation against corporate income taxes

       With respect to resource efficiency, these tax preferences could be applied when purchasing
       certain resource-efficient technologies or undertaking resource-efficient expenditure.

       An extensive list of the use of tax preferences for environmental purposes in the OECD is
       available in Appendix A of OECD report “Tax Preferences for Environmental Goals” (Greene &
       Braathen, 2014).




28           1 INTRODUCTION                        2 TYPES                         3 CONTEXT
•	 What are the conditions for successful application?
  The following conditions are required for an appropriate tax preference program:
  –	 A functioning tax system must be in place, which requires the conditions as described for a tax.
  –	 The tax preference must be allowed for in the tax code (World Bank, 2015).
  –	 Simple eligibility criteria should be applied so that an adjustment can easily be incorporated
     into existing tax structures (Greene & Braathen, 2014).
  –	 Tax preferences are costly, similar to other subsidies, so adequate funds must be in place.
  –	 Tax preferences do not internalize the cost of an externality, so should not be used instead
     of taxes to tackle a negative externality (Greene & Braathen, 2014). However, they are
     often used in this manner due to political pressure.

  A full discussion on the principles of applying tax preferences are provided in the OECD report
  “Tax Preferences for Environmental Goals” (Greene & Braathen, 2014).

•	 How cost-effective is the incentive?
  Tax preferences are considered to be less cost effective than a traditional tax on resource
  use. This is because a tax on resource use gives businesses and industry the flexibility
  to reduce an environmental harm in whatever way they see fit to reduce their tax bills.
  Tax preferences are normally attached to a specific behavior or technology, so are more
  prescriptive in the resource-efficiency actions. This is highly likely to be less cost-effective
  than taxes due to the existence of asymmetrical information (as discussed above).



  Case study 2: France — bonus-malus scheme for purchasing private
  automobiles

  France introduced a bonus-malus or “feebate” scheme in 2008 for the purchase of
  new cars. The goal of the scheme was twofold: First, to cut vehicle carbon dioxide (CO2)
  emissions; second, to encourage car manufacturers to shift their production to lower-
  emissions vehicles. As opposed to a more conventional fuel tax, which is an excise tax on
  the sale of fuel, the French feebate scheme took a carrot-and-stick approach by offering
  a purchase-price rebate to buyers of low-emissions vehicles while charging a fee to
  buyers of high-emissions ones (“bonus” and “malus” are Latin for “good” and “bad”,
  respectively). Low-emissions cars were defined as those producing 130 grams or less of CO2
  per kilometer, while high-emissions vehicles were defined as those producing 160 grams or



           4 DESIGN                            5 FOCUS                         6 BIBLIOGRAPHY           29
     more; the scheme neither incentivized nor penalized the purchase of cars emitting between
     130 and 160 grams of CO2. The rebate for conventional low-emissions vehicles went up as
     high as €1,000 (purchasers of electric vehicles were eligible to receive up to €5,000), while
     buyers of high-emissions cars were taxed as much as €2,600.

     The scheme proved to be very popular with the French public and was extremely successful.
     Sales of low-emissions vehicles jumped from 20% of the total at the end of 2007 to 32%
     in January of 2008. However, the scheme’s popularity somewhat mitigated its positive
     environmental impact. As the bonus-malus scheme was introduced without significant
     advance warning in November 2007, sales of more polluting vehicles jumped in December
     2007 before the new rules came into effect. Then, after the rebate provisions came into
     force, French consumers rushed to buy new cars, so that the total volume of automobile
     purchases rose by 13.4% between November 2007 and May 2008 — a far larger increase
     than could be accounted for by seasonal buying patterns. Since car buyers tended to favor
     makes that came in just under the low-emissions threshold, the average overall level of
     CO2 emissions per kilometer went down less than might have been expected. Moreover,
     because it ended up being far more popular than policymakers had anticipated, the bonus-
     malus scheme — instead of being revenue-neutral as conceived — ended up costing the
     French treasury €285 million in 2008.

     The unexpected popularity of the scheme — and the resulting attenuation of the scheme’s
     environmental effectiveness — is an indication that feebate systems can spur the desired
     change in behavior, but that such schemes must be calibrated carefully to achieve the
     looked-for impact. In the case of the French bonus-malus scheme, it seems likely that the
     rebate was too generous, while the threshold for low-emissions vehicles was set too high.
     Nevertheless, the long-term effects of the scheme are still to be determined, especially
     with regard to the response of manufacturers; a production shift in the long run to lower-
     emissions vehicles may more dramatically counteract the overall increase in fleet size seen
     to date.




30        1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                         3 CONTEXT
  Sources
  D’Haultfoeuille, X., Givord, P., & Boutin, X. (2013). The Environmental Effect of Green Taxation. Retrieved from
  http://www.crest.fr/ckfinder/userfiles/files/pageperso/xdhaultfoeuille/bonus_malus_final.pdf

  Royal Economic Society. (2014, August). Media Briefings — TAX INCENTIVES FOR LOW EMISSION CARS:
  Evidence of their environmental impact from France’s Bonus/Malus scheme. Retrieved from Royal Economic
  Society: http://www.res.org.uk/details/mediabrief/6514941/TAX-INCENTIVES-FOR-LOW-EMISSION-CARS-
  Evidence-of-their-environmental-impact-from.html




Tariff exemptions for resource-efficient products

•	 How does the incentive work?
  Countries impose import tariffs/duties on a wide range of products to protect domestic
  industries and to provide a source of government revenue. Therefore, one possibility for
  promoting the import of resource-efficient products is to grant exemptions to import tariffs
  for these products, so reducing their price. The measure is analogous to tax preferences, but
  applied to tariffs rather than taxes.

•	 How is the incentive typically applied?
  Tariff exemptions are applied through the tariff system by setting reduced tariff rates on
  resource-efficient products.

•	 What are the conditions for successful application?
  There is little published analysis on tariff exemptions for resource efficiency, with recent interest
  around international trade in energy-efficient products being focused on trade impacts of
  minimum energy performance standards (Ecofys et al., 2015). However, OECD (2005) suggests
  that eliminating tariffs on renewable energy technologies in developing countries could yield
  significant gains.




              4 DESIGN                                5 FOCUS                             6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             31
       While generally not publicized as tariff exemptions for resource efficiency, there is evidence
       that tariff reductions on resource-efficient products are being widely applied. For example,
       tariffs on light emitting diode (LED) lamps tend to be 5 percentage points or more lower than
       tariffs on halogen light bulbs in 65 countries (Pitney Bowes, no date). Consequently, there
       appear to be few barriers to successful application. The following circumstances may make
       successful application of tariff exemptions difficult:

       –	 Domestic industries face strong competitive pressure from international, resource-
          efficient products. Building a domestic resource-efficient industry is the stated reason for
          which Ukraine is planning to revoke reduced tariffs on energy-efficient products (Interfax
          Ukraine, 2015).
       –	 Tariff exemptions cause significant loss in government revenue.

     •	 How cost-effective is the incentive?
       Tariffs are a barrier to international trade. Reducing the overall levels of tariffs and other trade
       barriers may lead to increased gains from trade, and is a key objective of the World Trade
       Organization (WTO, no date). Leaving these potential gains aside, tariff exemptions (just
       as tax preferences and grants) can be effective in accelerating the uptake of the targeted
       technologies, but are, by themselves, not well suited to correcting environmental externalities.
       It should also be noted that only imported goods are affected by reduced tariffs. This may put
       domestically produced products at a disadvantage if these have previously been shielded from
       international competition through import tariffs on competing imported products.

     Grants

     •	 How does the incentive work?
       Grants are payments from a donor organization (such as a government) to a recipient
       organization or individual (Salamon & Elliott, 2002). As such, grants typically constitute one
       of the most direct types of subsidy. Their aim is to stimulate or support a particular type
       of activity, to which the availability of a grant payment is usually tied. The incentive works
       through the grant payment covering part or all of the cost of the desired activity. Therefore,
       pursuit of the desired activity increases as it becomes less costly for the grant recipients to
       undertake.




32           1 INTRODUCTION                        2 TYPES                           3 CONTEXT
•	 How is the incentive typically applied?
  Grants are one of the most widely used forms of subsidy. Given the breadth of the definition,
  a large variety of different grant types are used in public policy. Within the realm of resource
  efficiency, one of the most common targets for grants are energy-efficiency improving
  investments. Energy-efficiency grants exist in many countries, including all International Energy
  Agency (IEA) member states (IEA, 2016). Grants may be directed either at producers (for
  example, for investment in resource-efficient products or production techniques) or consumers
  of resource-efficient products (reducing the price of a product and, thereby, increasing
  demand).

  The timing and conditionality of a grant payment can vary from traditional upfront grants to
  results-based support over several years. Upfront grants also address the lack of availability of
  funding by reducing the required investment capital. Results-based grants aim to strengthen
  the exposure of the project initiators and only provide payments if certain milestones have
  been reached.

  Upfront grants can play an important role with regard to risk sharing during the high-risk early
  stage of project development or research and development (R&D) in new technologies. Grants
  can reduce the capital exposure of project initiators. Often, DFIs provide matching grants to
  reduce the exposure of developers. Such risk sharing in early stages of development will ensure
  demand for later project financing.

  Results-based grants are not necessarily paid over the full lifetime of a project, although this
  approach would certainly offer the highest level of results orientation. A “frontloading” of
  results-based grants can be recommended for various reasons including: 1) donors prefer to
  disburse committed funds within a reasonable timeframe rather than “park” them for up to
  20 years, 2) a frontloading will reduce overall financing costs, and 3) a frontloading can at
  least partially address the lack of availability of long-term funding (Frankfurt School of Finance
  & Management, 2016).




           4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             33
     •	 What are the conditions for successful application?
       The following conditions are required for an appropriate tax preference program (GTZ, CSCP,
       Wuppertal Institute, 2006; GreenMax Capital Advisors, 2009):
       –	 objectives clearly defined — good understanding of how a grant payment could address a
          particular barrier to resource efficiency
       –	 setting the right grant amount — little uptake/impact if it is set too low, low efficiency/
          windfall gains to recipients if it is set too high
       –	 setting the right scope — little impact if the number of eligible recipients is too low, too
          high a burden on government funds if the number of eligible recipients is too high
       –	 setting the right eligibility requirements — be aware of the trade-off between the
          administrative burden and ensuring that only effective measures are supported

     •	 How cost-effective is the incentive?
       Grants can be a cost-effective means for ensuring innovation and technology diffusion.
       However, by themselves, they are unlikely to be cost-effective as a mechanism for improving
       resource efficiency as they do not directly address the externalities from resource use (Duval,
       2008). Moreover, they may also create incentives for inefficiency should inefficient practices
       be supported while efficient practices are not. They may also reduce innovation and create
       incentives for fraud and corruption if actors’ incentives shift from receiving income through
       competitive provision of goods and services to receiving income from subsidies (GTZ, CSCP,
       Wuppertal Institute, 2006).

     Vouchers

     •	 How does the incentive work?
       Vouchers are a particular form of grant, and work by subsidizing the price of specific goods
       and services that meet the aims of the scheme. While only certain goods and services may be
       eligible under the scheme, the beneficiary of the voucher may have some flexibility over which
       of these goods or services they wish to buy with the voucher.

       One of the benefits of a voucher scheme is that eligibility can be ascertained prior to the actual
       transaction (that is, only eligible beneficiaries are given a voucher). This may have advantages
       in terms of reducing the administrative burden for eligible buyers and sellers of the subsidized
       good or service. Moreover, it can be a transparent system for disbursing available grants when
       the total number of available grants is capped (such as through a limited program budget).



34          1 INTRODUCTION                        2 TYPES                         3 CONTEXT
•	 How is the incentive typically applied?
  Issuing vouchers as a way of improving resource efficiency has not been in widespread
  use. One example from the United Kingdom is the provision of vouchers to households for
  undertaking energy-saving home improvements as part of the Green Deal Home Improvement
  Fund (GOV.UK, 2015). Under the scheme, households could apply for a voucher that could
  then be redeemed as partial payment for a specific energy-saving investment (for example,
  solid wall insulation).

  Vouchers can be a helpful tool for disbursing large numbers of small grant sums. For
  example, utilities in Austria provide vouchers to customers to help with the purchase of
  energy-efficient household goods and boilers (Fair Energy Partner, no date).

•	 What are the conditions for successful application?
  The same conditions as for grants apply (see above). In addition, voucher programs should
  be well designed and fraud-resistant (for example, through personalization and electronic
  verification of vouchers).

•	 How cost-effective is the incentive?
  The cost-effectiveness of vouchers reflects that of grants more widely (see above). As is the
  case for other “consumer-side” grant schemes, vouchers may encourage competition in
  the field by allowing grant recipients a free choice of suppliers.

Subsidy reform

•	 How does the incentive work?
  Subsidy reform involves phasing out subsidies that incentivize inefficient resource use (such
  as fossil-fuel subsidies), and introducing alternative incentives that encourage a more efficient
  use of resources. These alternative incentives would have the same primary objective as
  the original subsidy (such as energy security), but would deliver the objectives using more
  resource-efficient practices (such as renewable energy subsidies). On a global scale, there is
  a large number of subsidies, especially in the field of energy, which act counter to resource-
  efficiency objectives (International Monetary Fund (IMF), 2013). In addition to encouraging
  more efficient resource use, subsidy reform can help governments address fiscal imbalances.




           4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY            35
     •	 How is the incentive typically applied?
       When the production and consumption of a natural resource is subsidized (directly or indirectly),
       efficient use of the resource is disincentivized as the subsidized price of the resource no longer
       reflects its scarcity. In addition, using the resource may be associated with negative externalities
       so that its use is inefficiently high even at market prices. By implementing subsidy reform,
       resource use is adjusted to more efficient levels while the strain on public funds is reduced.

     •	 What are the conditions for successful application?
       Subsidy reforms can be politically difficult to implement. Industries benefitting from subsidies
       tend to develop strong connections to governments and regulatory agencies. The effects of
       energy subsidy reforms are likely to impact immediately upon a majority of the electorate.
       Therefore, subsidy reforms require detailed planning.

       A number of success factors have been identified (World Bank, 2012; IMF, 2013):
       –	 a comprehensive energy sector reform plan with clear long-term objectives
       –	 an extensive communications strategy with announcement of one-off compensatory measures
       –	 appropriately phased price increases
       –	 introduction of credible targeted measures to protect the poor
       –	 institutional reforms that depoliticize energy pricing, such as the introduction of automatic
          pricing mechanisms

     •	 How cost-effective is the incentive?
       Subsidy reform targets inefficient allocation in resource markets by removing price distortions.
       Therefore, successful subsidy reform is, by definition, cost-effective.




36           1 INTRODUCTION                         2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
Case study 3: Ghana — fuel subsidy reform
Ghana has tried several times to reform fuel subsidies. Fuel subsidies were not just draining
the treasury, they were also spilling over into and threatening the soundness of the financial
sector. The state-owned Ghana Commercial Bank was extending loans to prop up the
loss-making activities of the state-owned Tema Oil Refinery, which had a monopoly on the
import and processing of refined oil products. However, these loans were essentially non-
performing loans and, as the size of these loans grew, the solvency of the state bank itself
came under threat.

In 2001, the government established an automatic pricing mechanism that tied Ghanaian
fuel prices to the international market price — and fuel prices rose by 91%. To lessen the
impact of this increase on Ghanaian households, cross-subsidies on kerosene and liquefied
petroleum gas (LPG) were also introduced. However, despite these mitigating measures, the
government was forced to abandon the automatic pricing mechanism in the face of popular
opposition, rising global oil prices, and a depreciating currency. Nonetheless, the financial
situation remained precarious, and the government reintroduced the pricing mechanism
in 2003. Fuel prices again rose by 90%. In turn, this caused real incomes to fall by 8.5%
despite a new round of cross-subsidies. Not surprisingly, the political will to stick with the
increase wavered in the run-up to the 2004 national elections, and the increase was once
again abandoned. By 2004, the financial cost of the subsidies to the Tema Oil Refinery
reached 2.2% of gross domestic product (GDP).

By 2005, the government was ready to try again. However, having learned from the previous
attempts, it took a number of measures to ensure that this round of reform would have a
greater chance of success. A poverty and social impact assessment was commissioned to
understand more clearly how higher fuel prices would affect different segments of society.
This assessment found that the impact of a fuel increase would fall disproportionately on the
poor. With this information in hand, the government launched a concerted media campaign
to explain the rationale for the fuel subsidy reform and try to win over the public. One of
the key messages of this campaign was that part of the savings from removing the subsidy
could fund other types of social spending. Aside from cross-subsidies on kerosene and LPG,
additional measures taken in conjunction with the 2005 reform included:
•	 a ceiling on public transport fares
•	 an increase in the minimum wage
•	 the removal of tuition fees for state primary and secondary schools


         4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                       6 BIBLIOGRAPHY          37
     In addition, the 2005 reform created an independent governing body, the National
     Petroleum Authority (NPA), to administer the pricing mechanism. The NPA comprised
     representatives from government, trade unions, the private sector and non-governmental
     organizations (NGOs). As a result, the government was not seen to have a controlling hand
     in setting fuel prices.

     While initially successful, the impact of the 2005 reform was reduced by flagging political
     will. The pricing mechanism was abandoned between May 2008 and November 2008
     following a rapid rise in world oil prices. During the 2009 national elections, fuel prices were
     again an issue, with the winning party running on a platform to reduce energy costs.

     While Ghana’s push to reform fuel subsidies was motivated mainly by budgetary concerns,
     removing subsidies has significant climate implications. Eliminating fuel subsidies worldwide
     would reduce GHG emissions by 5%. As Ghana’s experience shows, political will and
     effective communications are key factors in determining the success or failure of subsidy
     reform.




     Sources
     Clements et al. (2013). Case Studies on Energy Subsidy Reform: Lessons and Implications. Washington DC:
     International Monetary Fund.

     Clements et al. (2013). Energy Subsidy Reform: Lessons and Implications. Washington DC: International
     Monetary Fund.

     Crawford, G. (2012). Ghana’s Fossil Fuel Subsidy Reform — Case Study 09. Institute of Development Studies (IDS).

     Laan, T., Beaton, C., & Presta, B. (2010). Strategies for Reforming Fossil Fuel Subsidies: Practical lessons from
     Ghana, France and Senegal. Manitoba: International Institute for Sustainable Development.

     Whitley, S., & van der Burg, L. (2015). Fossil fuel subsidy reform in sub-Saharan Africa: from rhetoric to reality.
     London & Washington: New Climate Economy. Retrieved from http://newclimateeconomy.report/misc/working-
     papers




38           1 INTRODUCTION                                2 TYPES                                 3 CONTEXT
Green finance (loans and associated instruments)

•	 How does the incentive work?
  Loans can be provided to business or countries to support resource-efficiency investments.
  Loans will be repaid to the lending institution plus any agreed level of interest. An incentive
  of this type can provide loans at favorable terms to businesses pursuing resource-efficiency
  projects or to support the provision of loans where they were previously unavailable.

  Concessional loans
  Concessional loans are offered on substantially more favorable terms, such as reduced rates
  of interest or a grace period, than are available in the market. This lowers the overall costs
  associated with resource-efficiency investments. These loans can have a significant impact and
  can be included with other approaches (Amin, Dimsdale, & Jaramillo, 2014).

  Underwriting
  Underwriting offered by the government/funder can provide project sponsors and
  intermediaries, such as banks, with a form of insurance when they offer loans to smaller
  companies. Government and intermediaries can agree on allocations of different types of risk
  by using appropriate terms and conditions, such as limits on liability and restrictions of loans
  to certain types of counterparties. The government and the intermediaries can select the kinds
  of risks for which they will take responsibility and then they can agree on a price for doing so.
  More generally, underwriting allows risks to be spread across a wider group of counterparties
  and, when offered across a number of projects, it allows risks and support services to be
  aggregated. With aggregation comes specialization and underwriting markets can then be
  used to offer guarantees against very specific types of risk.

  Loan guarantees are similar to underwriting. They are an obligation on the guarantor to
  assume the debt obligation of a borrower if that borrower defaults. Loan guarantees can cover
  the full amount of debt outstanding or apply only for a defined portion. Loan guarantees are
  used in very specific cases when a private-sector lender can provide the required capital, but
  does not want to absorb the credit risk.




           4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY            39
       Green lines of credit
       A line of credit is an agreement between the intermediary (such as a bank) and the
       government/funder that underwriting will be put in place if the intermediary’s loan portfolio
       meets specific requirements. Green lines of credit are a way that intermediaries can obtain
       insurance to financially back any loans that align with resource-efficiency objectives. The
       advantage can be that credit is advanced only when needed and that government funds can
       be used for other purposes (the funds are not earmarked or ring-fenced) until the credit line
       is used. The structure of charges is likely to include an arrangement, such as higher payments,
       that will give the financial institution an incentive to complete loans.

     •	 How is the incentive typically applied?
       Loans and the associated incentives generally use existing domestic finance institutions (such
       as banks, national bank, or funds) and can build up the local financial sector’s skillset in
       resource efficiency.

       Concessional loans
       Concessional loans are often similar in structure to typical commercial loans. The subsidy is
       provided using government or DFI funds and may be implemented directly by the government
       or through an intermediary, such as a bank. In practice, the design of the scheme will depend
       on its objective, available government funds, and details such as the target number of
       companies in the sector being subsidized.

       The government or intermediaries may be able to offer companies variants of the same
       subsidy with a limited set of standardized (mutually exclusive) options, such as:
       –	 an interest rate below market rate
       –	 a longer repayment rate
       –	 a set of lower requirements for collateral
       –	 flexible scheduling of interest payments

       Underwriting
       By offering underwriting, the government participates in what is a wholesale market for risk.
       The government has a choice over how tightly to define the terms it offers to intermediaries.
       The more tightly defined the terms are, the less flexibility the intermediary will have in the
       offers it makes to final resource-using companies in the retail market for risk, but the more




40          1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                         3 CONTEXT
  certain the government will be that the underwriting is being used for the intended specific
  purposes. The more loosely defined the terms are, the more the underwriting offered will be
  valuable to the intermediary as a flexible form of credit that can be deployed across a wider
  range of retail products. The value of that flexibility may enable the intermediary to charge
  lower fees to the government.

  Green lines of credit
  Green lines of credit are offered to local financial institutions by national development banks
  or DFIs and international finance institutions (IFIs) for a particular purpose at concessional rates
  (Amin, Dimsdale, & Jaramillo, 2014). DFIs/IFIs can lend to the local financial intermediary for
  the purpose of on-lending to green projects. Such loans can also help to reduce refinancing
  costs and, consequently, financing costs for the ultimate borrower. This helps local financial
  institutions develop expertise in resource efficiency. On-lending is of particular interest when it
  comes to end-customer/household finance. Then, local operations and understanding of the
  market are required to manage a high number of ultimate borrowers.

•	 What are the conditions for successful application?
  The following conditions are necessary for a scheme using financial markets:
  –	 coherent regulatory and policy environment
  –	 effective financial institutions
  –	 matching funds are available
  –	 administrative conditions are:
     -	 simplified and standardized
     -	 well documented with lists of eligible materials and equipment provided
     -	 well marketed
     -	 that monitoring procedures are well established
  –	 there is collaboration between the public and private sector
  –	 high-quality investments are on offer

•	 How cost-effective is the incentive?
  The cost-effectiveness of financial instruments cannot be assessed in general terms and
  depends on the calibration of the specific financial instrument.




           4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY              41
     Case study 4: Tunisia — green financing for solar water heaters

     Tunisia enjoys high levels of solar irradiance, making solar power an abundant and
     potentially attractive source of renewable energy for domestic needs. For example, it is
     estimated that solar power could supply up to 80% of the country’s residential hot water
     needs. However, until the early 2000s, almost 80% of these needs were supplied by
     imported LPG. Early efforts to promote solar water heating (SWH) were hampered by a
     number of factors including market-distorting fossil-fuel subsidies, weak financing channels,
     and the newness of the technology, and the underlying market and supply chain for it.

     In 2005, the Tunisian National Agency for Energy Conservation (ANME) and the state
     electrical utility, the Tunisian Company of Electricity and Gas (STEG) launched Program
     Prosol (Prosol) to jumpstart the spread of SWH technology. Financial and technical support
     for Prosol came from the Italian Ministry of Environment, Land and Sea (MATTM) and from
     UNEP. Prosol drew on lessons learned from Tunisia’s previous attempts at promoting SWH
     technology.

     First, within a few months of the program’s launch, the government introduced into law
     a 20% capital cost subsidy for residential SWH. This subsidy, which was funded with the
     support of MATTM, aimed to counterbalance the existing LPG subsidies that lessened the
     financial attractiveness of SWH, and marked the first time that subsidies were applied to
     renewable energy technologies.

     Second, STEG took on the role as debt servicer and guarantor for SWH loans, thereby
     lowering the risk for commercial banks and stimulated their interest in, and capacity to
     award, renewable energy loans. STEG conducted credit checks, processed paperwork,
     and enforced repayment terms by suspending electricity and gas services to defaulting
     borrowers. In addition, Prosol allowed the banks to offer very favorable lending terms.
     These included a temporary interest rate subsidy funded by UNEP (the subsidy was phased
     out after 18 months), a reduction in interest rates from 12% to 6%, and an extension in the
     repayment term from 3 years to 5 years. Because of such measures, loan default rates under
     Prosol were very low.




42        1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                         3 CONTEXT
Third, Prosol introduced an accreditation system for suppliers, installers, and the technology
itself. This accreditation system helped build consumer confidence in the quality of the solar
water heaters and in the reliability of the after-sales maintenance offered by installers.

Finally, in 2006, the government supported Prosol with a number of decrees maintaining
a VAT exemption for residential SWH and bringing down customs duties to 10% — the
lowest rate allowed by law.

To date, Prosol has overseen the installation of 119,000 systems. The program has also
benefited the government’s bottom line — the move from LPG to SWH has reduced the
cost of fossil-fuel subsidies and is expected to save $101 million over the SWH lifespan. The
SWH systems installed under Prosol are also projected to reduce CO2 emissions by 715,000
metric tonnes over the SWH lifespan. In the longer term, the application of a double subsidy
is not an ideal situation, and it remains to be seen if the government of Tunisia will find it
effective to subsidize LPG and SWH technologies.




Sources
Polycarp, C., Brown, L., & Fu-Bertaux, X. (2014). Mobilizing Climate Investment — Annex 3 — Solar Waters in
Tunisia. Washington: World Resources Institute.

Trabacchi, C., Micale, V., & Frisari, G. (2012). San Giorgio Group Case Study. Climate Policy Initiative.




            4 DESIGN                                  5 FOCUS                              6 BIBLIOGRAPHY     43
     Case study 5: Bangladesh — solar home systems

     Bangladesh has identified solar home systems (SHS) as a technology that can help the country
     reach its goal of providing electricity to all households by 2021. While this goal is ambitious
     in itself, reaching rural households not connected to existing power grids — about two thirds
     of people in the countryside lack electricity — presents an especially daunting task. Each SHS
     consists of a rooftop solar module connected to an in-home control panel and battery box that
     can power lamps, mobile chargers, and small appliances — the number depends on the size and
     capacity of the unit. Since they rely on rooftop installation rather than on power grid generation,
     SHS are seen as a viable way to take advantage of the country’s average of more than 200 sunny
     days a year to generate a sustainable power supply for village households.

     In 2003, to encourage the distribution of SHS, Bangladesh put in place a program that combines
     purchase grants and state refinancing of purchase credit. This program was later modified by
     an adjustment of import tariffs on SHS components and parts. Under this program, the state-
     owned Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) has contracted with 47 partner
     organizations (POs) with grassroots networks in rural areas, typically NGOs or microfinance
     institutions. In turn, POs are responsible for selling, installing, and providing maintenance services
     for the SHS. The POs select SHS units from a list of IDCOL-approved suppliers, which buy the units
     from IDCOL at a price that has been partly subsidized (about $20 of the approximate unit cost of
     $400) by buy-down grants from donors. POs offer purchase financing to the customer at rates
     of between 12% and 15%, but can then obtain IDCOL concessional refinancing of up to 80%
     of the loan amount at preferential rates of between 6% and 9%. At the same time, since many
     SHS were assembled in Bangladesh using components imported from China, the government
     later exempted solar panel imports from customs duty. As a result, the price of batteries and
     accessories were drastically reduced, and this helped keep the cost of SHS units down.

     By 2014, more than 3.5 million SHS had been installed under the program, providing electricity
     to over 16 million Bangladeshis, mainly in the countryside. While the SHS program has been
     a great success, there is rising opposition to the current tariff treatment of imported solar
     components, as Bangladeshi manufacturers have claimed that they are able to meet the national
     demand for SHS parts and that they are harmed by the customs duty exemption for imported
     solar panels.




44         1 INTRODUCTION                          2 TYPES                           3 CONTEXT
   Sources
   CDKN3 Asia. (2011, July 6). FEATURE: Explosion of solar power in Bangladesh. Retrieved from CDKN: http://cdkn.
   org/2011/07/explosion-of-solar-power-in-Bangladesh/?loclang=en_gb

   Elahi, R., Rysankova, D., Sadeque, Z., & Soni, R. (2014). Scaling up access to electricity: the case of Bangladesh.
   Live wire knowledge note series no. 2014/21. Retrieved from http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
   en/2014/06/19669152/scaling-up-access-electricity-case-bangladesh

   Energising Development. (n.d.). Bangladesh. Retrieved from Energising Development: http://endev.info/content/
   Bangladesh

   Haque, N. (2013). IDCOL Solar Home System Program. Rural Energy Access: A Nexus approach to Sustainable
   Development and Poverty Eradication. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

   Kabir, I. (2015, May 17). The potential of solar home systems in Bangladesh. Retrieved from The Daily Star: http://
   www.thedailystar.net/op-ed/the-potential-solar-home-systems-bangladesh-82837

   Khandker, S. R., Samad, H. A., Sadeque, Z. K., Asaduzzaman, M., Yunnus, M., & Hague, A. E. (n.d.). Bangladesh
   rural electrification and renewable energy development — Solar Homes System (SHS) Project : lessons learned.
   Retrieved from http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/09/25096025/bangladesh-rural-electrification-
   renewable-energy-development-solar-homes-system-shs-project-lessons-learned

   Marro, P., & Bertsch, N. (2015). Making renewable energy a success in Bangladesh: Getting the business model
   right. ADB South Asia Working Paper Series No.41.




Trading schemes

•	 How does the incentive work?
   Trading schemes have mostly been used as an incentive for pollutant and CO2 emission
   control, but can, in principle, be applied as an incentive for limiting natural resource
   consumption or controlling access to land (GTZ, CSCP, Wuppertal Institute, 2006). Trading
   schemes involve governments defining an upper limit to a given activity (for example, emitting
   CO2) in a given region over a given time period and issuing certificates/permits that allow
   holders to pursue the activity up to the given maximum. Certificates can be auctioned off or
   pre-allocated to market participants (for example, based on their previous emission levels).



3	 Climate and Development Knowledge Network.



               4 DESIGN                                 5 FOCUS                              6 BIBLIOGRAPHY              45
       Market participants may freely buy and sell certificates to each other. Thus, the optimum
       strategy for participants is to reduce the given activity to the point where it is cheaper than
       buying certificates. Conversely, participants will buy certificates where reducing the activity
       would be more expensive than the cost of the certificate.

       Trading schemes are broadly similar to taxes. Both associate a given activity with a uniform
       price, leading to efficient and low-cost emission reductions (Parry & Pizer, 2007). However,
       outcomes can vary in practice. Trading schemes set a limit on the quantity of an activity,
       allowing certificate prices to fluctuate when demand changes, while taxation schemes impose
       a price on an activity and allow quantity to fluctuate when demand changes.

     •	 What are the conditions for successful application?
       –	 Stakeholder readiness: key stakeholders are generally familiar with taxes, but they may
          be unfamiliar with the requirements of a trading scheme. Such things as extensive capacity
          building and trials may be required prior to implementation.
       –	 Monitoring: to ensure compliance, robust monitoring, reporting, and verification
          procedures are required.
       –	 Participant size: large numbers of participants help establish a liquid market for
          allowances. The efficiency of the market can be compromised if some actors have
          monopoly power and strategically manipulate prices. Some researchers found evidence
          of price manipulation in the early phases of the EU Emissions Trading System (ETS)
          (Hintermann, 2015).
       –	 Institutional capacity: all of the above require functioning institutions including rule of
          law, financial systems, government, and judiciary systems (GTZ, CSCP, Wuppertal Institute,
          2006).

     •	 How is the incentive typically applied?
       Typically, the scheme is applied to defined sectors of the economy (such as the energy industry
       and heavy industries under the EU ETS). Companies in these sectors are required to purchase
       allowances for each unit of emissions they generate. This incentivizes them to reduce the
       number of units they emit. The incentive is typically not applied to individuals or SMEs as
       information requirements for participation can be substantial and costly.




46           1 INTRODUCTION                        2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
   The OECD database on instruments used for environmental policy (OECD, 2014) presents
   examples of trading schemes used in:
   –	 water abstraction rights
   –	CO2 and other emissions that impact water and air quality
   –	 fishing quotas
   –	 water quality (nitrogen emissions)
   –	 development rights

•	 How cost-effective is the incentive?
   From a theoretical perspective, emissions trading is a cost-minimizing way of achieving a
   defined level of emissions reductions. Therefore, it is well suited for correcting externalities (as
   is taxation of emissions). In practice, imperfect information for market actors has led to high
   price volatility in the EU ETS. This uncertainty is likely to increase costs for scheme participants
   compared to taxes where levels are more predictable. Another potential issue is strategic
   behavior by actors with monopoly power (Hintermann, 2015).



Combining incentive schemes with other policies

Incentives can be applied in isolation, but are frequently applied in combination with other policy
instruments. Indeed, a complementary mix of instruments can often provide a more effective
approach to achieving a given environmental outcome. For example, introducing a new resource
tax on businesses without developing or ensuring the capacity of business to respond or providing
awareness of exactly who will be subject to the tax will severely undermine the environmental
outcomes. Equally, unless the tax is very high, it is unlikely to stimulate significant investments in
resource efficiency on its own (Sorrell, et al., 2003)4.

The UK Environment Agency (2009) suggests that the optimum combination of instruments
would involve incentives being applied alongside regulatory measures, and in combination with
capacity building and awareness-raising activities.




4	 Taxation measures can also benefit other policy measures that support resource-efficiency improvements more explicitly. In
   theory, the revenues from taxation can also be hypothecated and made available for resource efficiency. However, in practice,
   hypothecation is not particularly popular among fiscal policymakers.



                4 DESIGN                                   5 FOCUS                                6 BIBLIOGRAPHY                   47
     The UK Environment Agency (2009) provides a checklist of actions to complete when combining
     policy actions:
     •	 Raising awareness among key groups — what is the scale of the issue and what problems
        are faced?
     •	 Building capacities to change and comply — stakeholders need the capacity to be able to
        respond to incentives and any other regulatory instrument adopted.
     •	 All instruments and approaches have the same environmental objective — care must
        be taken to ensure that all instruments have objectives and no conflicts are in place.
     •	 Regulations should support rather than contradict — stakeholder engagement should be
        included at each stage to ensure support.
     •	 Incentives should reward change and compliance — enforcement action should reflect
        the scale of the environmental problem experienced.
     •	 Policies, instruments, and approaches should be sequenced — policies and initiatives
        should be sequenced to reflect the desirability of the instrument. Softer options should be
        introduced first (such as awareness raising and capacity building) followed by the introduction
        of incentives and regulation to ensure environment objectives are met.
     •	 Monitoring and evaluation — an effective monitoring and evaluation program must be in
        place to monitor the effectiveness and costs of the policies.

     The UK Environment Agency (2009) also recommends that, before implementing a program, a log-
     frame matrix should be used that can identify the mechanisms by which the program will reach its
     stated aims and the risks. More details are provided in the log-frame handbook (World Bank, 2005).

     All other things being equal, decision makers should favor policies that are complementary and try
     to avoid those that overlap. A number of policies appear always to interact in a complementary
     way with others — taxation, standards and norms, and information. There is a relatively small
     number of policy instrument combinations that can deliver less than the sum of their parts — and
     these largely feature subsidies and instruments providing access to capital.

     However, in many cases, policy instruments address several goals and are used to mitigate unintended
     effects of another policy instrument (for example, financial instruments can be used to support
     businesses to comply with minimum efficiency standards). In other words, it may be legitimate to
     combine policy instrument types even if the overall effect on resource efficiency is diminishing. Hence,
     the goal is not to always avoid such combinations where the overall effect is diminishing, but to assess
     in which circumstances the interaction between policy instruments is acceptable or unacceptable
     (Sorrell, et al., 2003).


48            1 INTRODUCTION                         2 TYPES                           3 CONTEXT
Challenges faced by governments in
introducing incentive schemes

The following section describes the issues faced by governments when introducing incentive
policies. Therefore, it presents some of the key considerations for practitioners to discuss and
explore with governments when establishing a resource-efficiency scheme.

Political factors
Business and investors must be assured that any incentive scheme is operating in a manner
that is free from corruption and political manipulation of the allocation of funds. Without such
assurances, confidence in investments will be low and this will impact environmental outcomes.

Political will is vital to ensure incentives are introduced at a significant level to influence
behavior. Policies to address resource efficiency will favor the “resource efficient” over “resource
inefficient” and will, therefore, be met with some resistance from vested interests. A careful
political calculation must be made about how to ensure these vested interests do not hinder any
move towards resource efficiency. Any approach must be founded on stakeholder engagement.

As well as extensive stakeholder engagement, governments must signal their commitment to a
resource program by enacting strong plans and strategies, and enshrining these in law where possible.

Ineffective allocation of public resources
Without thorough assessment of the cost-effectiveness of incentives and ongoing monitoring,
public funds could be supporting initiatives that offer poor value for money. Therefore, objective
analysis must be undertaken to ensure that supporting an incentive is the best use of funds and is
effective in achieving the desired outcomes.

Distortions to competition
Incentives can distort markets and have an impact on competition. With incentives that promote
resource efficiency, distorting the market in favor of resource-efficient companies is a central
objective. Incentives are introducing social values into existing markets and moving resource
allocation towards a more socially optimal allocation — the more efficient companies will have a
competitive advantage.



            4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                       6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             49
     Taking action on resource efficiency, such as implementing an environmental tax, may place
     domestic companies at a disadvantage in international markets. For this reason, it is often
     difficult politically to introduce taxes on resource use or provide exemptions to heavy users of
     resources. This need not be the case; taxes on economic “bads” (resource use) could utilize
     double dividends to reduce taxes on economic goods (income or energy output), although the
     application of this idea is not well tested or grounded in theory.

     Administrative inefficiencies
     Overly bureaucratic approaches add significant costs to doing business during the incentive
     application process, can undermine the attractiveness of incentives, and add significant costs to
     government to ensure compliance.


       Further reading
       Amin, A.-L., Dimsdale, T., & Jaramillo, M. (2014). Designing smart green finance incentive schemes. London: E3G.

       Carbon Trust. (2015). The Enhanced Capital Allowance scheme for energy savings schemes. Carbon Trust.
       Retrieved from https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/421006/ECA272_
       Capital_Allowance_v7_April_2015.pdf

       Duval, R. (2008). “A Taxonomy of Instruments to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions and their Interactions”,
       OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 636, OECD Publishing, Paris.

       Ecorys. (2012). The role of market-based instruments in achieving a resource efficient economy. Report for the
       European Commission. Retrieved from http://ec.europa.eu/environment/enveco/taxation/pdf/role_marketbased.pdf

       Environment Agency. (2009). Guidance on combining policy instruments. Bristol: Environment Agency.

       Goulder, L. H., & Parry, I. W. (2008). Instrument Choice in Environmental Policy. RFF Discussion Paper No. 08-07.

       Greene, J., & Braathen, N. (2014). Tax Preferences for Environmental Goals: Use Limitations and
       Preferred Practices. OECD Environment Working Papers. OECD Publishing. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.
       org/10.1787/5jxwrr4hkd6l-en

       GTZ, CSCP, Wuppertal Institute. (2006). Policy Instruments for Resource Efficiency: Towards Sustainable
       Consumption and Production. Retrieved from http://www.scp-centre.org/fileadmin/content/files/publications/
       GTZ-CSCP-PolicyInstrumentsResourceEfficiency.pdf

       Hintermann, B. (2015). “Market power in emission permit markets: Theory and evidence from the EU ETS.”
       Environmental and Resource Economics (2015): 1-24.




50            1 INTRODUCTION                               2 TYPES                                3 CONTEXT
IEA. (2016). Energy Efficiency Policies and Measures Database. Retrieved from
http://www.iea.org/policiesandmeasures/energyefficiency/

IMF. (2013). ENERGY SUBSIDY REFORM: LESSONS AND IMPLICATIONS. Retrieved from
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2013/012813.pdf

OECD. (2005). Liberalisation of Trade in Renewable-Energy Products and Associated Goods: Charcoal, Solar
Photovoltaic Systems, and Wind Pumps and Turbines. OECD Trade and Environment Working Paper No. 2005-07.
Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org/trade/envtrade/35842415.pdf

OECD. (2010). Taxation, Innovation and the Environment. Paris: OECD.

OECD. (2014, March 26). Database on instruments used for environmental policy. Retrieved from OECD: http://
www2.oecd.org/ecoinst/queries/Default.aspx

Parry, W., & Pizer, A. (2007). Emissions Trading versus CO2 Taxes versus Standards. RFF Issue Brief 5. Retrieved
from http://www.rff.org/files/sharepoint/WorkImages/Download/CPF_7_IssueBrief_5.pdf

Rosenow, J., Fawcett, T., Eyre, N., & Oikonomou, V. (Forthcoming). Energy Efficiency and the policy mix. Building
Research & Information.

Salamon, L. M., & Elliott, O. V. (2002). The Tools of Government: A Guide to the New Governance. Oxford
University Press.

Sorrell, S., Smith, A., Betz, R., Walz, R., Boemare, C., Quirion, P., Pilinis, C. (2003). Interaction in EU Climate Policy.
Sussex: SPRU

World Bank. (2012). Implementing Energy Subsidy Reforms: An Overview of the Key Issues. Retrieved from
http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/1813-9450-6122




             4 DESIGN                                   5 FOCUS                                6 BIBLIOGRAPHY                 51
                      MODULE 2
            Application of Incentive Scheme




52   1 INTRODUCTION      2 TYPES        3 CONTEXT
Figure 1 is a schematic that takes the reader through a suggested order of tasks for implementing
an incentive as set out in Chapters 3 and 4. This order can be adapted to the particular
circumstances in the country and is only intended as a guide.



FIGURE 1          Implementing an incentive

                                                      Meeting the Government

                                                    Establish working relationship

                                                    Plan stakeholder engagement

                  REWG                                Conduct diagnostic study                  Stakeholder engagement

                                              Current levels of resource efﬁciency

                                                            Prioritization

                         Market context         Regulatory institutional content         Barriers and drivers

                                                            Prioritization

                                                       Selecting incentive type

                                                           Target resource

            Target industry/tech/life cycle stage        Regulatory context              Barriers and drivers

                                                          Favored incentive

                                                     Design and implementation

                     Preparatory steps                 Level, scale of incentive     Institutional delivery mechanism

                     Policy assessment                  Compliance and M&V               Accompanying activities


                                                                 Pilot

                                                      Communication strategy

                                 Developing and improving administration and management

                                                          Process mapping

                                              Process purpose and responsibilities

                                                     Identifying reform options

                                                     Monitoring and evaluation




            4 DESIGN                                          5 FOCUS                                   6 BIBLIOGRAPHY   53
                      3
           UNDERSTANDING THE CONTEXT




54   1 INTRODUCTION   2 TYPES    3 CONTEXT
Introduction	57
Meeting the government	                          57
Conducting a diagnostic study	                   61




     4 DESIGN             5 FOCUS   6 BIBLIOGRAPHY    55
     What the reader will get from this chapter:

     • guidance on how to establish the working
       and stakeholder relationships that will be
       used throughout the introduction of a
       program

     •	an understanding of the country context
       in terms of resource use, regulation, and
       market

     •	guidance on how to determine priorities
      for the incentive




56   1 INTRODUCTION       2 TYPES         3 CONTEXT
Introduction

This handbook now turns to taking practitioners through the required steps in introducing an
incentive scheme for resource efficiency. The steps outlined in this chapter draw heavily on the
approach outlined in “Climate Competitive Industries: A Practitioner’s Field Guide” (World Bank,
2016), but departs in some areas to reflect the focus on incentives in this handbook.

The focus of this chapter is understanding the context into which the incentive will be introduced.



Meeting the government

The first stage of the project will be an inception meeting between the practitioner and the
government ministry responsible for the resource-efficiency program. The aim of the meeting is
to establish a working relationship and to plan the stakeholder engagement activities required
as part of the development of the incentive. Plans should also be discussed for conducting a
diagnostic study.

FIGURE 2          Establishing working and stakeholder relationships


                                      Meeting the Government

                                    Establish working relationship


                                    Plan stakeholder engagement


           REWG                       Conduct diagnostic study            Stakeholder engagement




            4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                      6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             57
     Establish working relationship
     Requirement and expected output
     The main outcome of the initial meeting will be the objectives of an incentive scheme, any
     resources or industries of focus, and establishing a resource efficiency working group (REWG) that
     will guide development of the incentive. By establishing clear objectives and a government-led
     stakeholder group, actions can be planned in advance, reducing the time and effort involved.

     Application
     Use this initial meeting to create a flexible, but clear, work plan including the next steps, task
     allocation, and plan for stakeholder engagement.

     There are also a number of items to be taken away from the initial meeting. Therefore, it is
     essential to plan what are the desired outcomes of the meeting in advance. At this stage, the
     following preliminary details are essential:

     1.	 The goal — including preliminary resources, industries, and areas of focus.
     2.	Funding — source of funding and, if applicable, scale and mode of possible contribution of
         the World Bank and other donors.
     3.	 Information and data — existing sources of data and means of collecting this data.
     4.	 Stakeholders — determining who the key stakeholders are in the public and private sectors.
     5.	Ambition — what is the scale of the ambition and is there a preliminary understanding of the
         intended outputs of an incentive scheme?
     6.	Timeline — is the project particularly time sensitive and what is the intended timeline?
     7.	 Communication channels — how will the government ministry communicate with the
         practitioner and establish communication channels and frequency of communication?
     8.	 Establish an REWG — the REWG will be the key decision-making panel from the government
         side. It will be the first port of call for in-country context, data and other relevant details. It
         should be made up of important members of the key government departments that have
         a stake in tackling resource efficiency and the development of the incentive (environment,
         business, and industry ministries). The REWG will review the evidence to determine whether
         an incentive is the right approach and, if so, direct the development and implementation of
         the incentive. Varying levels of seniority should be included so that the REWG not only covers
         decision approval (from senior civil servants), but also research support and engaging with
         stakeholders.




58            1 INTRODUCTION                         2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
Plan stakeholder engagement
Requirement and expected output
The full implementation of a scheme involving incentives will require the involvement of a
range of parties. Including the views and support of these parties at the relevant time will help
ensure that the scheme is robust and will increase the chance of smooth development without
surprises. In general, the willingness of all key parties must be established early, but details can be
developed later.

Stakeholder engagement should be an ongoing process that starts in the early phases of
the project, continues throughout the incentive development phase, and then into the
implementation phase. The aim of consultation at this early phase of the incentive design is to
help understand the driving forces of resource efficiency and the barriers to implementation, and
to identify the factors that will be critical to the program’s success. This will allow a practitioner to
develop transparent, relevant, and achievable objectives.

Application
The following stages may be involved in the development of the stakeholder engagement plan.
They should be followed throughout the development of an incentive at intervals determined by
the REWG. It is good practice for the engagement plan to be developed and undertaken with the
support of the REWG.




             4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                         6 BIBLIOGRAPHY              59
     FIGURE 3             Stakeholder engagement process


                                • Building on the preliminary list of stakeholders identiﬁed at the initial meeting
             Identify             with the government ministry, all key public sector, private sector, and community
           stakeholders           stakeholders should be identiﬁed.

                                • Stakeholders should be mapped using matrices to determine interest and
                                  inﬂuence of stakeholders over any incentive.
               Map              • What does your (the practitioner’s) team add to the capacity that is in the
           stakeholders           country? How do the goals of the stakeholders that are operating in country
                                  overlap with your own?

                                • It is assumed in this guidance that a government will lead the implementation
                                  of the incentive scheme. Therefore, governments are essential stakeholders.
                                  Prominent ministries should be seen to lend their backing to a scheme.
               Get
                                • Local governments are also key stakeholders that are key implementation partners
           government
                                  and potential beneﬁciaries of a resource-efﬁciency scheme.
             support
                                • The beneﬁts of resource efﬁciency must be clearly explained to governments to
                                  ensure their support.

                                • Financiers, technical experts, and end users should be included in any stakeholder
        Engage ﬁnanciers          engagement from the outset. Examples of previously successful resource-efﬁciency
          and end users           schemes should be used to demonstrate the potential of resource efﬁciency to
                                  potential target groups.


       Establish organization   • The accountability of the incentive and the responsibilities of the REWG.
          and leadership


       Deﬁne engagement         • Determine the best method of approach with key stakeholder groups.
           strategy




     A common approach to understanding the stakeholder landscape is to build relationships
     with key in-country stakeholders who are supportive of the implementation of an incentive
     mechanism. Working with such stakeholders will result in a good understanding of the role of
     each stakeholder group, their attitudes towards resource-efficiency incentives, and the most
     effective ways of engagement.




60            1 INTRODUCTION                            2 TYPES                               3 CONTEXT
Conducting a diagnostic study

Conducting a diagnostic study is important for gathering the key evidence required to inform
decision making around the potential resource-efficiency incentive. This may include analysis of the
levels of resource efficiency in the country, information on the market and the regulatory context,
and the potential barriers and drivers of resource efficiency at a local level. This information is
important for prioritizing and screening options and, ultimately, selecting the incentive type.

The scope of the diagnostic study should be informed by the REWG and the data gathering
should involve key stakeholders (as shown in Figure 4).

FIGURE 4          Conducting a diagnostic study


           REWG                        Conduct diagnostic study              Stakeholder engagement

                                  Current levels of resource efﬁciency


                                             Prioritization


             Market context       Regulatory and institutional context   Barriers and drivers


                                             Prioritization

                                        Selecting incentive type




            4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY           61
     Assess the current levels of resource efficiency
     Understanding the current levels of resource efficiency within the country is an essential precursor to
     the development of an incentive scheme. It is necessary to understand the absolute level of resource
     production and consumption, but also the potential for resource-efficiency gains. Those industries
     with a high level of resource production and consumption are likely to be priority targets for resource-
     efficiency actions. Therefore, greater focus should be invested in gathering data for these sectors.

     Indicators and benchmarks can be used to assess relative performance and to help identify areas with
     the potential for resource-efficiency gains. These can be defined at different levels. For example, it is
     possible to derive performance indicators at the level of specific technologies or industry sectors, and
     for different goods and services. Indicators developed as part of the diagnostic study can also be used
     to monitor and evaluate performance once the incentive has been implemented.

     The key questions that should be answered in this task are:
     •	 What is the current level of resource production/consumption?
     •	 What are the sectors with the greatest levels of production/consumption?
     •	 What have been the historical trends in production/consumption and the projected future trends?
     •	 How does the resource efficiency of the country/sector compare with relevant performance
        benchmarks?

     The output of this task is a dataset, including any relevant indicators, that can be used to assess the
     current levels of resource efficiency in the country and the potential areas where resource efficiency
     can be improved.

     Application
     Data gathering
     The initial meeting with the government should be used to identify and gather relevant national
     data sources on resource production/consumption. This should include historical statistics and any
     projections on future production/consumption.

     Statistics on volumes of resource use at a national level are usually available from government
     sources, although the quality may vary for different resources and/or sectors. Data may be held by
     different government ministries and, depending on the resources or sectors concerned, they may
     need to be gathered from several different ministries.




62            1 INTRODUCTION                          2 TYPES                           3 CONTEXT
Most countries have a centralized national statistical office, which is a good starting point for
basic data and for further information about more detailed or recent data (regional offices
may also exist). More recent data that has not been published may be available on request.
Commonly, the degree of data disaggregation is limited so that individuals or industrial sites
cannot be identified. Notes about using the statistics may be published and, if available, should
be read.

In some cases, prior national studies on resource production/consumption may have been
prepared. These studies may be sufficiently authoritative that they reduce or eliminate the need
to use government statistics directly. Such studies may also simplify the understanding of details
(such as definitions).

National and international industry associations may also be a valuable source of data, but, more
than that, they often have an important supplementary role as a source of advice. For example,
their experts often are long-term users of government statistics and can provide an opinion of
upcoming government and other data sources. Industry associations may also be able to identify
experts that can assess specialized resources (such as very rare materials).

As a supplement to national-level data, international agencies can provide data and comparative
statistics on production/consumption for certain resources. International data can also be used to
make comparisons with other countries, including the performance of similar sectors in different
countries. Sample organizations holding such data include the IEA, OECD, and the International
Water Resources Association.

Data compilation
Definitions of resources are important when compiling data, particularly from different sources.
Calculations of value and volume may be affected by the measurement points for a flow of
resources and by accounting conventions, such as those for goods shipped, but not yet received.
Averaging over a longer period (several years) can be a quick method to reduce the effects of
timing. Resources are frequently reused, such as water that is used and then returned (such as
cooling water), as opposed to water that is consumed and not returned. Where resources are
converted — often from primary fuels to electricity — double-counting errors may be more
common.




            4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                       6 BIBLIOGRAPHY           63
     Resource definitions may also change over time and between countries. Examples of standardized
     measures, which are available from international agencies, can be used to make comparisons
     of resources with other countries. A measure that is most meaningful to changing behavior
     should be used in local implementation. The main types of resources (energy, water, waste,
     and strategically important materials) are sufficiently important that they usually have a well-
     established set of analytical institutions.

     Data analysis — indicator analysis
     The main objective of data analysis is to identify the potential opportunities for resource-efficiency
     gains, which may be targeted by the incentives. Indicator analysis and benchmarking can help
     identify the priority areas.

     A number of approaches to resource-efficiency indicators are available. The most appropriate
     indicators to use should be chosen by the team undertaking the work and being advised by the
     REWG. These indicators will be determined by how easy it is to collect data, the effectiveness in
     determining the resources of focus in the country, and the alignment with any regional resource-
     efficiency programs already established. A great deal of work has already been undertaken to
     define indicators for resource efficiency (OECD, 2008; BIO Intelligence Service, Institute for Social
     Ecology and Sustainable Europe Research Institute, 2012; UNEP, 2015; Eurostat, n.d.; Hirschnitz-
     Garbers, et al., 2012).

     UNEP (UNEP, 2015) provides an indicator set for the use of resource-efficiency assessment in Asia
     and the primary function of this is to determine trends. Therefore, it is important that multi-year
     data is collected. Indicators do not, in themselves, define resource priorities. These indicators
     must be assessed alongside an understanding of the scarcity of a resource, the environmental
     impact of the use of a resource, and the severity of an environmental pollutant. This may require
     a qualitative analysis speaking to key experts in the country.

     International benchmarks should be used wherever possible to provide regional and global
     context to the data gathered. Industries that have particularly high levels of resource use in a
     regional or a global context should help determine priorities. Using benchmarks also helps to
     identify errors in the data as they aid the identification of outliers. Statistics should be adjusted to
     make valid comparisons, including using per-capita figures, per unit of turnover, adjusting costs
     for purchasing power parity, and so on.




64            1 INTRODUCTION                         2 TYPES                           3 CONTEXT
Prioritization
After understanding resource use in the country, and in consultation with the REWG and other
key stakeholders (civil society, in-country experts) the key focus areas should be determined
(resources and industries).

Assess the market context
Requirement and expected output
The applicability of different incentive types, and their overall effectiveness, will be affected by the
market context in which the incentive is required to operate. Therefore, an important element of
the diagnostic study is an assessment of the market context.

This may include gathering information on the:
•	 price elasticity of demand for resources and substitution possibilities
•	 potential for technological innovation and resource-efficiency activity
•	 extent to which resource-efficiency costs might differ across sectors
•	 extent to which domestic sectors are in a favorable competitive position or in a fast-growing
   market
•	 market structure itself (competitive or oligopolistic markets5)
•	 nature of supply chains and skills relevant to the resource-efficiency issue

Carrying out a market analysis will allow the practitioner and REWG to understand the
resource-efficiency gains in a particular market through technical or behavioral action and an
understanding of the potential for integration or development of resource-efficient technologies.

A clear understanding of the scale of the potential impact of an incentive on business is important
to avoid unintended consequences. A scheme that is well thought out and presents the effects
on markets up front, also contributes to making a case because it shows an understanding of the
perspectives of commercial operators.

The types of priority areas identified in the previous task will define the way that the market
analysis is undertaken in this task. If priority areas identify energy savings rather than
improvements to waste collection, then the consideration of international factors relevant to


5	 A market structure characterized by few sellers and many buyers, and homogenous or differentiated products (that is, the
   products offered may be identical or, more commonly, differentiated in one or more respects and barriers to entry (for
   example, there are five main players in the United Kingdom mobile phone market)).



               4 DESIGN                                   5 FOCUS                                6 BIBLIOGRAPHY               65
     energy markets will be more important than the consideration of domestic and regional factors
     relevant to the waste industry. The market analysis task is based on a simple conception of
     individual markets for companies in which the company operates as a buyer or a seller. Their
     upstream (purchasing) markets and downstream (sales) markets may have to be investigated.

     A thorough market analysis should provide the following:
     •	 an understanding of the importance of the focus markets to the country’s economy
     •	 an understanding of the supply chain in key industries
     •	 what the historical trends are in the target markets
     •	 what the baseline of resource use in these target markets is
     •	 which technologies and/or behaviors can be adopted in the industry
     •	 how much can be achieved and how quickly
     •	 the finance going into resource efficiency at present (although this information is hard to come by)

     Application
     Existing evidence
     The first step is to establish whether there is detailed knowledge of the resource-efficiency
     potential within the target sector (for example, whether information is available through recent
     audit programs). Where information is missing for specific equipment, or for activities within
     particular industries, resource-efficiency audits can be undertaken directly to support the project if
     considered necessary.

     To carry out the assessment of the resource-efficiency potential, a technical analysis is required.
     Given that local expertise may be lacking, the project team’s in-house capacity and external
     consultants might be required to undertake this analysis. Local groups may hold useful knowledge
     and should be involved from the start. The costs of the analysis will depend on the depth of the
     work and who is carrying it out.

     Qualitative or quantitative analysis
     Markets are the results of many complex features. Therefore, detailed statistics (particularly if they
     relate to conditions in the past) may be less informative than having a good understanding of the
     underlying factors that influence the behavior of experienced operators (for example, traders or
     manufacturers). For that reason, the most effective research may be gained by conducting interviews
     with knowledgeable participants, beginning with contacts supplied by industry associations.




66            1 INTRODUCTION                         2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
Similarly, the choice between qualitative and quantitative analysis must reflect a considered
balance of effort. A qualitative description can be a good starting point. Such a description should
use simple statements or hypotheses that can be subsequently developed and confirmed. For
example, the statement of “The price of solar panels is subsidized by overseas governments” can
be used as a working description of an important influence on the domestic market, but it can
also be checked and quantified independently to derive a quantitative answer to the question of
“Subsidized by how much?”

Some of the basic sector, economic activity, and market statistics may be available from work in
other settings (for example, preparatory work for World Bank Group engagements in specific
regions or countries).

While this step of the analysis provides a good understanding of where most of the potential is
located and which sectors are most likely to be suitable for resource-efficiency incentives, it does
not evaluate the existing regulatory framework in which markets operate. This is the aim of the
next step of the analysis.

Assess the regulatory and institutional context
Requirement and expected output
Regulatory and institutional analysis comprises a survey and mapping exercise to identify the
overarching authorities, policies, targets, and measures that are relevant to resource efficiency.
The information captured in this process will provide the practitioner with an understanding of
the existing institutional and regulatory framework, and the challenges that may impact on the
application of an economic incentive in the country. This is to provide an understanding of the
regulatory environment into which an incentive will be introduced and the institutional capacities
that exist.

Understanding the underlying conditions will make it possible to build on what is already there,
by designing programs that will be reinforced by the existing regulatory infrastructure. On the
other hand, it will also reveal any institutional or regulatory gaps that might be filled by an
incentive program. Together with a market assessment, it will provide a further tool to identify the
most appropriate incentive to apply.




            4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY            67
     The following questions should be answered at the end of this task:
     •	 What is the regulatory context?
        –	 What action has already been undertaken for resource efficiency?
        –	 What are the policies governing industrial development?
        –	 Other relevant environmental legislation.
     •	 What incentives, regulations, and initiatives have an impact on resource use?
     •	 What are the in-country institutional capacities to develop incentive schemes?
     •	 What are the barriers to implementing particular incentive schemes (for example, corruption
        and lack of trust)?

     Application
     Regulatory and incentives environment
     It is necessary to understand existing regulations and incentives that impact on resource use in
     the area of focus. This requires undertaking the tasks described below. This approach follows
     the World Bank typical advisory assistance in rationalizing investment incentives, as set out in the
     investment incentive guidance (World Bank, 2015).

     Incentives inventory
     To understand existing incentives and any potential conflicts with an incentive for resource
     efficiency (for example, subsidizing an activity with negative impacts on resource efficiency) an
     inventory of all incentives in the country should be prepared. The key steps are presented below,
     and detailed steps are presented in World Bank (2015):
     1.	 Obtain buy-in by ensuring that key stakeholders are engaged in the process and have
         ownership of the outcomes.
     2.	 Collect inventory data from key government stakeholders.
     3.	 Analyze data and produce descriptive report.
     4.	 Submit report and collect feedback.

     The following questions should be asked about the existing incentives:

     •	 Can rationalization save money?
        What is the cost of existing incentives in the country and would rationalization save money for
        the government?




68            1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
•	 How important are these incentives for business decisions?
   To be able to estimate the potential impact of additional incentive schemes, one first needs
   to understand how existing incentives are influencing business decisions. This relates to a)
   resource-using behaviors of businesses and b) investment decisions related to resource use.
   This analysis will also provide a better understanding of how any new incentives can be tied to
   existing schemes to maximize the response.

•	 What are the market distortions provided by these incentives?
   Depending on the calibration of existing incentives, they may either help with addressing
   market failures or lead to market distortions that, in turn, result in an even more inefficient
   resource use. A good example is subsidies for the consumption of certain resources (such as
   energy).

•	 What are the results of a cost-benefit analysis of these incentives?
   Taking into account the response from businesses and the degree to which the existing
   incentives distort or correct the market, a high-level, cost-benefit analysis is needed to
   establish which incentives generate real economic benefits and which do not.

This will be supported by the stakeholder engagement/consultation. The REWG should lead the
in-government engagement.

Regulatory context and institutional capacity
Understanding the regulatory context
The regulatory context is of high importance when it comes to designing effective incentive
schemes. An analysis of the regulatory context would need to consider:
•	 existing targets related to resource use (such as a requirement to reduce resource consumption
   by x% by 2020 compared with a base year of 1990)
•	 existing pollution limits
•	 waste regulations
•	 monitoring and reporting requirements
•	 existing performance standards and norms for resource-efficient equipment
•	 labeling of resource-efficient equipment
•	 levels of compliance
•	 enforcement regime




            4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                       6 BIBLIOGRAPHY           69
     Some aspects of the regulatory context will be “softer” (such as indicative targets related to
     environmental issues and resource use), but other aspects will be “harder” (such as pollution
     limits, performance standards, and waste regulations). It is particularly important to get a good
     understanding of the levels of compliance and the enforcement regime. In case compliance
     levels are low and the enforcement regime weak, there are limited existing regulatory levers that
     encourage businesses to shift towards higher resource-efficiency standards.

     The analysis should develop a set of recommendations with a view to enhancing the regulatory
     context in such a way that resource-efficiency incentives are more likely to be effective.

     Institutional analysis
     An institutional analysis should aim to assess the country’s financial, human, and institutional
     capacity to:
     •	 implement new regulations and incentives
     •	 monitor and verify implementation of an incentive
     •	 enforce and respond to non-compliance offenses
     •	 evaluate the performance of the incentive
     •	 update regulations and measures as appropriate

     The assessment should be based on the developed understanding of the regulatory context and
     document the institutional current context. It should also provide a list of recommendations for
     areas of improvement and capacity-building measures to cover the institutional capacity gaps
     identified. Consider who should lead the assessment and which stakeholders to involve (for
     example, during interviews).

     A thorough analysis of the regulatory and institutional capacity in a country can be conducted by
     following the checklist that is contained in “Climate Competitive Industries: A Practitioners Field
     Guide” (World Bank, 2016) of which an edited version is presented in Table 1. The analysis can be
     conducted through a review of secondary data. However, it may be necessary to supplement this
     with information gathered through stakeholder interviews. If there is no legislation/regulation in
     effect, an understanding should be generated of what draft legislation has been presented and
     the barriers it faced. Equally important is the compliance culture in the country and the quality
     of the monitoring processes. While legislation may require high levels of resource efficiency, a
     lax compliance culture, corruption, and/or a lack of monitoring and enforcement can seriously
     compromise the effectiveness of regulations in place.



70            1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
TABLE 1         A checklist for assessing the existing regulatory and institutional
                environment


  1. Institutional integration

  A strong dialogue across relevant government bodies helps to support the
  development of an efficient industry. Policies relevant to the greening of industries
  cut across the domains of many agencies. Integration of environmental, social, and
  economic objectives and actions should take place — “vertically” (between the
  international, national, and local tiers of government) and “horizontally” (between
  government sectors) within government.

  Do relevant authorities coordinate horizontally through:
  •	 overarching strategies and policy frameworks?
  •	 coordination mechanisms (for example, interagency working groups and joint-research
     programs)?
  •	 high-level, interagency integration (that is, within presidents’ or prime ministers’ offices)?
  •	 developing in-house capacity (such as an environmental unit within an economic
     ministry)?

  Do relevant authorities coordinate vertically through:
  •	 capacity building of local government (for example, through oversight, implementation
     support, policy guidance, and staff training)?
  •	 appropriate funding and reporting mechanisms?
  •	 clear allocation of responsibilities between levels of government to avoid friction,
     overlaps, redundancies, or lengthy procedures?
  •	 information sharing to promote understanding of interlinked responsibilities and to
     facilitate coordinated decision making?




            4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY           71
     2. Influencing demand

     How is government influencing demand for resource-efficient technologies?
     •	 facilitating market access
     •	 influencing framework conditions (for example, through competition policy)
     •	 introducing regulations that affect product standards and production processes
     •	 instituting green procurement



     3. National strategies and legal frameworks

     Integrating resource-efficient policies into national strategies and legal frameworks
     ensures policies receive a high profile, and benefit from national processes and
     allocated funding. Some countries promote their resource-efficiency strategies
     through integrated legal frameworks, which determine political and administrative
     authorities, and regulatory and enforcement instruments.

     Is resource efficiency integrated into any of the following high-level government
     strategies?
     •	 national sustainable development strategies
     •	 poverty reduction strategies
     •	 national development plans
     •	 national innovation strategies

     Are there any strategies that address resource efficiency specifically?
     •	 national sustainable consumption and production strategies
     •	 cleaner production strategies

     Is resource efficiency integrated into any overarching legal frameworks?
     •	 integrated legal framework (for example, China’s circular economy promotion law)
     •	 defined political and administrative authorities
     •	 defined regulatory and enforcement instruments




72         1 INTRODUCTION                     2 TYPES                       3 CONTEXT
4. Effective policy development

A good policy process is vital for effective policy development. Listed below
are some questions to ask that can lead to successful policy formulation and
implementation.

•	 Do policies provide relevant agencies with clearly defined mandates, responsibilities, and
   timeframes?
•	 Are policies backed by adequate resources (for example, finance and personnel)?
•	 Are policy objectives clearly defined with measurable targets so that progress can be
   quantified?
•	 Are policies phased in gradually, providing time for affected industries to adjust?
•	 Is stakeholder consultation taking place (for example, through consultative bodies or
   taskforces that include the community, NGOs, industry, and trade unions)?
•	 Are agencies developing policies independent of political lobbying or external pressures?
•	 Is there systematic use of environmental policy evaluations in the policy design cycle?
•	 Are policies enforceable?
•	 Is there a low compliance cost?



5. Raising awareness and capacity building

Governments can support industry sectors and businesses by promoting practices
that enable them to trade sustainably. Businesses need to be able to see the value
in adopting sustainable practices. For example, understanding how consumer
preferences are evolving in relation to sustainability issues in specific market
segments and the resulting market opportunities.

What methods are being using to raise awareness?
•	 high-profile demonstration projects
•	 staff training
•	 providing funds for small investments
•	 providing resources to monitor and disseminate results of efficiency investments
•	 using cleaner production agencies




         4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                      6 BIBLIOGRAPHY          73
     •	 using cleaner production rapid assessments
     •	 tools for analyzing options regarding improvements of resource efficiency
     •	 support for the acquisition of funding

     How is government encouraging the development of technical capacity?
     •	 promoting technology literacy by delivering high-quality education to as many people as
        possible
     •	 encouraging investment
     •	 permitting the creation and expansion of companies using high-tech processes
     •	 facilitating access to finance
     •	 building institutional capacity to promote the diffusion of technologies where private
        demand or market forces are inadequate
     •	 fostering closer ties between public research institutes, universities, and industry
     •	 assisting companies to learn to how to adapt, adopt, and market new technologies and
        services
     •	 urging research institutions to practice outreach, testing, marketing, and dissemination
        activities
     •	 being open to external technologies through foreign trade, foreign direct investment
        (FDI), diasporas, and other international networks is critical for technological progress —
        for low and middle-income countries
     •	 integrating new technologies into government operations, including providing
        environmental infrastructure

     How is the government supporting industry sectors to trade on the basis of
     sustainable business practices?
     •	 gathering market intelligence about the environmental goods and services sector
     •	 flagging areas and opportunities for environmental goods and services
     •	 contributing evidence to regulatory impact assessments and consultations
     •	 engaging and consulting with environmental goods and services sector stakeholders,
        trade associations, regional development agencies (and their clusters), and devolved
        administrations
     •	 providing access to international partnerships and networks for disseminating information,
        and presenting trade and investment opportunities (such as the Asia-Pacific Partnership)




74         1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
  6. Encouraging environmental technologies

  How is government encouraging the development and adoption of environmental
  technologies?
  •	 having a sustained policy of increased openness to foreign trade and FDI
  •	 increasing investments in capacity development
  •	 investing in the development of science platforms
  •	 fostering partnerships with industry and end-users to ensure investments result in
     relevant and/or commercially viable technologies
  •	 developing technology transfer mechanisms/networks
  •	 ensuring coherence between environmental and innovation policies



Identifying barriers to and drivers for resource efficiency
Requirement and expected output
This task will identify the main barriers that limit businesses taking additional resource-efficiency
actions and the existing drivers. By exploring the barriers faced, the implementing agency will
be able to design incentives that are targeted at overcoming the issues identified. Furthermore,
the incentive can be designed to align with key drivers to maximize efficacy. It will build on the
stakeholder engagement that has been developed up to this point.

It is important to recognize, as described in “Main types of incentives” on page 23, that
incentives, by their very nature, are designed to address the specific barrier of businesses having
insufficient financial incentive, or lack of access to capital, to implement resource-efficiency
actions. As part of this step, other barriers may be identified that could be addressed through
policy mechanisms and which may need to be implemented in parallel with the incentive.

Application
This work will be defined in part by the prioritization of resources, but should be undertaken
alongside the market analysis.

The easiest way to undertake this task is through engagement with stakeholders in targeted
industries. General methods of obtaining typical information from a large number of companies
can be used, including surveys, interviews, and dialogue with relevant experts.



            4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY            75
     The main method is likely to be interview-based, and the effort to prepare and conduct interviews
     is a key component of the task.

     The following are examples of the types of questions that can be posed to companies and their
     counterparties. They will need to be tailored to the country and industry context.

     BOX 1           Sample questionnaire


       What are the motivations for engaging with some resource-efficiency opportunities
       while not taking up others?

       Can you tell me a little bit about why you adopted the opportunities you did?
       Prompt for:
       •	 payback period	                       •	 low cost/cost savings
       •	 part of natural upgrade	              •	 enhanced reputation
       •	 ease of implementation	               •	 supply chain pressure
       •	 support within business	              •	 legislative compliance

       We are interested in the daily experiences in taking up resource-efficiency
       opportunities and integrating them in the business. Can you tell me about any
       successes and challenges you faced when adopting these opportunities? Prompt for:
       •	management buy-in	                     •	cost
       •	time	                                  •	difficulty level
       •	 expertise	                            •	 lack of integration with existing systems/
          		infrastructure

       Can you tell me why you decided not to implement resource-efficiency
       opportunities in the past? Prompt for:
       •	 unattractive payback period	        •	 lack of expertise
       •	 lack of support within business	    •	 not a priority
       •	 cost	                               •	 not part of core business
       •	time	                                •	tenant/landlord issues
       •	 other priorities	                   •	 other physical constraints
       •	 lack of detail



76            1 INTRODUCTION                      2 TYPES                        3 CONTEXT
Following the interviews, a list of barriers and drivers will be developed. This will provide the basis
for selecting the most appropriate incentive mechanism.

Prioritization of the incentive mechanism
As a result of the diagnostic study that looks at resource use, the following information will have
been gathered at this stage:
•	 the resource of focus
•	 the industry and activity or focus
•	 the need for regulatory reform
•	 the institutional capabilities in country at present
•	 the barriers and drivers

This last round of prioritization, conducted with the REWG and stakeholders, will identify those
potential areas of focus for the incentive scheme. The prioritization will determine:
•	 the availability of technology and or activities that could be supported through incentives for
   the purposes of resource efficiency
•	 the capacities of the private sector to enact change for the purposes of resource efficiency
•	 what the “low hanging fruit” are for companies (easy to enact, profitable, and reduces
   resource use)
•	 if an incentive is an appropriate approach to tackle resource efficiency or would other
   approaches be more suitable
•	 which types of incentives overcome the barriers identified and align well with the drivers
•	 overall, which types of incentive scheme appear to have a good fit

The output of this step will be a shortlist of potential incentive mechanisms.

Template for scope of work
Box 2 includes a template scope of work for inclusion in the terms of reference when planning
the work and understanding capabilities in relation to diagnosis, targeting, and institutional and
policy considerations. These templates should be revised as appropriate to reflect the specific
support required for a given country or region.




            4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY              77
     BOX 2           Template scope of work relevant to diagnosis, targeting, and
                     institutional and policy considerations


      Assignment objective
      A diagnostic assessment of the resource-efficiency landscape within [insert country] to identify
      suitable approaches, priorities, and incentives to improve resource efficiency in the country.

      Scope of work
      1.	 Assessing the levels of resource efficiency — development of indicators for use in
          assessing resource efficiency in [insert priority areas]. International best practice should
          be adopted in selecting and applying the indicators. The indicators will be used alongside
          expert judgement to assess resource-efficiency concerns in the country determining the
          priority resources and by users to target any incentive in [insert country].

      2.	 Overview of market context — an overview of the markets for priority areas in [insert
          country] should be provided. This will include an understanding of markets in the priority areas,
          and their importance to [insert country/region] (for example, GDP contribution). Key questions
          to answer include what are the trends in the industry in terms of economic growth and
          resource use, and what actions could be undertaken in industry to improve resource efficiency?

      3.	 Institutional and regulatory analysis — based on the analysis of opportunities, an
          analysis on the regulatory and institutional context in [insert country] will be undertaken.
          The analysis should include:
          •	 An inventory of existing in-country incentives — to understand the support
             offered to resource use and resource efficiency in the country.
          •	 Regulatory analysis — the consultant will identify and analyze existing and planned
             policy measures related to energy efficiency. This should include country, regional,
             and sector-level policies and targets; and relevant international, national, and regional
             policies that are related specifically to resource efficiency. The analysis should include an
             assessment of how the different policies align, and their potential conflicts and synergies.
          •	 Institutional analysis — to understand the government and industry’s ability to
             implement an incentive scheme. This analysis should take into account the capacity
             for implementation of the scheme, the costs associated with implementation for the
             different parties involved, and the benefits for their institutions.



78           1 INTRODUCTION                         2 TYPES                           3 CONTEXT
4.	 Identifying barriers and drivers — should be performed to understand the
    impediments to resource efficiency by conducting an analysis with stakeholders in the
    industries of focus.

5.	 Determining the best approach for regulation — includes whether an incentive
    program would be the best approach for resource-efficiency goals.

Deliverables
A report presenting the research, findings, and recommendations.




Further reading
BIO Intelligence Service, Institute for Social Ecology and Sustainable Europe Institute. (2012). Assessment of
resource efficiency indicators and targets. European Commission, DG Environment.

BIO Intelligence Service, Institute for Social Ecology and Sustainable Europe Research Institute. (2012).
Assessment of resource efficiency indicators and targets. Annex Report. European Commission, DG Environment

Hirschnitz-Garbers, M., Srebotnjak, T., Porsch, L., Grünig, M., Hand, P., & Timeus Cerezo, K. (2012). Integrating
resource efficiency, greening of industrial production and green industries- scoping of and recommendations for
effective indicators. Berlin: Ecologic.

OECD. (2008). Measuring Material Flows and Resource Productivity. Paris: OECD

UNEP. (2015). Indicators for a Resource Efficient and Green Asia and the Pacific — Measuring progress of
sustainable consumption and production, green economy and resource efficiency policies in the Asia-Pacific
region. UNEP.

World Bank. (2015). Investment Policy: Investment Incentives Toolkit with Tools and Selected Readings.
Washington: World Bank Group.

World Bank. (2016). Climate Competitive Industries: A Practitioners Field Guide. Washington: World Bank Group.




            4 DESIGN                                 5 FOCUS                             6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             79
                            4
                      DESIGN OF INCENTIVE




80   1 INTRODUCTION          2 TYPES        3 CONTEXT
Introduction	83
Selecting an incentive type	                              83
Design and implementation of an incentive	                89
Developing and improving incentive administration 	      102
and management




      4 DESIGN                 5 FOCUS        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY   81
     What the reader will get from this chapter:

     •	an understanding of the key
       considerations in the design of an
       incentive

     •	an appreciation of the “must haves” for
       efficient and effective implementation




82   1 INTRODUCTION      2 TYPES            3 CONTEXT
Introduction

This chapter describes the key steps that need to be followed in the selection of the incentive and
in its design.



Selecting an incentive type

Evidence gathered as part of the diagnostic study should be used to inform the selection of the
incentive. This includes selecting the target resource for the incentive and the target industry,
technology, or life cycle stage. Consideration also needs to be given to the regulatory context,
and the barriers and drivers to resource efficiency in the markets in which the incentive is targeted
to operate. Following the selection of the favored incentive, further work is required to design
and implement the incentive.

The selection of the incentive type should be informed by the REWG and the data gathering
should involve key stakeholders, as shown in Figure 5.

FIGURE 5            Selecting an incentive type


            REWG                          Selecting incentive type         Stakeholder engagement

                                              Target resource


 Target industry/tech/life cycle stage      Regulatory context                 Barriers and drivers


                                             Favored incentive


                                         Design and implementation




              4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                    6 BIBLIOGRAPHY              83
     No single type of incentive is clearly superior to any other (Goulder & Parry, 2008). However,
     as identified in the section “Main types of incentives” on page 23, there are certain conditions
     that mean some types of incentive may be more effective in some circumstances than others.
     Therefore, in selecting the most suitable incentive type, it is important to take into account the
     relevant circumstances in which the incentive will be applied.

     Some of these circumstances will be related to the country in question, and will be largely beyond
     the control of the practitioner and the government. This will include, for example, the regulatory
     and policy landscape, and the existing barriers to and drivers for resource-efficiency actions.

     Other circumstances will be related to the decisions that have been made about the scope of the
     incentive. Specifically, as a result of the diagnostic studies recommended in the section “Conducting
     a diagnostic study” on page 61 and the prioritization step, the REWG and the practitioner should
     have decided upon the relevant resource(s) that will be targeted by the incentive. A decision should
     also have been made with respect to the relevant life cycle stages to target, and the sectors or
     groups of organizations to be targeted6.

     The main contextual circumstances that need to be taken into account when selecting the
     incentive type are discussed further below.

     Accounting for the target resource(s)
     Requirement and expected output
     The characteristics of the target resource(s), including the availability of relevant production/
     consumption statistics, may influence the applicability of different incentive types.

     It is necessary that the suitability of the different instrument types is assessed in relation to the
     characteristics of the target resource. For example, if freshwater is the target resource, a tax on
     water use or a trading scheme in water abstraction rights may not be feasible if data was lacking
     on the water consumption for different sectors. In this instance, proxies for water consumption
     may need to be used or an alternative incentive applied that does not require this information —
     such as a tax incentive for water efficient technologies.

     6	 In the case of manufacturing industry, resource-efficiency activities are often focussed on reducing consumption of energy,
        water, and other primary inputs, as this is where a large amount of the potential efficiency gains can be achieved, along with
        minimization of waste production.




84              1 INTRODUCTION                                   2 TYPES                                   3 CONTEXT
The output is a qualitative assessment of the suitability of different instrument types, based on
the target resource. Instrument types that are not suitable should not be considered further.

Application
Practitioners and the REWG should identify whether the target resource(s) presents any issues
regarding the applicability of a particular type of incentive. This would draw upon the evidence
gathered in the diagnostic study (see the section “Conducting a diagnostic study” on page 61).

Key questions to ask to help identify any issues are:
•	 How good is the quality of data on the production/consumption of the resource? Are there
   any important data gaps in the production/consumption statistics of the target resource?
•	 How good is the quality of market data for the resource? Are there any important data gaps in
   relation to market prices for the target resource?
•	 What is the international experience of applying incentives to that particular resource? Review
   the OECD database on economic instruments (OECD, 2014) and other sources.

Accounting for the target industries and/or technologies
Requirement and expected output
For an incentive to be effective, it needs to provide sufficient stimulus to the target businesses
to drive a change in behavior in relation to resource efficiency, including investment in new
technologies. Therefore, it is important that the selection of the incentives takes into account the
nature of the opportunities that exist for resource efficiency in the target industries, including the
relevant behaviors or technologies that the incentive is expected to stimulate. This may include
identifying cases where specific technologies are particularly important — so a technology-
focused incentive may be suitable.

Account also needs to be taken of the size and scale of the businesses that would be targeted.
If the sector is represented by a small number of large organizations, the suitability of certain
incentives will differ from a sector represented by a large number of small organizations. In the
latter case, the transaction costs are likely to be much more important.

The output is a qualitative assessment of the suitability of different instrument types, based on
the target industries and/or technologies. Instrument types that are not suitable should not be
considered further.



            4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             85
     Application
     Practitioners and the REWG should consider the suitability of the different incentives types in
     relation to the specific characteristics of the industries concerned.

     The following should be taken into account when selecting the correct incentive with reference to
     the market conditions:
     •	 What is the size and scale of the targeted industry? Is it characterized by a small number of
        large organizations or a large number of small organizations?
     •	 Is there capacity within the target industry to adopt technologies or processes to reduce
        resource use? Would capacity building be a better approach?
     •	 Which incentive has the greatest chance of take-up in the selected industry?
     •	 Which parts of the supply chain are affected by the most significant market failures and/or
        sub-optimal investment situations?
     •	 What is the international experience in the application of incentives with this particular market
        focus? Review the OECD database on economic instruments (OECD, 2014) and other sources.

     Accounting for the life cycle stage
     Requirement and expected output
     A key design choice for any incentive scheme is where in the supply chain the incentive will apply:
     •	 upstream (such as, regulation on fuel suppliers to trade the emissions associated with the fuel
        they sell to customers)
     •	 midstream (such as, regulation on direct emissions)
     •	 downstream (such as, where consumers are responsible for the resource use in the goods they
        consume)

     Upstream companies tend to be engaged in R&D, component manufacturing, and act as resource
     aggregators. Downstream companies typically comprise organizations offering resource-efficiency
     system integration and/or project development, resource-efficiency component distribution, and
     companies deploying resource-efficiency assets.

     An upstream approach can cover a large number of resource users where costs associated with
     resource use (such as taxes and ETSs) or benefits associated with resource efficiency (subsidies)
     could be passed down to consumers. Downstream approaches may be favored where it is
     unlikely that costs and benefits would be passed on to consumers. However, in reality, theoretical
     considerations, industrial competitiveness, technical capacity, data availability, may give way to
     political advocacy and industrial acceptance.


86            1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                         3 CONTEXT
Application
Practitioners and the REWG should consider the influence of the life cycle on the effectiveness
of different incentive types. The following should be taken into consideration when selecting the
appropriate application of an incentive with reference to the life cycle stage:
•	 Where in the supply chain can the greatest leverage effect be achieved?
•	 Is an upstream, midstream or downstream approach favored?
•	 What is the international experience in the application of incentives with this particular market
   focus? Review the OECD database on economic instruments (OECD, 2014) and other sources.

Accounting for the regulatory context
Requirement and expected output
Accounting for the existing regulatory context will ensure the proposed incentive is best suited
to the existing regulatory infrastructure. For example, it will help determine whether the option
exists for realigning an existing incentive or whether a new incentive needs to be introduced.

Application
Practitioners and the REWG should consider how the existing regulatory context may influence
the appropriateness of a given incentive type. This should consider whether the option exists for
realigning an existing incentive. The analysis should draw upon the information gathered in the
section “Assess the regulatory and institutional context” on page 67.

The following questions should be answered:
•	 Does the existing regulatory environment (including existing incentives) provide any
   opportunities for rationalization for the purposes of resource efficiency?
•	 Are there any existing pricing and tariff systems that could be exploited when implementing
   incentives?
•	 How would a new incentive scheme complement or overlap with existing policy instruments?
•	 Are there any additional policy instruments that need to be introduced alongside the incentive
   scheme (for example, accreditation processes for resource-efficiency auditors/installers)?
•	 Are there any lessons learned from previous incentive schemes?
•	 What is the availability of skills within government? Is there sufficient capacity to adopt
   effective monitoring, evaluation, and compliance procedures?
•	 What is the political feasibility and acceptability for each incentive?




            4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                       6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             87
     Accounting for barriers and drivers
     Requirement and expected output
     Accounting for the barriers and drivers identified in the section “Identifying barriers to and drivers
     for resource efficiency” on page 75 will help ensure the type of incentive (or combination of
     incentives and policies) is best suited to the barriers that exist at a local level. An incentive seeks to
     realign the country context for the pursuit of resource efficiency. Therefore, existing barriers and
     drivers are a key determinant on the type of incentive chosen.

     Ideally, when carrying out the diagnostic study on barriers, some weighting of the importance of
     each barrier would have been undertaken to focus on the most important barriers in this step.
     Only a comprehensive strategy for improving resource efficiency that comprises complementary
     measures in the form of targeted investments, technical assistance, and policy and regulatory
     reforms is likely to be able to address the key barriers.

     Application
     Working with the REWG, while recognizing the bias that each stakeholder group may bring to
     any discussion, a choice of incentive will be made.

     Different incentives are suited to overcome/address different barriers. Therefore, the types of
     barriers that are most important need to be established prior to instrument selection. This will
     determine which instruments are most likely to be effective in a given context.

     For example:
     •	 If the main barrier is related to the up-front investment costs, a loan scheme might be a
        suitable mechanism that enables businesses to invest while keeping the cost to the public
        manageable (as the loan will be repaid).
     •	 If the main barrier is the principal-agent problem (the landlord of a property invests whereas the
        tenant receives the savings) then instruments, such as on-bill financing, may be appropriate.
     •	 If the main barrier is imperfect information, then an incentive that engages beneficiaries
        through training might be suitable. This could be subsidized resource-efficiency audit and
        training.
     •	 If resource prices are particularly low, rendering investments non-profitable, a tax measure is
        potentially the right response.




88            1 INTRODUCTION                          2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
The favored incentive(s) and implementation plan
Requirement and expected output
The favored incentive will have been selected as a result of the country context. The next step is
to develop a policy statement communicating the intention of implementing an incentive.

Application
The incentive should be agreed with the REWG, which should then work to develop a policy
statement that will be used in communications in the next phase.



Design and implementation of an incentive

Once the favored incentives have been identified, work needs to begin to design and then
implement the incentive. This includes a number of preparatory activities, including the
development of the governance associated with the incentives. The implementation of the incentive
may be first piloted and then modified according to the lessons learned from the pilot phase.

The design and implementation of the incentive should be informed by the REWG and the data
gathering should involve key stakeholders, as shown in Figure 6.

FIGURE 6          Designing and implementing an incentive


           REWG                       Design and implementation            Stakeholder engagement

        Preparatory steps               Level, scale of incentive     Institutional delivery mechanism

        Policy assessment               Compliance and M&V                Accompanying activities



                                                  Pilot

                                       Communication strategy

                                     Developing and improving
                                   administration and management




             4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                      6 BIBLIOGRAPHY               89
     After selecting the preferred incentive type, it is necessary to carefully design how the incentive
     will be implemented. While some decisions may already have been made (for example, on the
     scope of the instrument), the design stage provides the opportunity to refine some of these
     decisions further.

     A number of sequential steps for the design of the incentive are described below. These are
     underpinned by several guiding principles, which reflect the lessons learned from existing
     incentive schemes.

     BOX 3            Guiding principles of incentive design


       The conclusions of a European Commission assessment of market-based instruments
       (which are incentives) give general guidance on the development of incentive schemes
       (Rademaekers, van der Laan, Smith, van Breugel, & Pollitt, 2011). They provide overarching
       recommendations to the European Commission and Member States, and are excellent
       general principles by which to begin the design of an incentive scheme. These principles are
       be combined with those set out in the handbook contained in other useful documents.

       Policymakers should remember to design instruments as part of a full package,
       because market-based instruments are not necessarily the single solution to all
       resource-efficiency issues. Incentives should be part of a broader, coherent, and consistent
       resource-efficiency strategy, this includes strategies across DFIs.

       Market-based instruments for resource efficiency should have resource efficiency as
       a primary objective. Without the focus on resource efficiency, instruments are likely to be
       focused on mitigating impacts rather than resource efficiency itself.

       Price-based measures should be set at a level that actually incentivizes change. Taxes
       must be set at a sufficient level to foster change in behavior.

       Planners should also consider how resource taxes can incentivize efficient behavior
       and can expand the environmental tax base. Resource taxes have focused on energy
       and transport, but there is considerable scope to apply resource taxes to a wider variety of
       resources.



90            1 INTRODUCTION                        2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
   Incentives need to be dynamic or regularly reviewed. The fiscal cost and risk for the
   government should be assessed on a regular basis and so should the effectiveness of the
   instrument. To ensure the tax level reflects resource-efficiency goals, any tax incentives (and
   incentives more broadly) should be reviewed regularly.

   Policymakers should take consumer behavior and perceptions into account during their
   instrument design phase. Information on the processes and procedures, administration,
   management, and dispersal of incentives should be transparent and publicly accessible.

   Policymakers should investigate how targeted education and awareness raising can be
   expanded. As discussed in in the section “Combining incentive schemes with other policies” on
   page 47, incentives need to be combined with other policy tools to maximize effectiveness.

   Market-based instruments should link resource quantity and overall effects. An
   incentive should cover a specific environmental impact of a resource, beyond simply the
   quantity of a resource used.

   Distributional effects of market-based instruments are, typically, not large, but should
   be considered. Care must be taken where an incentive is regressive to make sure affected
   groups are not put into precarious positions.

   Market-based instruments should be predicated on a sound life cycle to support
   real resource efficiency. Careful analysis must be made to ensure an incentive is achieving
   resource efficiency.

   Incentives should be granted with a sunset clause7 and be time bound. Incentives
   should recognize that business can come to depend and expect incentives after the need for
   the incentive has passed.

   After possible reforms to the existing tax system have been considered, additional
   incentives should be used sparingly as a focused policy instrument to correct market
   failures. The introduction of incentives must provide additional efficiency gains to the status quo.

   The process for applying for incentives should be simple and minimize discretion. In
   the case of tax incentives, the approval process should be automatic (with verification).


7	 A sunset clause provides a definitive end date for an incentive programme.



                4 DESIGN                                   5 FOCUS              6 BIBLIOGRAPHY            91
       Sources
       (Rademaekers, van der Laan, Smith, van Breugel, & Pollitt, 2011; World Bank, 2015; Amin,
       Dimsdale, & Jaramillo, 2014; Whitley & Ellis, 2012)



     The design of the incentive from this point follows a general process in consultation with
     stakeholders, which is described below.

     Preparatory steps
     Engagement and securing commitment
     Requirement and expected output
     An important initial step in the design of any new incentive is securing the necessary political,
     legislative, and regulatory commitment to enact changes within the country to implement the
     incentive scheme.

     For a business to embrace a resource-efficiency project, there must be buy-in from government
     and industry. Therefore, the practitioner should work with the relevant government departments
     and users of a resource that have not yet been approached, or are not yet committed to resource
     efficiency, to develop an understanding of their commitment to resource efficiency and any
     activities that would need to be undertaken to implement an incentive.

     Application
     The practitioner decides how to convene these stakeholder discussions and whether to include
     key stakeholder groups individually or if a number of groups will come together. This work will be
     planned centrally with the REWG.

     Understanding and committing resources
     Requirement and expected output
     This stage seeks to understand the budgetary implications of the chosen incentive. The financial
     transfers made between counterparties are often the main focus of the design of an incentive
     scheme. However, overhead costs can be high enough to make a design ineffective or even
     unviable. One reason the government may use an intermediary (such as a bank) to run a scheme
     is that the bank’s overhead costs may be lower.




92            1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
Those costs include:
•	 administration — for example, record keeping and government supervision
•	 enforcement — for example, legal costs
•	 monitoring — for example, measuring equipment and inspectors
•	 transitional costs — that is, costs that occur only once, such as training costs

Application
The practitioner will assist the REWG in costing the incentive and designating funds that should
be allocated to the incentive from public funds. The practitioner will also support efforts to access
funds from international sources if required.

For many incentive schemes, there is evidence on the relative cost of the different schemes.
However, this data is not readily available for all types of incentives (an example can be found in
Tukker & Ivanova (2013)). Contacting government departments and agencies in other countries
where similar incentives have been successfully introduced can provide useful insights into the
scale of the costs involved in setting up and running such schemes.

Agree on the desired outcomes or targets and monitoring and evaluation program
Requirement and expected output
It is important to agree on the desired outcomes for the incentive, including relevant targets.
These targets will enable an assessment of the performance of the incentive to be carried out.

Targets should be specific, measurable, achievable, realistic, and time-bound (SMART). They
should reflect the ambitions and expectations in the country, but also any potential constraints.
This would take into account:
•	 government targets for resource use and resource efficiency
•	 resource-efficiency potential in the target sectors
•	 available funding
•	 risk aversion (reflecting confidence and experience from previous incentive deployment)
•	 knowledge of the likely reaction of companies
•	 capacity issues (as previously mentioned)

Targets are most valuable when they give clear expression to a future situation that a majority of
stakeholders (or stakeholders who are particularly influential) understand as being achievable, but
challenging. Targets can be expressed in general or specific terms.



            4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             93
     Application
     Although targets can be selected and designed in a number of ways, a beneficial beginning is to
     develop an ambitious set of targets with few restrictions, which are then progressively refined to
     match available technical solutions. If one uses that strategy, the initial set of targets need not be
     complementary or mutually compatible, and they can focus on reflecting the requirement and
     level of ambition.

     Possible ways of expressing initial targets are in terms of:
     •	 resource use (national, regional, or sectoral; reduction in absolute, percentage, or per-capita
        figures)
     •	 investment (increase in percentage of investment for resource-efficiency measures; number of
        carbon-neutral developments)
     •	 imports (percentage of reduction by volume or value; new use of accredited supplier of, for
        example, biomass)
     •	 behavior change (level of reduction in energy consumption at peak times; grey water reuse)
     •	 awareness raising (population or number of companies involved; knowledge of energy-saving
        measures)

     The practitioner will help the REWG consider the above points, and agree on the desired
     objectives and targets to take forward.

     Setting the level and scale of incentive required (to deliver the desired target)
     Requirement and expected output
     An incentive’s primary function is to change behavior by using monetary levers. Therefore, an
     incentive must provide sufficient motivation to result in the required change in behavior. In
     addition, the scale of the incentive mechanism (for example, the total amount of annual funding
     provided) needs to be sizable enough to trigger significant resource-efficiency improvements.

     Chapter 5 of this handbook presents the key considerations for setting the levels and scales for
     specific types of incentive. However, it should be recognized that this is unlikely to be an exact
     science. The level and scale of the incentive will be determined by many factors including the
     level of ambition and the funds available. The decision on the level and scale of incentive will
     be framed by the political context, so is likely to take into account the results of stakeholder
     consultation.




94            1 INTRODUCTION                        2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
Designers of the incentive scheme must recognize that negotiated settlements are a critical part of
achieving a scheme and that they must work in all relevant ways to make negotiations effective.
Early bilateral dialogue to establish an indication of the “red lines” that participants will not cross
during consultation is valuable preparatory work. Furthermore, working in stages is recommended.
For example, obtaining a participant’s commitment to the process may be easier than obtaining a
commitment to support the outcome. Also, an incentive providing a subsidy rather than penalizing
resource use is more likely to receive support from affected industry groups.

Application
A number of components are needed to estimate the correct level and scale of the incentive.
Economic literature provides a vast amount of information on the level of incentive at which
marginal social cost equals marginal social benefit for resource use. Estimating these values and
determining the appropriate level of incentive is a complex task that is unlikely to be achievable in
most projects introducing financial incentives.

Instead, a tailored diagnostic study is needed to be able to determine the incentive level and its
scale in a practicable way.

When determining the level of the incentive (that is, the level of taxation or the grant contribution
to the total cost of specific resource-efficiency improvements), the following aspects would need
to be analyzed through a diagnostic study:
•	 Cost-benefit profile of the technologies targeted — while not applicable to taxation measures,
    the cost-benefit profile of the targeted technologies needs to be understood for financial incentives
    in the form of subsidies (whether a grant, tax rebate, loan, or other). This is because it allows the
    analyst to estimate the investment needed to finance specific resource-efficiency improvements
    and their payback periods. Such information can then be contrasted with perceptions of potential
    beneficiaries of what is deemed financially attractive to them (see next point).
•	 Survey — ideally, the diagnostic studies (as set out in the section “Conducting a diagnostic study”
    on page 61) will carry out an in-country survey across the potential beneficiaries of the incentive
    to determine the levels at which the incentive is deemed to be substantial enough to influence
    investment decisions that concern resource efficiency. For example, businesses would be asked which
    payback periods they consider financially attractive enough to invest in (typically this will be less than
    3 years, but depends on the specific circumstances in the country and in different sectors). Once an
    attractive payback period has been established, the incentives can be designed in such a way that
    payback periods would be reduced to levels deemed financially attractive by the beneficiaries.



             4 DESIGN                             5 FOCUS                          6 BIBLIOGRAPHY                95
     •	 The resource target — this applies only to taxation measures. Elasticities can be used to
        determine the level of incentive required to reach a certain level of resource use. Elasticities
        may not be readily available for a particular country. Therefore, estimates may be taken from
        existing studies.
     •	 Leakage — this applies only to taxation measures and cap-and-trade systems, but not
        financial subsidies. In setting an incentive at too high a level (such as a very high tax rate on
        resource use) companies may take their industry elsewhere resulting in no resource efficiencies
        and potential job losses. The level of incentive needs to carefully determine the reaction of
        industries.
     •	 Benchmarks — in the absence of data and limited resources to collect data, international
        benchmarks could be used to determine an appropriate level of incentive. A risk with this
        approach is that benchmarks may be based on rates that are inefficient and not appropriate
        to the country context, which would, ultimately, result in failure to achieve the expected
        resource-efficiency gains.
     •	 Consultations — once the level of the incentive has been established, an in-country
        consultation process can help with validating the proposal and maintaining transparency.

     Setting the level of incentive is a complex task and one that should be supported by experts in
     a particular incentive. For financial subsidies, in addition to the incentive level for subsidies, the
     scale of the allocated budget needs to be determined (for example, how many grants per year
     will be provided). This depends on:
     •	 The capacity of the supply chain — when considering the level of an incentive aimed at
         increasing the deployment of resource-efficiency technologies, the capacity of the supply chain
         needs to be assessed. This includes an analysis of the current levels of market activity (that is, how
         many resource-efficiency measures are installed per year and what the market size is in terms
         of turnover). Given the diversity of resource-efficiency technologies and the sectoral variety of
         applications, a segmentation approach indicating the current supply chain capacity in different
         sectors and technology markets is needed. This is important to be able to estimate the potential for
         growth across the different parts of the resource-efficiency supply chain. Setting the scale of the
         incentive too low may simply subsidize existing levels of activity, whereas setting the scale of the
         incentive too high may result in underspending of the budget allocated to the incentive.
     •	 Available financial resources — for a subsidy, the scale of the incentive is also determined
         by the available financial resources. This will depend on the maximum amount of funding that
         can be allocated to the incentive from the public budget and additional funding provided by
         third parties (including international donor agencies).



96            1 INTRODUCTION                          2 TYPES                           3 CONTEXT
Select an institutional delivery mechanism
Requirement and expected output
The skills and capacity for fiscal incentive schemes are likely to be available already. Simplistically,
an incentive scheme could require just an adjustment to a single number: the relevant tax rate.
In practice, administrative procedures will be required to verify that applicants qualify for the
adjustment and analysis will be required in the design phase to estimate the level of adjustment
needed. Nevertheless, the relevant skills are likely to be in place already as a result of the skill sets
used to manage government revenue.

More complex changes, such as a new specific tax — rather than an adjustment to the existing
tax rate — may be much more difficult to put in place. Changes to operational tax systems are
likely to be costly, especially if disruption results and system testing is required. The availability of
experienced staff and the constraints of existing operational and maintenance schedules within
government are likely to determine the capacity for more complex tax changes.

Technically, the main focus will be on the procedures for verifying that the tax adjustment
applies to the applicant. Additional personnel may be needed for monitoring, but incorporating
monitoring within existing systems (such as dockside checks on equipment that is claimed to
qualify for import tax discounts) may also be possible.

Application
This task should be undertaken with careful assessment of the analysis described in the section
“Assess the market context” on page 65 to determine the regulatory context in which an
incentive will sit and also which agencies are best placed to introduce it.

The practitioner will support the REWG in determining the most suitable implementing agency
delivery mechanism for this work, which will require the co-ordination of the REWG with the
wider government.

Select activities to accompany the incentive
Requirement and expected output
To ensure that an incentive mechanism is successful, associated activities need to be considered.
Financial incentives typically address financial barriers and additional activities can engage
stakeholders through addressing other (non-financial) barriers.




             4 DESIGN                            5 FOCUS                         6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             97
     This should build on the theory presented in the section “Combining incentive schemes with
     other policies” on page 47.

     Application
     The following associated activities can help to increase the efficacy of an incentive:
     •	 Capacity building. A proven approach to capacity building is the use of resource-efficiency
        networks. Such networks engage in capacity building for resource efficiency by raising
        awareness, providing information, and showing possible solutions. Networks help to find
        and understand solutions by engaging different members in discussions and encouraging the
        exchange of experiences — successful and unsuccessful. The cooperation between network
        members is essential for sustainable learning. Training courses and workshops offered by
        networks contribute greatly to the creation of capacity of resource efficiency within businesses.
        External coaches and experts, which could be too costly to hire for a single company, can be
        brought to the whole network. Capacity building addresses processes in the production phase
        and those activities aiming to improve the use of products.
     •	 Performance standards. Usually, there is a pool of products or production technologies on the
        market, with different environmental and resource-efficiency performances. Here, “hard” regulatory
        instruments can ensure a minimum performance standard, while softer informative instruments
        and financial incentives can be used to award the “top end” in a market. This can create a market
        dynamic by which, gradually, the average product or process performance improves over time.
     •	 Actor-specific approach. In some cases, the improvement of resource-efficiency performance
        needs a coordinated change in a full value chain. In this case, policy mixes can be applied
        where each instrument addresses a different actor (such as labelling aimed at producers
        of products, information campaigns for consumers, and green public procurement to be
        implemented by authorities).

     These should be considered by the REWG against what is politically feasible, required to support
     the development of the incentive, and the budget that exists.

     Establish a compliance mechanism, and monitoring and verification for
     individual projects
     Requirement and expected output
     Compliance is relevant to all incentive schemes — taxes need to be collected, permits for trading
     schemes need to be held by participants, and measures need to be installed in case of subsidies
     for specific technologies.



98            1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
Monitoring and verification is important to be able to understand whether or not the
incentive scheme delivers the expected outcome at project level and beyond. If implemented
comprehensively, the benefits of monitoring and verification can extend to the macro level: As
policymakers gain better understanding of deficiencies in the resource use of the private sector,
they are able to design targeted policy measures and regulation.

Application
An effective compliance mechanism can be developed by:
•	 specifying what compliance consists of (for example, performance standards)
•	 allocating enforcement responsibilities to qualified organizations and individuals
•	 carrying out spot checks
•	 establishing a penalty regime

A robust monitoring and verification (M&V) system can be established by:
•	 developing clear guidelines for reporting on project implementation and outcomes
•	 carrying out surveys to collect primary data on resource-use trends in individual companies
•	 carrying out quality checks of the installed resource-efficiency measures
•	 ensuring monitoring and verification is done independently from the beneficiaries
•	 ensuring that the personnel involved in monitoring and verification are trained and accredited

Detailed guidance on monitoring and verification can be found in the “International Performance
Measurement and Verification Protocol” (Efficiency Valuation Organization, 2012). The
development of a monitoring and verification mechanism is likely to require expert advice.
Detailed guidance on compliance is also available from the International Network for Compliance
and Enforcement (INCE) (INCE, 2009).

Policy assessments
Requirement and expected output
Careful consideration needs to be given to the potential impacts and cost-effectiveness of an
incentive prior to its introduction. A full range of impacts should be assessed, including those
beyond the immediate target of the incentive, and it should be ensured that the incentive chosen
represents the best use of public and donor funds for the policy objective.

The introduction of an incentive that penalizes resource use instead of rewarding efficiency can have
regressive impacts on the poorer sections of society. For example, energy and CO2 taxes can directly



            4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY            99
      impact on the end user and in poorer households, where energy use forms a large part of expenditure,
      the tax could have a disproportional effect on those less able to pay. It may be possible to reduce the
      impact on poorer households through the design of an incentive. Distributional concerns should be
      carefully considered in the design of any incentive and included in an impact assessment.

      The output of this phase is a completed impact assessment that justifies the incentive adopted. If
      the impact assessment does not suggest that the incentive is cost effective, a different approach/
      incentive must be taken.

      Application
      There is a lot of literature available on undertaking impact assessments of government
      interventions. For example the OECD (OECD, 2008) provides an “Introductory Handbook for
      Undertaking Regulatory Impact Analysis” and the UK’s HM Treasury’s “The Green Book” provides
      an overview of the requirements of any assessment of policy and the techniques to be adopted
      (HM Treasury, 2011).

      Impact assessments can be a large undertaking. Predicting and assessing future states of the world
      and stakeholder response is a highly uncertain process. Resources can be diverted to undertaking
      impact assessments of larger size where the marginal benefit associated with more analysis is
      minimal. Impact assessments must, as a minimum, meet the legislative standards required for the
      introduction of policy within a jurisdiction and the funding requirements of any donor.

      Pilot
      Requirement and expected output
      Pilot projects are used in many policy fields to test the applicability of a policy tool. Piloting
      experiences link theory to practical experience, and help to adapt the implementation of the
      policy tool to the specificities of each system.

      The aim is to benefit from the lessons learned in the pilot projects so that authorities are able to
      implement reforms at a larger scale based on their experience. The piloting phase should allow an
      appropriate period of time to authorities to reflect on how to best fulfil their needs and objectives.

      A pilot phase enables the incentive’s implementer to assess whether or not specific design features
      require modification. This may include assumptions made regarding the resource-efficiency
      gains from specific interventions, the response from businesses, the costs of resource-efficiency
      improvements, and the effort involved in administering the scheme. It is recommended that a pilot


100            1 INTRODUCTION                         2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
study is conducted even if similar technology has been used in similar countries. The results of the
pilot are influenced by a host of factors including the skills and expertise of the personnel involved
in delivery of the scheme, and the particular features of industry sites — especially when integrated
resource-efficiency technologies are installed.

Application
From a practical point of view, the process to develop a pilot project could have the following
structure:
•	 define responsibilities, timeframe and overall institutional framework
•	 plan the pilot-project stages: timetable, resources involved, objectives, and supervision-
    monitoring mechanisms
•	 gather performance data, identify areas for improvements, and demonstrate resource-
    efficiency savings that can be used to secure additional stakeholders’ support (such executive
    leaderships and funders)
•	 analyze the outcomes of the pilot phase and study possible applications in the future in a more
    systematized way
•	 communicate the process and publicize the outcomes — these should be done from the
    beginning of the pilot process to foster support and engage stakeholders

Communication strategy
Requirement and expected output
Engaging with businesses to ensure compliance and commitment to an incentive requires a well-
developed communication strategy.

Application
The general approach to developing a communications strategy is presented in “Climate
Competitive Industries: A Practitioner’s Field Guide” (World Bank Group, 2016). The development
of this communication strategy will be led by the REWG. The steps below should be followed
when creating a communication plan (World Bank Group, 2016).
1.	 Establish goals for the communication plan
2.	 Define/identify audience
3.	 Identify key messages
4.	 Create an outreach plan
5.	 Develop materials
6.	 Specify a timeline
7.	 Communicate program and policy results


            4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             101
      Developing and improving incentive
      administration and management

      The development of effective administration and management for an incentive scheme should
      be undertaken when the institutional delivery mechanism is understood. Once designed, the
      administration and management procedures should be tested. Where possible, this should be
      done using the pilot studies detailed in the previous stage.

      FIGURE 7          Developing and improving incentive administration and management


                                                    Pilot

                                     Developing and improving incentive
                 REWG                                                       Stakeholder engagement
                                      administration and management

                                              Process mapping


                                     Process purpose and responsibilities


                                         Identifying reform options


                                            Implementation plan

                                         Monitoring and evaluation




102           1 INTRODUCTION                      2 TYPES                     3 CONTEXT
The administration and management of incentives should minimize the costs for government and
businesses associated with the incentive, while ensuring policy objectives are achieved. Step 4 of the
investment incentives guidance (World Bank Group, 2015) provides guidance on how to improve
the administrative efficiencies associated with investment incentives. The guidance follows the
method of business process re-engineering. This guidance provides a useful overview of the reform
of existing administrative structures and processes, and is useful in designing a management and
administration regime from scratch. The key stages are taken mostly from the investment incentives
guidance. Practitioners should refer to the original document for a complete overview.

Using process maps to diagnose how the system works
Requirement and expected output
In cases where existing structures (such as processes, implementing agencies, and enforcement)
will be used by an incentive, it is necessary to understand how they operate and are performing.
This provides the baseline for improvement. The output of this stage will be a process map
identifying the key steps that will be used for the new incentive.

In the case of a new incentive scheme that will not adopt an administration structure, a method
will have to be designed and put into a process map.

Application
By interviewing staff from relevant authorities and conducting stakeholder engagement with the
private sector, each stage of the process should be established. The resultant process map should
present:
•	 each step in the application for complying with an incentive
•	 the time burden associated with each step
•	 what the administrative requirements are for each step
•	 an estimate of costs associated with each step

This work should be supported by analyzing the applications received for an incentive. Why
applications are withdrawn or why there are failures in compliance can provide valuable
intelligence for improving application procedures.

In cases where the process has yet to be established, the process map can be drawn on the
proposed approach.




            4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                       6 BIBLIOGRAPHY              103
      Having a clear understanding of the purpose of a process and assigning
      responsibility for monitoring
      Requirement and expected output
      After understanding each stage of the process that is in place, the next level of analysis must
      determine why each stage is required and whether it provides value. During this assessment, the
      following questions should be answered:
      •	 What is the purpose of the procedure?
      •	 Does the process have a solid legal footing?
      •	 Is each procedure absolutely necessary?

      In cases where a process for an incentive has yet to be established, these questions must be kept
      in mind.

      In addition, the following principles should provide the general basis against which the review, or
      development of an administration or management process should take place:
      •	 transparency — procedures should be predetermined, uniform, and available to the public
      •	 appropriate level of responsibility within government departments — administration should be
          undertaken by an appropriate government department
      •	 responsiveness — the process and administration should be geared so that it is easy to
          understand for government and the private sector
      •	 less discretion — incentives should not be assessed on a case-by-case basis
      •	 compliance — consideration must be given to how compliance with a process will be assured

      Application
      In the case of a review of an existing process and the design of a new one, this phase should be
      undertaken in consultation with the private-sector organization that is subject to or will be subject
      to a process and with the government agencies responsible.

      Identifying reform options: knowing the pros and cons, and costs and
      benefits in incentives reform
      Requirement and expected output
      Potential inefficiencies in the existing process will have been identified in the previous step.
      Reforms to the existing process should be suggested. The aim of this task is to develop reform
      options for incentives.




104            1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                         3 CONTEXT
In cases where a process has yet to be designed, this task is likely to be considered before the
previous two steps.

Application
The following can be used in the incentive reform and administration process to increase
efficiency and effectiveness:
•	 process simplification — based on the process map, determine if there are any options for
    streamlining the process
•	 increasing accountability — multiagency approval should be minimized
•	 reducing discretion — discretion can create opportunities for bribery and corruption
•	 fast tracking — where circumstances allow, fast tracking may be applicable for certain applicants
•	 self-certification — where circumstances allow, self-certification may reduce administrative burden
•	 one stop shop — providing a single contact point can support efficiencies
•	 automation — online systems provide ease of administration and application

This phase should be undertaken in consultation with the private-sector organization that is
subject to or will be subject to a procedure and with the government agencies responsible.

Developing an implementation plan: agreeing to a timeline of actions to
implement and sustain the reform
Requirement and expected output
An implementation plan sets out the strategy for implementing a reform to an existing process,
but can also set out the planned strategy for introducing a new administration and management
process for an incentive.

Implementing any change to existing structures or introducing new structures is dependent on
the level of stakeholder support and capacity.

Application
The implementation plan should identify:
•	 who the key stakeholders are
•	 the capacity building required to introduce the reform
•	 the level of communication required in government and with key stakeholders
•	 how often the process will be reviewed




             4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             105
      Monitoring and evaluation: putting in place an evaluation framework to
      monitor, record, and assess development impact
      Requirement and expected output
      To ensure that the administrative processes involved are efficient and not overly burdensome,
      monitoring and evaluation of the procedures is recommended. This is to ensure that efficiencies
      are identified and realized.

      Application
      Monitoring and evaluation of the administrative processes should include:
      •	 monitoring the number of full-time staff in government ministries and agencies dedicated to
         administration of the incentive
      •	 a survey of costs to participants
      •	 a process evaluation identifying which processes might need improvement

      Template for scope of work
      Box 4 includes a template for scope of work that could be included in the terms of reference
      when planning work and understanding capabilities in relation to designing an incentive scheme.
      This template should be revised as appropriate to reflect the specific support required for a given
      country or region.

      BOX 4            Template for scope of work relevant to designing an incentive


        Assignment objective
        A program of work to design an incentive and its implementation that is suitable for the
        particular environment in [insert country] and will help to achieve resource-efficiency objectives.

        Scope of work
        1.	 Selecting an incentive type: building on work in understanding the context in [insert
            country], the favored type of incentive should be chosen for implementation.

        2.	 Design and implementation of an incentive: understanding how the incentive will be
            applied and the necessary conditions for effective implementation will include:
            •	 preparatory steps — to engage with key stakeholders to ensure buy-in and understanding;
               ensure budgetary commitment; and determine the targets for the incentive




106            1 INTRODUCTION                        2 TYPES                           3 CONTEXT
   •	 level and scale of incentive — determining the level and scale of the incentive that is to
      be applied
   •	 institutional delivery mechanism — determining how the incentive will be delivered
      including the responsible agency and mechanism of delivery
   •	 accompanying activities — supporting the implementation of an incentive by
      introducing supporting activities such as capacity building or performance standards
   •	 compliance mechanism — ensuring the rules of an incentive scheme are adhered to
      through the design of an effective compliance mechanism including a monitoring and
      verification system
   •	 policy assessments — ensuring any approach is cost-effective and potential impacts are
      understood prior to implementation requires policy assessment tools to be used
   •	 pilot — testing the implementation of an incentive will help determine the potential
      success of the scheme at a larger scale
   •	 communication strategy — designing an effective strategy to communicate the
      introduction of an incentive scheme to business and stakeholders

3.	 Incentive administration and management — following a systematic process to ensure
    that the design of the administration and management of an incentive is effective, but is
    achieved at minimum cost to business and the government.

Deliverables
A carefully designed implementation program for the introduction of an incentive.




         4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                       6 BIBLIOGRAPHY            107
      Further reading
      Amin, A.-L., Dimsdale, T., & Jaramillo, M. (2014). Designing smart green finance incentive schemes. London:
      E3G.

      Efficiency Valuation Organization. (2012). International Performance Measurement and Verification Protocol.
      Washington: Efficiency Valuation Organization.

      Goulder, L. H., & Parry, I. W. (2008). Instrument Choice in Environmental Policy. RFF Discussion Paper No. 08-07.

      HM Treasury. (2011). The Green Book. London: HM Treasury.

      International Network for Compliance and Enforcement. (2009). Principles of Environmental Compliance and
      Enforcement Handbook. Washington: International Network for Compliance and Enforcement.

      OECD. (2008). Introductory Handbook for Undertaking Regulatory Impact Analysis. Paris: OECD.

      OECD. (2014, March 26). Database on instruments used for environmental policy. Retrieved from OECD: http://
      www2.oecd.org/ecoinst/queries/Default.aspx

      Rademaekers, K., van der Laan, J., Smith, M., van Breugel, C., & Pollitt, H. (2011). The role of market-based
      instruments in achieving a resource efficient economy. European Commission: DG Environment.

      Tukker, A., & Ivanova, O. (2013). Topical Paper 5: Policy options for resource efficiency as input for modelling.
      Brussels: European Commission.

      Whitley, S., & Ellis, K. (2012). Designing public sector interventions to mobilise private participation in low carbon
      development: 20 questions toolkit. London: Overseas Development Institute (ODI).

      World Bank. (2015). Investment Policy: Investment Incentives Toolkit with Tools and Selected Readings.
      Washington: World Bank Group.

      World Bank. (2016). Climate Competitive Industries: A Practitioners Field Guide. Washington: World Bank Group.




108           1 INTRODUCTION                                2 TYPES                                 3 CONTEXT
4 DESIGN   5 FOCUS   6 BIBLIOGRAPHY   109
                           5
                       INCENTIVE FOCUS




110   1 INTRODUCTION         2 TYPES     3 CONTEXT
Tax on resource use (including tax on proxies)	              113
Application of trading schemes	                              120
Application of green finance	                                125




      4 DESIGN              5 FOCUS               6 BIBLIOGRAPHY   111
      What the reader will get from this chapter

       guidance on the specific considerations in
      •	
       implementing taxes, trading schemes or
       green finance

       an appreciation of the wider relevance of
      •	
       these principles for all incentive schemes




112   1 INTRODUCTION      2 TYPES          3 CONTEXT
In this chapter, the focus is on three incentives. These have been selected because they are the
most commonly used, but more technically difficult to apply. The key principles to consider in
the development of these incentives, many of which are relevant for multiple approaches, are
presented. The incentives that are considered are:
•	 taxes on resource use
•	 trading schemes
•	 green finance



Tax on resource use (including tax on proxies)

Principles of application
Taxes can create a strong economic signal to change behavior associated with resource use. A tax
can correct (in part at least) for externalities associated with resource use, such as environmental
or health impacts resulting from pollution that arises. It does so by imposing a cost on companies
that use the resources concerned, either in relation to the quantity used or a measure of the
pollutants or waste products that arise. The imposition of these costs may have an impact on
the competitiveness of the companies using the resources and, potentially, on the prices paid by
consumers for the associated products. For this reason, policy impact assessments need to be
carried out and the range of design options fully considered (for example, in the coverage of the
tax, its rate or for cost-mitigation measures). These options are discussed below.

The tax base
A key question in defining the base of a tax (that is, what is taxed) is what are the specific
objectives in introducing the tax? Is it to reduce resource use or is it to reduce the harms
associated with that resource use?

If the objective of the tax is to reduce any environmental harm (such as a pollutant) associated
with resource use, then the tax should be applied as “closely” as possible to that pollutant (that
is, in relation to the quantity of the pollutant at the point of release to the environment or a proxy
directly related to the pollutant). This maximizes the incentive for the abatement options available.
If the tax is applied to an intermediate good (or a proxy), the incentive will be limited to a subset
of abatement options. An example given by the OECD (OECD, 2010) is that if a tax is put on coal
use to address sulfur emissions, the abatement options will be limited to reducing coal use or



            4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             113
      finding an alternative to the use of coal; there would be no financial incentive to adopt “end-of-
      pipe” measures that would reduce sulfur emissions.

      If the objective is to reduce the resource use directly, then the tax should be applied as closely as
      possible to the point at which the resource is used.

       Wider relevance — identifying the objective of the incentive and where it shall be applied
       is important for all incentives.

      Coherence
      Coherence means that government policies should be aligned consistently towards common
      objectives; be applied uniformly; and not have conflicting goals, economic incentives or
      administrative procedures. Coherent incentives will be more efficient and make the best use of
      public funds.

      Any new tax that will be introduced for the purposes of resource efficiency must fit into the
      existing regulatory and tax environment.

      Incentives or regulatory approaches that conflict with the goals of resource efficiency may be in place
      and reform should be considered (including a program of subsidy reforms) prior to the application of
      a new tax. The basis of any assessment of reform options should be the regulatory and institutional
      analysis described in the section “Assess the regulatory and institutional context” on page 67.

      This coherence should extend to the same rate of tax being applied to every unit of pollution or
      resource use. Tax rates which are homogenous will ensure any reduction is achieved as cheaply as
      possible (OECD, 2010).

      The establishment of a new tax can have a significant financial impact on businesses and they
      may seek to influence design choices. To minimize any potential disruption from vested interests,
      careful and extensive stakeholder engagement must be undertaken.

       Wider relevance — coherence of regulation and incentives is a principle that should be
       adopted across all incentives.




114            1 INTRODUCTION                         2 TYPES                           3 CONTEXT
Flexibility, certainty, and tax levels
Change is fostered through leveraging behavioral and structural responses — in this case through
incentives. Generally, behavioral responses occur in response to price signals in the short term.
Structural responses occur in the long term and come through investment in technologies, or
through cultural or market changes. These structural responses are dependent on long-term price
signals, and the predictability and credibility of a policy (OECD, 2010).

Changing economic circumstances and the difficulty in setting a tax level that results in the
desired resource use means that the impact of a tax on businesses and on resource use is
uncertain, and needs to be monitored carefully by the implementing body. The rate of tax may
be adjusted if resource use is not decreasing, or the tax burden is disproportionate or having
unintended consequences. For this reason, an effective monitoring and evaluation program must
be created by the implementing body, with regular review of the level of tax.

However, it should be understood that frequently changing the level of taxes (and incentives more
broadly) creates uncertainty and can undermine the intended structural changes towards resource
efficiency. The evolution of the tax should be well communicated and provide long-term clarity to the
market. A planned scale-up of the tax rate may be favored as it allows the progressive introduction of
costs and monitoring of impacts. In the longer term, changes should be concerned with fine tuning.

 Wider relevance — monitoring and evaluation of the level of an incentive is key.

Use of revenue
Taxes on resource use will generate revenues for the government. How this additional revenue
should be spent is an important issue. Economic theory would suggest compensating those who
suffer the damage of resource use (hypothecation), but this is very complicated to do in practice.
Therefore, it is suggested that revenues from taxes on resource use should be treated much like
the revenues from any other tax (OECD, 2010).

A further consideration for the use of revenues is that the impacts of the resource tax could be
mitigated by correspondingly reducing the tax burden on other aspects of the economy. For
instance, the impacts of energy-related taxation on energy-intensive industry could be mitigated
by corresponding tax incentives associated with the purchase of capital intensive energy-efficient
equipment. Such action may provide political support for a tax (OECD, 2010).



            4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             115
        Wider relevance — the use of revenues collected from any incentive should seek to
        maximize societal benefit, be that through general government spending or reducing
        particular distortions in the economy.

      Defining the level of the tax
      The theoretical basis for setting taxes where the marginal cost of damage associated with an
      activity is equal to the marginal cost of abatement is known as the Pigouvian level (OECD,
      2010). Setting Pigouvian taxes requires a detailed understanding of the social costs associated
      with resource use. These costs are difficult to estimate — knowing the marginal rate of damage
      associated with resource use and then giving it a monetary value is a complex process. Therefore,
      policymakers have preferred to introduce a desired target for resource use (or level of pollution)
      and adjust the tax rate to reach this desired level. Estimating the level of tax required to reach a
      level of output can be done based on elasticities8 of demand for the resource.

      Any method of determining marginal social costs or elasticities for a good will be uncertain.
      Therefore, some degree of refinement in the tax rate could be required as the policy evolves.

        Wider relevance — setting levels of incentives is not an exact science and should be
        reviewed regularly.

      What are the challenges specific to tax implementation?
      Tax administration
      There are three major tasks of effective tax administration that could present a challenge to
      governments without appropriate capacities or existing tax infrastructure (Bird, 2010).

      Facilitating compliance
      Implementing agencies must make sure those parties subject to any tax are able to pay easily and
      efficiently. There are four components of facilitating compliance (Bird, 2010):
      •	 An easy registration process for taxpayers and a systematic process in which to identify those
          who are not fulfilling their tax obligations must be in place. This could be done by adopting
          unique tax identification.
      •	 Tax liabilities should be determined through a systematic process using self-assessment or by
          the implementing agency.

      8	 Elasticities (or price elasticities) describe the change in quantity demanded of a good in response to a change in price. Price
         elasticities are presented as the percentage change in demand in response to a one percentage change in demand. For exam-
         ple, if a price elasticity of electricity is -0.4, it means that if prices go up by 10% then electricity demand will fall by 4%.



116               1 INTRODUCTION                                   2 TYPES                                    3 CONTEXT
•	 Tax collection is key — this should be done through the financial system and cash collection
   should be avoided.
•	 Taxpayers require certain support services to facilitate taxpayer compliance, including advice
   agencies, telephone and online services, and guidance literature.

Ensuring compliance
Tax authorities must have a thorough understanding of the tax base and, as a consequence, who
should pay to determine the extent of non-compliance. This would include the number of companies
and the scale of their exposure to a tax so as to understand the number of companies that are not
complying because they are not filing tax returns or they are underreporting resource use.

Attention should also be paid to ensure that the known tax base pays on time and in full. This
is a matter of enacting simple tasks such as quickly following up on companies that do not file
on time or pay incorrect amounts. Penalties and interest charges should be applied to provide
incentives to deter evasion and late payments.

Ensuring tax system is free from corruption
To ensure the tax administration is free from corruption, tax officials must be adequately
compensated and professionally trained to minimize the temptation to engage in corrupt
practices. Direct contact between tax officials and taxpayers should be limited to exceptional
circumstances to minimize the opportunity for corruption.

 Wider relevance — making incentives easy to apply for or to comply with, making sure
 any conditions are adhered to, and ensuring that there is no corruption in the system are
 good practices for all incentives.

Implications for competitiveness and the environment
Taxes provide incentives to resource inefficient companies to improve their resource efficiency. If
they do not adjust in response to the tax, inefficient resource users will be put at a competitive
disadvantage. However, there is a concern about how taxes on resources will impact on the
competitiveness of companies on an international scale and whether a tax would force companies
to relocate with no improvement in resource efficiency, a situation known as leakage, originally
phrased in the context of carbon leakage due to regulatory costs of carbon mitigation policies.




            4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                       6 BIBLIOGRAPHY            117
      There are three causes of leakage:
      •	 Investment leakage — regulatory action can result in incentives for companies to relocate
         to regions/areas with less stringent environmental regulations. The company’s investments are
         then made outside of the regulated area and with less focus on improving resource efficiency.
      •	 Trade leakage — unilateral environmental policies can create a competitive disadvantage
         for regulated companies competing in global markets. Consumption of products within the
         borders of a regulated market is substituted with imported goods from countries outside the
         regulated area whose products do not face comparable costs from climate legislation. A similar
         effect may also occur in the export market of the regulated area.
      •	 Energy price leakage/supply-side leakage — the reduced demand for resources as a result
         of resource-efficiency policies can create a downward pressure on global resource prices. Those
         countries without stringent resource-efficiency policies will then use more resources as a result of
         reduced prices. In this instance, the resource use has not “leaked” in the same way as it does in the
         first two instances, but there could be a net increase in global resource use as a result of resource
         regulation and it is believed that this could be the most significant factor of all three.

      The best option to tackle international competitiveness concerns and any leakage is to coordinate
      environmental regulation across countries. However, the extent to which this is feasible is very
      limited, and further options to mitigate competitive impacts should be considered. One method
      of addressing leakage concerns is to provide companies with fair warning that environmental
      regulation is coming. This gives them sufficient time to adjust investments accordingly, assuming
      they wish to avoid relocation. Companies affected by a tax could receive recycled revenues to
      reduce the impact on them. In this instance, an important consideration is whether or to what
      degree the mitigation measure reduces the incentive for resource-efficiency improvements. Tax
      allowances or rebates contingent on improvements in resource efficiency can be an option.

      Border tax adjustments are measures imposed to correct for any competitive disadvantage
      businesses face resulting from domestic environmental policies (Eckermann, et al., 2012). This can
      have two components:
      •	 a tax on imports that contain resources that domestic industries pay a tax on (if applied)
      •	 a refund to exporting businesses for any tax paid domestically to ensure they are competitive
         internationally (Eckermann, et al., 2012)

      This approach has yet to be adopted (OECD, 2010).




118            1 INTRODUCTION                         2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
It should be recognized that environmental regulation is only one small part in a company’s
decision to relocate (OECD, 2010). The evidence on the existence of leakage as a result of
environmental regulation is mixed. However, measures can be included in any incentive to address
such concerns. These are discussed fully in the World Bank’s Partnership for Market Readiness
(PMR) document “Carbon Leakage” (PMR, 2015).

 Wider relevance — incentives that impose a cost on companies should be designed with
 an awareness of leakage, but action to alleviate it should not undermine the desired
 objectives of the scheme.

Distributional concerns
Taxes on resource use can affect individuals through the “pass-through” of taxation costs to
product prices or the tax applied directly to the resources used by individuals (such as utilities).
This can have consequences for the poorest in society. Therefore, taxes should be designed
with this in mind. Approaches to tackle distributional concerns have included exempting certain
households from any tax or reducing tax rates for particularly poor regions. However, the risk in
taking these approaches is that any incentive is reduced and the intended progressive impacts
are not achieved (OECD, 2010). A better approach would be to address distributional concerns
through existing taxes, such as lowering incomes taxes, or with welfare provision.

 Wider relevance — incentives that could impose a cost on a poorer section of society
 should ensure that measures are in place to minimize the overall impact, although this
 need not necessarily be through reducing the level of incentive.




            4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                       6 BIBLIOGRAPHY            119
      Application of trading schemes

      Principles of application
      Trading schemes involve governments defining an upper limit (a cap) to an activity (such as
      emitting CO2 from specific sectors) in a region over a specified time period. Allowances up to
      the level of the cap are issued and regulated entities must acquire and surrender a number of
      allowances corresponding to their actual activity (for example, their verified emissions). The
      allowances can be auctioned or freely allocated to regulated entities (for example, based on their
      previous emissions levels). Regulated entities may freely buy and sell allowances from and to each
      other or from and to non-regulated entities that may participate in the allowance market. The
      optimum strategy for regulated entities is to reduce the activity covered by the trading system
      where it is cheaper to do so than to buy allowances, but no further. In doing so, the regulated
      entity may need to acquire additional allowances from the market or have a surplus to sell.

      The following section presents the key aspects that should be considered for the design of a
      trading scheme to improve resource efficiency. These considerations are mainly based on those
      experiences associated with ETSs. Emissions trading does not focus directly on resources, but
      instead on the pollutants associated with the use of resources.

      It should be kept in mind that emissions trading for the purposes of reducing CO2 emissions is not
      the only area where trading schemes have been applied. Trading schemes have also been applied
      for sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions, water quality, and resource rights for fishing using individual
      transferable quotas (ITOs).

      The cap
      A key indication of the ambition of a trading scheme is the level of the cap on emissions,
      resources, or usage rights. The cap is converted into the allowances/quotas/credit/units of trade.
      The cap could severely curtail the use of resources in a country or it could be set at a level that
      sets low-level reductions in resource use from industry, but gets more stringent over time.

      The setting of a cap determines the use of resources (or level of pollutant) in an economy, but
      is vulnerable to political manipulation from those groups with vested interests. A balance must
      be sought between environmental objectives and bearable economic costs for industry and
      consumers. Intensity targets could be used in place of a cap to allow for increased economic



120            1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
activity in sectors with high and/or uncertain growth prospects that contribute to the wider
development of the economy, such as in developing countries where economic development is so
key to poverty reduction.

 Wider relevance — all incentives must weigh up the benefits and costs for society in
 achieving an resource-efficiency target.

Allocation methodology
The unit of trade in a trading scheme, be it allowances, quotas, or credits (referred to as
allowances for simplicity going forward), provides a participant in a trading scheme the right to
emit a certain quantity of pollutant or use a quantity of a resource. The right to emit a pollutant
or use a resource is valuable in a regulated market. Therefore, how these rights are initially
determined is of critical importance to a scheme. The allocation can be undertaken using free
allocations or auctions.

Free allocations could be used to minimize the burden on industries and to prevent leakage
(discussed in the section “What are the challenges specific to tax implementation?” in the context
of taxes on page 116). Free allocation can be based on historical emissions or resource use
(grandfathering) or on benchmarks applied to historical activity levels. Both of these approaches
require considerable data gathering and analysis. Providing allowances on a historical basis
grants a form of rent to companies and, in principle, could provide perverse incentives for higher
emissions, resource use, or activity prior to the system introduction to secure a more favorable
allocation. An additional disadvantage is that the costs of allowances may be recoverable through
product prices (at least in part) and an initial allocation for free can result in net windfall profits.

Auctioning the allowances in a trading scheme requires less primary data collection than free
allocation and can provide revenue to implementing agencies. Grandfathering and auctioning will
result in the same price in the trading market, but does impact the initial ownership of trading
rights. In the case of grandfathering, polluting industries extract the benefit from these trading
rights. With auctions, it is extracted by the implementing agency, which could then redistribute
appropriately for social gain. As a result, most analyses stress that an auction system is a more
cost-effective way for society to allocate permits.

 Wider relevance — care must be taken in giving resource inefficient industries an
 advantageous position based on past performance.



             4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY              121
      Monitoring, reporting, and verification
      An effective monitoring, reporting, and verification (MRV) system is a critical part of any trading
      scheme. It underlines the environmental integrity of, and underpins market confidence in, a
      system. Monitoring determines the emissions or resources used. This is generally done by the
      market participant themselves. The difficulty in measuring resource use or emissions may mean
      that a proxy to the resource is used as the basis for monitoring. In the case of ETS, direct emission
      monitoring or proxies (fuel use) are used to determine the emissions covered by the scheme.
      Verification is the process by which the monitoring of regulated parties is checked by a third party.
      Considerable guidance exists on MRV approaches, especially with regard to the EU ETS9.

      As part of the overall compliance and oversight processes, the emissions or resource use must be
      reported to the regulator and this is often done online. Again, this is done by the participant of
      the trading scheme.

       Wider relevance — clear guidance must be established of what is expected from
       participants with regards to MRV for any incentive.

      Flexible measures
      Trading schemes could adopt flexible measures that allow market participants to meet their
      obligations at the lowest cost. These measures, which are primarily designed for ETS, include:
      •	 Banking — gives participants the option to carry over surplus allowances for use in the future.
      •	 Borrowing — allows for use of future allowances against the previous year’s obligations.
      •	 Offset mechanisms — participants are allowed to meet their obligations under the trading
         scheme by paying for reductions in resource/emissions outside the boundaries of the trading
         scheme. It must be ensured that the standards for offsets matches the standards of the trading
         scheme.
      •	 Linking — linking trading schemes across national or regional boundaries would allow
         participants to achieve resource/emission reductions in the cheapest way possible. However,
         linking schemes requires extensive co-ordination and harmonization across schemes.

       Wider relevance — incentive designers should allow companies and consumers to
       improve resource efficiency in the cheapest manner possible through building flexibility
       into an incentive.


      9	http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets/monitoring/documentation_en.htm




122              1 INTRODUCTION                                2 TYPES               3 CONTEXT
Supporting measures
Supporting measures may be beneficial in a trading scheme to ensure market shocks and cost
concerns are addressed. These measures, which are most commonly applied to ETS, fall into the
following categories:

•	 Managing market supply and price
   –	 Managing supply of allowances — unforeseen events, such as recessions or particularly
      strong growth, may create circumstances in which there is an oversupply or undersupply
      in the scheme. While this is potentially manageable in the short term, severe or persistent
      imbalances can result in distortions in the market including extremely low or high prices. A
      system where allowances are kept in reserve or released from a reserve can be used to help
      accommodate such circumstances. This would not impact the level of the cap.
   –	 Price caps and price floors — these tools could be used to set boundaries in which prices
      can fluctuate. Such approaches impact the efficiency of the market and any unplanned or
      repeated regulatory interventions can undermine market confidence.

•	 Managing participant and non-participant costs
   To minimize costs to participant industries and minimize the risks of leakage, cost mitigation
   measures may be required. This could include free allowances or financial assistance. This
   support should be provided with the understanding that the long-term direction of the
   regulated industry is towards resource efficiency and this support is transitional.

•	 Institutional infrastructure
   Strong institutional infrastructure is required to establish an effective trading scheme. The
   following are key:
   –	 regulation and enforcement — an effective regulator is required to ensure compliance with
       the scheme and provide market oversight
   –	 allowance registry — a functioning registry system needs to be put in place to record
       ownership, and transfer and surrender of allowances
   –	 trading platform — a well-managed platform on which trading takes place is key; it will be
       a spot market and could allow for futures trading




            4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                      6 BIBLIOGRAPHY            123
      •	 Legal foundation
         Any trading scheme requires a solid legal framework. There are levels of regulation:
         –	 the law or regulation concerning the trading scheme itself which specifies the structure of
            the scheme
         –	 the law that concerns the technical guidance for each component of the scheme
         –	 those legal/regulatory provisions that are required so that the scheme may be managed
            effectively

       Wider relevance — strong institutional structures must be in place for incentive schemes.

      What are the challenges specific to trading schemes?
      Political commitment
      Securing political commitment is critical to implementing a functioning trading scheme. For
      investors and the allowance market, this will help provide confidence in the longevity and stability
      of the system, and that oversight and enforcement arrangements will be applied robustly and fairly.

       Wider relevance — incentives require strong political backing which can determine the
       success of any program.

      Oversupply
      A number of factors, including weak ambition (as a result of weak political commitment), the
      use of international credits, and the economic downturn resulted in oversupply of allowances in
      carbon trading systems after 2008. This oversupply resulted in an extremely low carbon price,
      providing very little incentive to abate (Asian Development Bank (ADB), 2016).

       Wider relevance — strong price signals must be sent by incentives to change behavior.

      Leakage from trading schemes
      This is discussed in the section “What are the challenges specific to tax implementation?” with
      respect to taxes on page 116.




124            1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
Application of green finance

Principles of application
In this section, “green finance” refers to loans and other instruments that can be applied through
the financial system. Grants can be considered alongside these instruments, but are often
provided through the public sector.

Existence of financial infrastructure
Financial incentives can be applied where the financial sector is well developed and stable. The
strength of the financial sector in comparison to the capacities of the public sector may mean
that an incentive that utilizes the established infrastructure is more attractive.

 Wider relevance — existing institutional structures should be used wherever possible.

Demand for the incentive
If a financial incentive is to be utilized in the pursuit of resource efficiency, there must be demand
from industry. The success of the incentive will be driven by the demand for it. If industry has no
demand for resource-efficient investments and, therefore, for financial incentives, the demand
could be created through a supplementary approach. For example, drivers from regulatory action
or resource taxes could be utilized to make the case for longer term business benefits which in
turn will drive demand.

 Wider relevance — designers must be sure there is demand for an incentive through
 stakeholder engagement.

Poor public-sector financing
There will be circumstances where regulatory approaches such as taxes, tax preferences, grants
(on their own), and subsidies may be inappropriate (for example, in countries with a poor fiscal
position, political instability, or low institutional capacity). This leaves room for DFIs to support
resource efficiency through financial incentives in a country by using the financial sector.

 Wider relevance — DFIs may provide support to implement an incentive where
 government is in a poor financial position.




             4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                        6 BIBLIOGRAPHY            125
      How to define the right level of incentives
      International support for resource efficiency
      At an international level, where concessional finance is provided by international donors (such as
      DFIs and bilaterally), the level of concessionality of a financial incentive is dependent on public-sector
      finances, capacity in the recipient country, and the financial variables of the activities supported.
      For example, grants, instead of loans, may be chosen if a country has a low level of income, high
      debts levels, or a lack of financial infrastructure. Those projects where revenue would be generated,
      but which do not occur due to high upfront capital costs, should be funded through loans. Table 2
      provides an overview of the types of finance that should be offered in such circumstances.

      TABLE 2           Guidelines for uses of grants and loans (REDD-net, 2010)


        Conditions	 Revenue- 	                                      Non-revenue	            Revenue-
        	           generating	                                     generating 	            generating
        	           activities	                                     activities 	            activities
        		                                                          (capacity building, 	   with high
        		                                                          policy planning)	       technical risk

        Sovereign funding to government	 Concessional	 Grants	                              Grants
        with strong macroeconomic	       loans
        and institutional conditions			
        Sovereign funding to weak	                Grants	           Grants	                 Grants
        macroeconomic and institutional
        conditions	
        Project-based funding to	                 Concessional	     Grants	                 Grants
        non-government entity	                    loans



      The choice of financial instrument is not as binary as a grant or loan. There are a number of financial
      instruments that could support the development of resource efficiency and the level of support
      provided by each can also vary enormously (the level of concessionality). The World Bank collects data
      on the average grant element (which provides some indication of concessionality) on new external
      debt commitments for developing countries (World Bank, 2015). The grant element of the loan is its




126             1 INTRODUCTION                         2 TYPES                          3 CONTEXT
commitment less the discounted present value of its contractual debt service. Those loans included
are from the World Bank, regional development banks, and other multilateral agencies. These are not
prescriptive rates for resource efficiency, but do provide an indication that poorer countries receive
greater grant elements in their debt obligations as presented in (World Bank, 2015) Table 3.


TABLE 3           Average grant element on new external debt commitments, official
                  (percent) (World Bank, 2015)


  	                                          2010	2011	2012	2013	2014

  Low income	                                71.08	65.89	65.84	64.70	61.40
  Lower middle income	                       57.58	60.40	53.87	63.81	58.43
  Low and middle income	                     56.62	53.76	54.25	61.40	57.51
  Middle income	                             54.90	52.08	52.34	60.92	56.71
  Upper middle income	                       52.49	43.71	49.46	52.51	54.48



Domestic support for resource efficiency
At a project level, the degree of concessionality provided to companies must make the investment
in resource efficiency attractive while ensuring that the company feels a responsibility to own the
project and that it makes returns for its business. For instance, if a financial incentive, say a loan,
is offered to a company for a resource-efficiency project at just below market rates, there may not
be sufficient incentive to undertake the project. However, if overly generous terms are offered,
the company may not have any stake in ensuring the project achieves its financial and resource-
efficiency objectives. This is a circumstance known as moral hazard (World Bank, 2015).

No strict rules or guidance exist in setting the levels of concessionality for financial incentives for
projects. However, international benchmarks should be taken alongside stakeholder engagement
and market analysis to determine appropriate rates.

Combination of instruments
Loans and other financial instruments can often be combined with grants to incentivize
investment in resource efficiency. The level of support, as discussed in the preceding section, is




            4 DESIGN                           5 FOCUS                         6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             127
      dependent on the country and project circumstances. Example approaches are provided in the
      European Commission Technical Guidance on Financing the Energy Renovation of Buildings with
      Cohesion Policy Funding (European Commission, 2014). A project may be funded throughout
      implementation by a mix of support grants, financial instruments, and the beneficiary’s own
      contribution. Alternatively, a grant might fund a project through an inception phase with project
      implementation being funded by the beneficiary’s own contribution and financial instruments
      (European Commission, 2014).

       Wider relevance — the type of incentive is strongly dependent on the country context.

      What are the challenges specific to green finance?
      Capacity requirements
      Loan-based incentive systems use basic financial infrastructure. Therefore, their effectiveness will
      depend on the robustness of the infrastructure, including, for example, the degree of corruption.
      Methods of ensuring that an incentive scheme will itself be financially robust and otherwise
      successful include:
      •	 accessing prior experience in government and other organizations (particularly of similar policy
         measures, end users, and financing structures)
      •	 working with reputable intermediaries (respected by resource-using companies)
      •	 using international organizations to provide objective and unbiased checks and services
      •	 explicitly including monitoring and checks to overcome weaknesses in the financial system
         (this may add appreciable or unaffordable costs)
      •	 strongly focusing on organizational design and links with the operational components of the
         incentive scheme

      In terms of staffing, technical requirements for such an incentive scheme involve specific
      scientific or engineering knowledge that is essential for understanding the application that the
      loan is designed to support. Skills in financial management and negotiation are required, as
      are more general skills in monitoring and reporting. At the government level, experience in the
      management of similar programs is necessary.




128            1 INTRODUCTION                       2 TYPES                         3 CONTEXT
The availability of a suitably skilled workforce is required in all of those areas — with a priority
on assessing scarce skills — because the lack of qualified staff may lead to bottlenecks. Any
difference in capacity between the current and required skill levels may be met through:
•	 providing training (with additional costs)
•	 limiting the size of the incentive scheme (for example, by geographic area, industrial sector, or
    size of company)
•	 requiring proof of capacity and ability (for example, qualifications or track record) from
    applicants

Financially, the availability of government funds will be a primary consideration. Assessment of
financial capacity should also consider:
•	 contingency requirements (for example, whether uptake is very high)
•	 the financial capacity of intermediaries (for example, additional lending may affect their
    creditworthiness or may be limited by banking rules or other agreements)
•	 aggregate financial capacity (creditworthiness) of end users (which could set an upper limit on
    the funding they can afford)
•	 potential for sharing risk (for example, with international donors)

 Wider relevance — there must be the institutional capacity in place to implement and
 manage an incentive

Application, selection, and disbursement
There are two ways of applying for project finance (European Commission, 2014):
•	 Calls for project proposals — such as a tendering process where the best projects are selected
   based on the objectives of the scheme. This method is generally suited to large-scale projects
   and where there is limited funding.
•	 Open applications — applicants can apply where the criteria are met. This will generally result
   in a large number of applicants and, in the case where there are limited funds, successful
   applications can be determined on a first-come, first-served basis. Decentralized application
   and approval processes appear to be the most successful with local installers and approvers.




            4 DESIGN                          5 FOCUS                       6 BIBLIOGRAPHY             129
      Project selection should be determined through a transparent and systematic project evaluation
      framework, allowing for scoring on key criteria. A project selection database should be
      established and feedback should be provided to unsuccessful applicants. Funds can be disbursed
      through (European Commission, 2014):
      •	 regional financial institutions or DFIs
      •	 national public financial institutions
      •	 special purpose vehicles/dedicated investment vehicles
      •	 private financial institutions

       Wider relevance — designers must consider the management process associated with
       any incentive.


        Further reading
        ADB. (2016). Emissions Trading Schemes and Their Linking: Challenges and Opportunities in Asia and the Pacific.
        Manilla: ADB. Retrieved from http://www.adb.org/publications/emissions-trading-schemes-and-their-linking

        Bird, R. (2010, October). Smart Tax Administration. World Bank Economic Premise.

        Eckermann, F., Golde, M., Herczeg, M., Mazzanti, M., Montini, A., & Zoboli, R. (2012). Resource Taxation
        and Resource Efficiency along the value chain of mineral resources. Copenhagen: European Topic Centre on
        Sustainable Consumption and Production.

        European Commission. (2014). Technical Guidance: Financing the energy renovation of buildings with Cohesion
        Policy funding. Brussels: European Commission.

        OECD. (2010). Taxation, Innovation and the Environment. Paris: OECD.

        PMR. (2015). Carbon Leakage — Theory, Evidence and Policy Design. Washington: The World Bank.

        World Bank. (2015). Investment Policy: Investment Incentives Toolkit with Tools and Selected Readings.
        Washington: World Bank Group.




130            1 INTRODUCTION                              2 TYPES                               3 CONTEXT
4 DESIGN   5 FOCUS   6 BIBLIOGRAPHY   131
                         6
                       BIBLIOGRAPHY




132   1 INTRODUCTION       2 TYPES    3 CONTEXT
Bibliography
ADB. (2016). Emissions Trading Schemes and Their Linking: Challenges and Opportunities in Asia and the Pacific.
Manilla: ADB. Retrieved from http://www.adb.org/publications/emissions-trading-schemes-and-their-linking

Amin, A.-L., Dimsdale, T., & Jaramillo, M. (2014). Designing smart green finance incentive schemes. London: E3G.

BIO Intelligence Service, Institute for Social Ecology and Sustainable Europe Institute. (2012). Assessment of resource
efficiency indicators and targets. European Commission, DG Environment.

BIO Intelligence Service, Institute for Social Ecology and Sustainable Europe Research Institute. (2012). Assessment of
resource efficiency indicators and targets. Annex Report. European Commission, DG Environment.

Bird, R. (2010, October). Smart Tax Administration. World Bank Economic Premise.

Carbon Trust. (2015). The Enhanced Capital Allowance scheme for energy savings schemes. Carbon Trust. Retrieved
from https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/421006/ECA272_Capital_
Allowance_v7_April_2015.pdf

CDKN Asia. (2011, July 6). FEATURE: Explosion of solar power in Bangladesh. Retrieved from CDKN: http://cdkn.
org/2011/07/explosion-of-solar-power-in-Bangladesh/?loclang=en_gb

Cleantech Magazine. (2010, March/April). UK: Energy from Waste. Retrieved from Cleantech Magazine: http://www.
cleantechinvestor.com/portal/bioenergy/5170-uk-energy-from-waste.html

Clements et al. (2013). Case Studies on Energy Subsidy Reform: Lessons and Implications. Washington DC:
International Monetary Fund.

Clements et al. (2013). Energy Subsidy Reform: Lessons and Implications. Washington DC: International Monetary
Fund.

Crawford, G. (2012). Ghana’s Fossil Fuel Subsidy Reform — Case Study 09. Institute of Development Studies (IDS).

D’Haultfoeuille, X., Givord, P., & Boutin, X. (2013). The Environmental Effect of Green Taxation. Retrieved from http://
www.crest.fr/ckfinder/userfiles/files/pageperso/xdhaultfoeuille/bonus_malus_final.pdf

Dobbs, R., Oppenheim, J., Thompson, F., Mareels, S., Nyquist, S., & Sanghvi, S. (2013). Resource Revolution: Tracking
global commodity markets. McKinsey Global Institute.

Duval, R. (2008). “A Taxonomy of Instruments to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions and their Interactions”, OECD
Economics Department Working Papers, No. 636, OECD Publishing, Paris.

Eckermann, F., Golde, M., Herczeg, M., Mazzanti, M., Montini, A., & Zoboli, R. (2012). Resource Taxation and
Resource Efficiency along the value chain of mineral resources. Copenhagen: European Topic Centre on Sustainable
Consumption and Production.




               4 DESIGN                                 5 FOCUS                             6 BIBLIOGRAPHY                 133
      Ecofys et al. (2015). Savings and benefits of global regulations for energy efficient products. A ‘cost of non-world’
      study. Final report for the European Commission. Retrieved from https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/
      Cost%20of%20Non-World%20-%20Final%20Report.pdf

      Ecorys. (2012). The role of market-based instruments in achieving a resource efficient economy. Report for the
      European Commission. Retrieved from http://ec.europa.eu/environment/enveco/taxation/pdf/role_marketbased.pdf

      Efficiency Valuation Organization. (2012). International Performance Measurement and Verification Protocol.
      Washington: Efficiency Valuation Organization.

      Elahi, R., Rysankova, D., Sadeque, Z., & Soni, R. (2014). Scaling up access to electricity: the case of Bangladesh.
      Live wire knowledge note series no. 2014/21. Retrieved from http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
      en/2014/06/19669152/scaling-up-access-electricity-case-bangladesh

      Energising Development. (n.d.). Bangladesh. Retrieved from Energising Development: http://endev.info/content/
      Bangladesh

      Environment Agency. (2012). Waste Mangement 2012. National Archives. Retrieved from http://webarchive.
      nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140328084622/http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/research/library/data/150322.aspx

      Environmental Services Association. (2012). Beyond landfill — using green taxes to incentivise the waste hierarchy.
      London: Environmental Services Association.

      Environmental Services Association. (2016). Landfill & Disposal. Retrieved from Environmental Services Association:
      http://www.esauk.org/landfill_and_disposal/

      European Commission. (2014). Technical Guidance: Financing the energy renovation of buildings with Cohesion Policy
      funding. Brussels: European Commission.

      European Commission. (2015, November 19). Resource Efficiency. Retrieved from European Commission Environment
      Website: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/resource_efficiency/

      Eurostat. (n.d.). Resource Efficiency Scoreboard. Retrieved from Eurostat: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/
      environmental-data-centre-on-natural-resources/resource-efficiency-indicators/resource-efficiency-scoreboard

      Fair Energy Partner. (no date). Gerätetausch. Retrieved from http://www.fep.at/index.php/aktuelles/aktuelles-detail/
      ger%C3%A4tetausch

      Frankfurt School of Finance & Management. (2016). Course — Certified Expert in Climate & Renewable Energy
      Finance. Retrieved from http://www.frankfurt-school.de/linked/en/courses/renewable-energy.html

      GCF. (2015). Level of Concessional Terms for the Public Sector. Green Climate Fund.

      Goulder, L. H., & Parry, I. W. (2008). Instrument Choice in Environmental Policy. RFF Discussion Paper No. 08-07.




134              1 INTRODUCTION                                2 TYPES                                3 CONTEXT
GOV.UK. (2015). Press release: £70 million for home energy efficiency through the Green Deal Home Improvement
Fund Release 3. Retrieved from https://www.gov.uk/government/news/70-million-for-home-energy-efficiency-through-
the-green-deal-home-improvement-fund-release-3

Green Investment Bank. (2014). The UK residual waste market. Retrieved from http://www.greeninvestmentbank.com/
media/25376/gib-residual-waste-report-july-2014-final.pdf

Greene, J., & Braathen, N. (2014). Tax Preferences for Environmental Goals: Use Limitations and Preferred Practices.
OECD Environment Working Papers. OECD Publishing. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jxwrr4hkd6l-en

GreenMax Capital Advisors. (2009). Lessons Learned from Energy Efficiency Finance Programs in the Building
Sector. Report for the European Climate Foundation. Retrieved from http://europeanclimate.org/documents/
LessonslearnedfromEEfinance-v2.pdf

GTZ, CSCP, Wuppertal Institute. (2006). Policy Instruments for Resource Efficiency: Towards Sustainable Consumption
and Production. Retrieved from http://www.scp-centre.org/fileadmin/content/files/publications/GTZ-CSCP-PolicyInstrum
entsResourceEfficiency.pdf

Haque, N. (2013). IDCOL Solar Home System Program. Rural Energy Access: A Nexus approach to Sustainable
Development and Poverty Eradication. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

Hintermann, B. (2015). “Market power in emission permit markets: Theory and evidence from the EU ETS.”
Environmental and Resource Economics (2015): 1-24.

Hirschnitz-Garbers, M., Srebotnjak, T., Porsch, L., Grünig, M., Hand, P., & Timeus Cerezo, K. (2012). Integrating
resource efficiency, greening of industrial production and green industries- scoping of and recommendations for
effective indicators. Berlin: Ecologic.

HM Treasury. (2011). The Green Book. London: HM Treasury.

IEA. (2016). Energy Efficiency Policies and Measures Database. Retrieved from http://www.iea.org/policiesandmeasures/
energyefficiency/

IMF. (2013). ENERGY SUBSIDY REFORM: LESSONS AND IMPLICATIONS. Retrieved from http://www.imf.org/external/np/
pp/eng/2013/012813.pdf

INCE. (2009). Principles of Environmental Compliance and Enforcement Handbook. Washington: International Network
for Compliance and Enforcement.

Interfax Ukraine. (2015, 12 02). Ukraine plans to revoke customs, tax benefits for imports of energy efficient goods.
Retrieved from http://en.interfax.com.ua/news/economic/308266.html

Kabir, I. (2015, May 17). The potential of solar home systems in Bangladesh. Retrieved from The Daily Star: http://www.
thedailystar.net/op-ed/the-potential-solar-home-systems-bangladesh-82837

Khandker, S. R., Koolwal, G. B., & Samad, H. A. (2010). Handbook on Impact Evaluation. Washington: The World Bank.




               4 DESIGN                                5 FOCUS                             6 BIBLIOGRAPHY                 135
      Khandker, S. R., Samad, H. A., Sadeque, Z. K., Asaduzzaman, M., Yunnus, M., & Hague, A. E. (n.d.). Bangladesh rural
      electrification and renewable energy development — Solar Homes System (SHS) Project: lessons learned. Retrieved
      from http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/09/25096025/bangladesh-rural-electrification-renewable-
      energy-development-solar-homes-system-shs-project-lessons-learned

      Laan, T., Beaton, C., & Presta, B. (2010). Strategies for Reforming Fossil Fuel Subsidies: Practical lessons from Ghana,
      France and Senegal. Manitoba: International Institute for Sustainable Development.

      Lawton, K., Carter, C., Lee, J., Tan, A., de Prado Trigo, A., Luscombe, D., & Briscoe, S. (2013). The opportunities to
      business of improving resource efficiency. European Commission.

      Marro, P., & Bertsch, N. (2015). Making renewable energy a success in Bangladesh: Getting the business model right.
      ADB South Asia Working Paper Series No.41.

      OECD. (2005). Liberalisation of Trade in Renewable-Energy Products and Associated Goods: Charcoal, Solar
      Photovoltaic Systems, and Wind Pumps and Turbines. OECD Trade and Environment Working Paper No. 2005-07.
      Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org/trade/envtrade/35842415.pdf

      OECD. (2008). Introductory Handbook for Undertaking Regulatory Impact Analysis. Paris: OECD.

      OECD. (2008). Measuring Material Flows and Resource Productivity. Paris: OECD.

      OECD. (2010). Taxation, Innovation and the Environment. Paris: OECD.

      OECD. (2014, March 26). Database on instruments used for environmental policy. Retrieved from OECD: http://www2.
      oecd.org/ecoinst/queries/Default.aspx

      Parry, W., & Pizer, A. (2007). Emissions Trading versus CO2 Taxes versus Standards. RFF Issue Brief 5. Retrieved from
      http://www.rff.org/files/sharepoint/WorkImages/Download/CPF_7_IssueBrief_5.pdf

      Pitney Bowes. (no date). Duty Calculator: Import Duties of Lighting Products. Retrieved from http://www.dutycalculator.
      com/hs-codes-import-duty-tax-rates-restriction/150/173/lighting/

      PMR. (2015). Carbon Leakage — Theory, Evidence and Policy Design. Washington: The World Bank.

      Polycarp, C., Brown, L., & Fu-Bertaux, X. (2014). Mobilizing Climate Investment — Annex 3 — Solar Waters in Tunisia.
      Washington: World Resources Institute.

      Rademaekers, K., van der Laan, J., Smith, M., van Breugel, C., & Pollitt, H. (2011). The role of market-based
      instruments in achieving a resource efficient economy. European Commision: DG Environment.

      REDD-net. (2010). The role of grants versus loans in development cooperation — lessons for climate finance and
      REDD+. REDD-net.




136              1 INTRODUCTION                                2 TYPES                                3 CONTEXT
Rosenow, J., Fawcett, T., Eyre, N., & Oikonomou, V. (Forthcoming). Energy Efficiency and the policy mix. Building
Research & Information.

Royal Economic Society. (2014, August). Media Briefings — TAX INCENTIVES FOR LOW EMISSION CARS: Evidence of
their environmental impact from France’s Bonus/Malus scheme. Retrieved from Royal Economic Society: http://www.
res.org.uk/details/mediabrief/6514941/TAX-INCENTIVES-FOR-LOW-EMISSION-CARS-Evidence-of-their-environmental-
impact-from.html

Salamon, L. M., & Elliott, O. V. (2002). The Tools of Government: A Guide to the New Governance. Oxford University
Press.

Sorrell, S., Smith, A., Betz, R., Walz, R., Boemare, C., Quirion, P., Pilinis, C. (2003). Interaction in EU Climate Policy.
Sussex: SPRU.

Taylor, S., Jones, P., Ettlinger, S., & Hudson, J. (2014). Waste Crime: Tackling Britain’s Dirty Secret. Environmental
Services Association Education Trust (ESAET).

Trabacchi, C., Micale, V., & Frisari, G. (2012). San Giorgio Group Case Study. Climate Policy Initiative.

Tukker, A., & Ivanova, O. (2013). Topical Paper 5: Policy options for resource efficiency as input for modelling. Brussels:
European Commission.

UNEP. (2015). Indicators for a Resource Efficient and Green Asia and the Pacific — Measuring progress of sustainable
consumption and production, green economy and resource efficiency policies in the Asia-Pacific region. UNEP.

UNEP. (no date). Resource Efficiency. Paris: UNEP. Retrieved from http://www.unep.org/pdf/UNEP_Profile/Resource_
efficiency.pdf

United Kingdom’s Environment Agency. (2009). Guidance on combining policy instruments. Bristol: Environment
Agency.

West, K. (2015, February 27). Waste not, want not: how the rubbish industry learned to look beyond landfill. Retrieved
from The Guardian: http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/27/waste-rubbish-industry-landfill-recycling-
dumps-incineration

Whitley, S., & Ellis, K. (2012). Designing public sector interventions to mobilise private participation in low carbon
development: 20 questions toolkit. London: Overseas Development Institute (ODI).

Whitley, S., & van der Burg, L. (2015). Fossil fuel subsidy reform in sub-Saharan Africa: from rhetoric to reality. London
& Washington: New Climate Economy. Retrieved from http://newclimateeconomy.report/misc/working-papers

World Bank. (2005). The Logframe Handbook. Washington: World Bank Group.

World Bank. (2012). Implementing Energy Subsidy Reforms: An Overview of the Key Issues. Retrieved from http://
elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/1813-9450-6122

World Bank. (2015). Average grant element on new external debt commitments, official (%). Retrieved from http://
data.worldbank.org/indicator/DT.GRE.OFFT




                4 DESIGN                                   5 FOCUS                                6 BIBLIOGRAPHY              137
      World Bank. (2015). Investment Policy: Investment Incentives Toolkit with Tools and Selected Readings. Washington:
      World Bank Group.

      World Bank. (2016). Climate Efficient Industries: A Practitioners Field Guide. Washington: World Bank Group.

      World Bank Group. (2015). Investment Policy: Investment Incentives Toolkit with Tools and Selected Readings.
      Washington: World Bank Group.

      World Bank Group. (2016). Climate Competitive Industries: A Practitioners Field Guide. Washington: World Bank
      Group.

      WTO. (no date). Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization. The WTO Agreement Series. Retrieved from
      https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/booksp_e/agrmntseries1_wto_e.pdf




138             1 INTRODUCTION                              2 TYPES                               3 CONTEXT
Cover photograph: © Shutterstock
