                       WORKING PAPER
                                                          APRIL 2016




Financial Inclusion for the Rural Poor Using
                     Agent Networks in Peru
    Measuring the Impact of Correspondent Banking Agents and
     Trust Workshops for Conditional Cash Transfer Beneficiaries
                                    Innovations for Poverty Action
The research team included Paul Gertler, Sebastian
Galiani, Alberto Chong, Ursula Aldana, Camila
Navajas, Dylan Ramshaw, Patricia Paskov, and Jaime
Ramos.

Please see page 9 for contact details.
                                                                     FINANCIAL INCLUSION FOR THE RURAL POOR USING
                                                                                          AGENT NETWORKS IN PERU


Table of Contents
Acknowledgments                  ............................................................................................................................................   iv

Executive Summary                ...........................................................................................................................................    1

1. Project Background                  .....................................................................................................................................    1

2. Description of the Intervention and Experimental Design .........................................................................                                            2

	         2.1.	      Agent Intervention                 ....................................................................................................................    2

	         2.2.	      Financial Education and Trust Intervention                                  ...........................................................................    3

3. Core Hypotheses ...........................................................................................................................................                  4

4. Measurement Indicators                      .............................................................................................................................    4

5. Financial Education and Trust Workshop ....................................................................................................                                  5

	         5.1. Workshop Description                     ....................................................................................................................    5

	         5.2. Workshop Evaluation                      ....................................................................................................................    6

6. Next Steps            ....................................................................................................................................................   8

Contact Details             .................................................................................................................................................   9




                                                                                                                                                      	iii
WORKING PAPER




Acknowledgments
Implementing Partners
The Bank of the Nation (BN), known in Spanish as Banco de la Nación, is the bank that represents the
Peruvian government in financial transactions in both the public and private sectors, as well as at both
domestic and international levels. It is a state institution, not to be confused with the Central Reserve Bank
of Peru, the Central Bank that coins money. BN belongs to the Peruvian Ministry of Economy and Finance.
Its headquarters is located in the San Isidro District of Lima, the capital of Peru.

The Peruvian Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion (MIDIS) was created on 18 August 2011, during
the presidency of Ollanta Humala and the cabinet of Salomon Lerner Ghitis. The inaugural minister was Kurt
Burneo. The incumbent minister is Paola Bustamante. The ministry was created to turn social programs into
productive tools for the benefit of the poor. One of its objectives is to create conditions so that beneficiaries of
social programs, such as JUNTOS, Pensión 65, and Cuna Más, as promoted by Humala’s policy of promoting
social inclusion during his campaign, can use the subsidies for “financial leverage” to improve their quality
of life, according to Prime Minister Salomon Lerner Ghitis.

Institute of Peruvian Studies (IEP) is a private institution dedicated to research, education, and dissemination
of social studies in Peru and other countries in Latin America. Through its work, IEP aims to contribute to
equitable economic development, to strengthen democratic institutions, and to recognize Peru’s rich
diversity.


Financial Support
We gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) and
the Yale Savings and Payments Research Fund at Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA), sponsored by a grant
from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.




iv
                                                    FINANCIAL INCLUSION FOR THE RURAL POOR USING
                                                                         AGENT NETWORKS IN PERU


Executive Summary
In developing countries, poor households often do not have access to formal financial products or use
bank accounts to save for the future. Without a safe and secure way to save, many people rely on riskier
and more expensive methods of managing their assets. Increasingly, government-to-person cash transfer
programs are addressing this issue by providing beneficiaries with formal savings accounts through which
they disburse cash transfers.

In Peru, evidence from one such program suggests that very few beneficiaries of a conditional cash transfer
(CCT) use their accounts to save, preferring instead to withdraw the entire cash transfer immediately after
it is made. Beneficiaries may prefer to withdraw their funds all at once due to the time and cost required
to travel to a bank branch or automated teller machine (ATM) to access their account, especially in rural
areas where there is limited banking infrastructure. Furthermore, although access is improved and travel
time reduced, beneficiaries may not have the necessary knowledge or confidence when interacting with
the formal financial system. This evaluation explores how the introduction of branchless banking and a
workshop to build knowledge and trust of the formal financial system impacts beneficiaries’ attitudes toward
this same system and savings behavior.

As a component of the pilot project and evaluation “Financial inclusion for the Rural Poor Using Agent
Networks,” Banco de la Nación (BN) installed correspondent banking agents (MultiRed Agents) in
municipalities and some shops on 30 districts of the Provinces of Puno, Cusco, Apurímac, and Ayacucho
in Peru. Concurrently in 2015, the Instituto de Estudios Peruanos (IEP) implemented education and trust
workshops in a subset of the districts where agents were functioning with the objective of improving the
knowledge, trust, and empowerment of beneficiaries of the state’s conditional cash transfer program
(JUNTOS) in the formal financial system and encouraging the use of formal savings accounts via BN
correspondent banking agents.



1.	       Project Background
The objective of the project “Financial Inclusion for the Rural Poor Using Agent Networks” is to gain a
better understanding of the impact of different strategies to promote financial inclusion among rural poor
households in Peru. CCT programs promote access to financial services for millions of beneficiaries around
the world, by opening bank accounts in the name of beneficiaries and depositing the transfer directly into
them. However, the evidence from Mexico and Peru shows that there are very few households who actually
use the account, either for savings or other kinds of transactions.

After reviewing the international literature and conducting preliminary research in the field, we identified
three hypotheses to explain why users of the Peruvian conditional cash transfer (CCT) program JUNTOS do
not actively use the accounts provided with their transfer. For each obstacle, we propose a solution, which
is tested via this intervention.

                                      Obstacle Identified       Proposed Solution
 Transaction costs to reach the bank branch are high: on        Install MultiRed Agents in shops and municipalities of
 average costs S/.20 (10% of the transfer) and takes 6 hrs.     district capitals where there are no bank branches
  Lack of information regarding use of the agent and the        Launch communication campaign from JUNTOS on
                           account provided to the user.        how to use the account and agent.
                                                                Develop and conduct an interactive workshop to
      Lack of trust in the financial system and knowledge on
                                                                build confidence and empower beneficiaries vis-à-vis
                                                 how to save.
                                                                use of the financial system and the savings account.


                                                                                                                         1
WORKING PAPER




2. 	 Description of the Intervention and Experimental Design
Figure 1 illustrates the randomized allocation process, and the following text explains in more detail the
intervention, eligibility criteria, and preselection fieldwork conducted.


Figure 1.	       Randomization Methodology




2.1.	     Agent Intervention
The districts randomly selected to receive the branchless banking agent were required to meet the following
eligibility criteria:

     1 Within Macro-Region 4 of BN                                 Sufficient signal from one of the telecom providers
                                                               4
     2 Operate JUNTOS                                              in the municipalities and shops of each district

    2a No MultiRed Agent already installed                     5 BN has the capacity to install the agent
    2b No BN branch paying JUNTOS in the district                  Minimum of 50 JUNTOS users who currently
                                                               6
    2c Users do not currently receive solely via transporter       receive their transfer in the BN branch
         BN in Cusco or Lima is not planning to install new        No more than 60 percent of the districts in the
     3                                                         7
         agents there in 2014                                      province have an agent installed already


Of the remaining eligible districts that met the criteria, in collaboration with BN and JUNTOS, IPA randomized
the roll out of new branchless banking agents (MultiRed) in 30 districts across four regions. A comparison
(control) group was constructed by randomly selecting 29 districts from the same pool of eligible districts.



2
                                               FINANCIAL INCLUSION FOR THE RURAL POOR USING
                                                                    AGENT NETWORKS IN PERU


2.2. 	 Financial Education and Trust Intervention
Villages within the 30 agent intervention districts were then randomly selected, taking into account the
following:

       The name and code of the village exists in each of the databases IPA uses for analysis—SISFOH, JUNTOS,
   1
       and INEI.
   2 The village has 15 beneficiaries or more (to avoid selecting villages that potentially do not exist).
   3 It is not a village that receives CCT payment by transporter (i.e., the users travel to the bank branch).
   4 At the point of holding the workshop, beneficiaries of the village are card holders.
   5 The village saves time by travelling to our newly installed agent, over going to the bank branch.


From the eligible villages, IPA randomly assigned 70 to receive an additional intervention of the education
and trust workshop to improve the confidence of JUNTOS users in the financial system. A further 70 villages
were randomly selected to act as comparison (control) villages, those that receive the agent only and no
workshop.

While the workshop was initially intended to be a simple financial education program that encouraged
beneficiary savings, existing literature and focus groups with beneficiaries suggested that such an approach
would not be effective on its own, given misconceptions of the formal financial system.1 Therefore,
components of the workshop were designed to improve the transparency of information concerning the
system, with the objective of building more confidence and trust.


Figure 2.	     Findings from Focus Groups on What Users Trust and do Not Trust When Using the Agent




1.	 Focus groups designed and performed by IEP under the direction of the Principal Investigators of the impact
    evaluation. The research was designed to understand more deeply the existing barriers to saving by the JUNTOS
    beneficiaries in the area of the pilot interventions. The focus groups included questions concerning attitudes and
    perceptions of the beneficiaries toward the formal financial system, in particular BN.


                                                                                                   	3
WORKING PAPER




3. 	 Core Hypotheses
Our hypotheses being tested by the interventions are as follows:

    3.1.	 The introduction of agents will also lower the cost of accessing the account for users, and this will
          increase their use of their accounts.
    3.2.	 This effect will be larger when agents are combined with the education and trust workshop.
    3.3.	 Use of the accounts leads to an increase in total savings, which facilitates consumption smoothing
          and increased capacity to make lumpy payments (durables, education, investments).

Our theory of change is explained in the following table.

                     Problem              Inputs             Products                 Outputs                  Impact
                 Beneficiaries do    BN develops        Agents provide         Beneficiary uses the
                 not use savings     and markets a      services to            agents for transactions;
                 account because     functional agent   beneficiaries, and     travel and opportunity     Beneficiary
                 cost of access is   product, and       have sufficient        costs of accessing         knowledge and
          Agent                                                                                           attitudes toward
                 too high            enrolls agents     liquidity and          account are reduced
    intervention                                                                                          formal financial
                                                        incentives to
                                                        serve the needs of                                system improve.
                                                        beneficiaries in the                              Beneficiaries
                                                        district                                          save more in BN
                                                                                                          account, total
                 Beneficiaries       IEP develops       Workshop               Beneficiaries have         savings increase,
                 do not use          training           sessions held in       better and more            consumption shift
                 savings account     intervention,      district capitals      transparent information    from temptation
      Workshop
                 because they        hires training     for JUNTOS             about the financial        goods to durables/
    intervention
                 lack information    team               beneficiaries          system and products/       human capital
                 and trust of the                                              services available to
                 financial system                                              them through BN




4. 	 Measurement Indicators
For the districts and villages selected for the study, IPA is analyzing the effectiveness of the treatments using
a combination of BN and JUNTOS administrative data and household surveys. Examples of outcomes to be
drawn from these data sources are as follows:

1.	 The first set of variables is taken purely from administrative data provided by our partners in MIDIS, JUNTOS,
    and BN. We have an agreement with these three institutions that they will merge individual-level data
    from their respective sources on the socioeconomic conditions of the beneficiaries, their belonging to the
    program, and the financial transactions carried out on their accounts. These data are then anonymized
    and sent to IPA for analysis to assess whether there are any observable changes in financial behavior in
    the treatment versus control group. Outcomes of interest include account balances, and the frequency
    and amounts of transactions.
2.	 The second outcome of interest is total saving, which will be analyzed from a mixture of administrative
    and household survey data. This will help to ensure that we account for those beneficiaries who perhaps,
    for example, started saving as a result of attending the workshops, but decided to save in a different
    bank, or preferred to continue to save informally.
3.	 Third, is to use household survey data to understand changes in perceptions and attitudes toward the
    financial system where there have been modified consumption patterns, including in education and
    business activity, as a result of the interventions.

4
                                             FINANCIAL INCLUSION FOR THE RURAL POOR USING
                                                                  AGENT NETWORKS IN PERU


5. 	 Financial Education and Trust Workshop
5.1.	   Workshop Description
The financial education and trust workshop consists of a three-hour interactive session that covers five key
themes. First, to show how beneficiaries can relate to both the bank and the agent, they are told a story
through a series of pictures in which one woman, a JUNTOS beneficiary explains to another how she uses
the bank to save her JUNTOS transfer.

The second theme emphasizes how beneficiaries can use their bank card by going through the different
things they can use the card for, including withdrawals, deposits, or transactions through the agent including
cell phone credit top-ups.

The third theme explains the concept of the agent itself and how beneficiaries can use agents. It tells them
about the different transactions they can carry out through an agent, in a shop or a municipality, rather
than only in BN branch. In this portion of the workshop is interactive with the workshop trainer pretending to
be the agent operator with a real (though not functioning) point-of-sale (POS) machine.

In this role-playing exercise, the beneficiaries practice going up to enter their personal identification number
(PIN), covering it with their hand as they do so, handing over the card, and saying how much money they
want to receive. They then receive some imitation money and the receipt and are asked to verify that
the amount is correct. In another exercise, beneficiaries practice entering their PIN on a giant POS poster
displayed at the workshop. This exercise was added because it became clear in the first workshops that
some beneficiaries were not sufficiently literate to confidently recognize the numbers on the POS, and for
this reason, were reluctant to enter it themselves.

The fourth theme of savings is then introduced. This module teaches beneficiaries that saving in the bank
is more secure than saving in the home or via the purchase of animals and addresses the different risks
associated with each. It explains how benficiaries’ money in the bank is protected by the regulatory
authority, the Peruvian Superintendent of Banks (SBS), and that beneficiaries have a right to complain
about problems by calling the phone numbers made available to them. IPA originally wanted to provide
beneficiaries with the BN and JUNTOS hotlines but thought it would be more beneficial for researchers to
have direct information on the kind of complaints that were coming in and so provided cell phones that
were managed by IPA´s own surveyor team.2

In the final, closing theme, beneficiaries put their
names into a hat to be selected by lottery to receive
50 soles in cash (US$16). Once the winning beneficiary
is identified, all the beneficiaries leave together to go
to the newly installed MultiRed agent. The beneficiary
who won the lottery is then asked to deposit some or all
of the money in his or her account using the agent and
then do a balance inquiry. On doing so, the beneficiary
is able to see from the voucher that the 50 soles is in the
account, and show this voucher to all the beneficiaries
gathering around. The beneficiary is encouraged to
come back the next day to check their balance again
and see that the money is still there.


2.	 Post pilot evaluation, the existing hotline provided by JUNTOS and BN will continue to be made available to
    beneficiaries to voice complaints and recommendations.


                                                                                                               5
WORKING PAPER



5.2. 	 Workshop Evaluation
Although we will not have rigorous results until the
endline household surveys scheduled for early 2016,
we are keen to conduct a preliminary data analysis
to gauge the initial effectiveness of the education
and trust workshops on beneficiaries’ knowledge and
attitudes. To do this IPA contracted a small team of
surveyors who were provided with tablets on which
to conduct short, 10-minute surveys on a randomly
selected group of five beneficiaries before and after
receiving each workshop. At completion of the survey
of the sample selected for the intervention, we had data
from 304 beneficiaries over 57 villages and 16 districts
in three departments. Some of the findings of these
surveys show positive results in terms of knowledge and
perceptions changes of beneficiaries after training.

The questions are divided into two sections (after collecting basic information on the beneficiaries). The
first looks at the beneficiaries’ knowledge on basic questions, such as whether they know what a savings
account is, what an agent is, or the transactions they can do in an agent. The second group of questions
focuses on beneficiaries’ level of trust with using the agent or leaving the money in the bank or with the
agent.

When asked, “What can one do in a MultiRed Agent?” prior to the workshop, 26.3 percent of beneficiaries
responded that they did not know what a MultiRed Agent was. After the workshop, this percentage
decreased to 0.7 percent. Meanwhile, the majority of those who did know what an agent was primarily
were solely aware that they could withdraw their JUNTOS transfer. While the percentage of those who were
made aware of this increased from to 55.3 percent to 96.7 percent following the workshop, there were also
significant increases in the level of knowledge on the existence of possibilities of other transactions such as
the ability to deposit money, send money, make balance enquiries, or credit top-ups on the cell phones. All
of these increases were significant at the 0.01 level.


Graph 1.	     What can one do in a MultiRed Agent?




6
                                           FINANCIAL INCLUSION FOR THE RURAL POOR USING
                                                                AGENT NETWORKS IN PERU


Graph 2.	     Do you believe you would be capable of using the agent without help from anyone?




In Graph 2, we ask if beneficiaries believe they could use the agent on their own without assistance. As is
clear, there is a 35.2 percentage point improvement (highly significant at the 0.01 level) in the number who
believe they can use the agent unassisted.

For the question, “What do you think happens when you leave your money in the MultiRed Agent?”
beneficiaries were given optional responses, such as “I think that I will be robbed” or “I think that I won´t
get my money back,” or “I think that the JUNTOS program will take part of my transfer away.” After the
workshop we saw that those who believed that their money would be safe and nothing would happen to
it improved by 36.2 percentage points, statistically significant at the 0.01 level.




Graph 3.	     What do you think happens when you leave your money in the MultiRed Agent?




                                                                                                            7
WORKING PAPER



Finally, when beneficiaries were asked where they felt safest saving their money, prior to the workshop, there
was a tendency for them to say that they felt safest saving their money in their home or through investing in
animals (which they could then either use as a food source or sell in a time of crisis). Following the workshop,
the tendency to choose these options decreased significantly, and those who opted for saving in the bank
increased by 56.9 percentage points (significant at the 0.01 level).


Graph 4.	     Where do you feel safest saving your money?




Thus, we can determine from these initial results that participating in the workshop affects beneficiaries’
knowledge and confidence vis-à-vis their interactions with both the agent and the bank. What we cannot tell
at this point is whether the effect can be sustained over time. These surveys were taken immediately before
and immediately after the workshops (with no other information provided in between). The methodology is
pre-post, and the aim is to describe the changes after the workshop rather than the impact of the program.

Nonetheless, to assess whether there is a sustained impact of the workshop on financial behavior such
as savings in an account and consumption patterns on durable as opposed to temptation goods, or on
impulse buying, we will need to take a look at the administrative data and conduct extensive household
survey analysis at endline.



6. 	 Next Steps
Our next steps are to receive and analyze the administrative data for the full sample up to March 2016.
We also hope to obtain nationwide data, which involves over 200 other districts in the country where POS
agents have been installed to conduct a difference in difference analysis on a nationally representative
sample. Finally, beginning in April 2016, IPA will conduct endline household surveys to understand how
financial behavior beyond bank account data was impacted from the interventions in terms of financial
knowledge and attitudes and spending on durable and other consumer items.




8
FINANCIAL INCLUSION FOR THE RURAL POOR USING
                     AGENT NETWORKS IN PERU


                                        Contact Details
                              Design and Analysis
                                       Paul Gertler
                             Principal Investigator
                 University of Berkeley, California
                     gertler@haas.berkeley.edu

                               Sebastian Galiani
                           Principal Investigator
                          University of Maryland
                         Galiani@econ.umd.edu

                                   Alberto Chong
                            Principal Investigator
                         Georgia State University
                     albertoechong@gmail.com

                                   Ursula Aldana
                            Principal Investigator
                                               IEP
                            ualdana@iep.org.pe

                               Camila Navajas
                             Research Assistant
                       caminavajas@gmail.com




                         Field and Implementation
                            Dylan Ramshaw
                           Director, IPA Peru
                 dramshaw@poverty-action.org

                                Patricia Paskov
                   Research Associate, IPA Peru
                   ppaskov@poverty-action.org

                                   Jaime Ramos
                                             IEP
                              jramos@iep.org.pe




                                                      9
Advancing financial inclusion to improve the lives of the poor



               1825 I Street NW, 7th Floor
                Washington, DC 20006
                       www.cgap.org


           Photo Credits: Innovations for Poverty Action
