THE ART OF
KNOWLEDGE
EXCHANGE
A Results-Focused Planning Guide
for Development Practitioners in
the Water Sector
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of
The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment
on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
DO
YOU
WANT
TO…
 Connect clients to new information and opportunities across
üü
 countries and regions?

 Catalyze innovative thinking and generate better development
üü
 solutions for water-related challenges?

 Inspire collaboration between individuals, institutions, cities,
üü
 countries, and regions?

 Accelerate decision-making and reform in the water sector?
üü

 Overcome bottlenecks and enhance project impact?
üü

 Customize, replicate, and scale up development solutions in
üü
 the water sector?
II




     ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

     The Art of Knowledge Exchange Guidebook for Development Practitioners
     in the Water Sector was truly a team effort. The preparation of this
     customized guide was led by Shobha Kumar from the World Bank Group’s
     Leadership, Learning and Innovation Client Services. The core team
     included Yolande Coombes, Yianna Vovides, and Richard A. B. Crabbe. It
     was Yolande’s experience and extensive work with clients in the water and
     sanitation sector that sowed the seeds for this customized version.
     This customized guide for water sector practitioners draws from the
     original guidebook, the Art of Knowledge Exchange: A Results-Focused
     Planning Guide for Development Practitioners, which is in its third edition.
     Shobha Kumar also led that team of contributors comprising Aaron
     Leonard, Ryan Watkins, Yianna Vovides, and Brigitte Kerby.
     For this customized water-sector version of the guidebook, the team
     would like to thank Abha Joshi-Ghani, Roby Senderowitsch, Laurent
     Besançon, William Kingdom, and Jyoti Shukla for their support and
     thoughtful guidance. The content was peer reviewed by several World
     Bank colleagues, whose time and valuable input is greatly appreciated; in
     this regard, the team would especially like to thank William Kingdom, Emily
     Christensen Rand, Bhavna Bhatia, and Pronita Chakraborty Aggarwal.
     The team extends its thanks for the good practice case studies and
     examples contributed by Masroor Ahmad, Vandana Bhatnagar, Upneet
     Singh, Taibou Maiga, Enrique Pantoja, Rokeya Ahmed, Ana Campos
     Garcia, Mark Ellery, Santanu Lahiri, Mei Xie, and Christopher Paul Jackson.
     It is these stories that make the guidebook come alive and demonstrate
     the power and potential of peer-to-peer learning.
     This guidebook has benefited extensively from the review and guidance
     of Sheldon Lippman as copy editor and Greg Johannesen as creative
     director for graphic design. Thanks also goes to Adam Broadfoot for his
     wise counsel and guidance on the printing process.
     And a final appreciation goes to the water practitioners who asked for this
     customized Guidebook, which will surely benefit many others in sharing
     knowledge with their peers.
     Stay connected with us at http://www.worldbank.org/knowledgesharing
     Spring 2016
                                                                               III




ABOUT THIS GUIDE

Welcome to the customized edition of The Art of Knowledge Exchange
This edition, based on the original Art of Knowledge of Knowledge
Exchange: A Results-Focused Planning Guide for Development
Practitioners, is customized for practitioners in the water sector to
facilitate designing, implementing, and measuring results from their
knowledge exchange initiatives. While all water sector practitioners
could use this informative guide, it is written for those who specifically
broker knowledge exchange by connecting and facilitating
engagements between knowledge seekers and knowledge providers
working on water-related issues.
The guide also provides the tools to help you — the knowledge broker
— play a more effective role in a knowledge exchange. This approach will
help you to:
  »» Consider knowledge exchange within a broader programmatic and
     development context for water;
  »» Ensure your initiative is stakeholder owned and demand driven;
  »» Determine the challenges to reaching a solution;
  »» Reflect on the change processes needed to address these challenges;
  »» Identify individuals or groups who can play effective roles in bringing
     about needed change;
  »» Choose the right mix of knowledge exchange instruments and
     activities to help your participants learn, grow, and act;
  »» Implement in an adaptive and learning-focused manner;
  »» Measure and report the results of a knowledge exchange initiative.
This guide includes and refers to case studies and other examples of
successful knowledge exchange initiatives in the water sector and also the
lessons learned from implementing these initiatives for high development
impact. It also reflects the experience of dozens of World Bank Group
staff, knowledge and learning professionals, government officials, and
other international and development practitioners who have successfully
integrated knowledge exchange as a part of a larger change process.
IV




                         ANCHOR




                                     End one journey,
                                      begin the next.



                                                   MEASURE
     DEFINE                                        & REPORT
                                                   THE RESULTS




              DESIGN &            IMPLEMENT
              DEVELOP
                                                                                                                              V




TABLE OF CONTENTS
     INTRODUCTION	VI


     ANCHOR 	                                                                                                           9
      Step 1.1	 Identify The Development Goal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
      Step 1.2	 Define The Institutional Challenge(s). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
      Step 1.3	 Determine The Change Objective(s) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12


     DEFINE	15
      Step 2.1	 Identify the Ideal Participant Profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
      Step 2.2	 Determine Intermediate Outcomes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
      Step 2.3	 Identify The Most Appropriate Knowledge Providers . . . . . . . . . . . .  27


     DESIGN & DEVELOP	                                                                                                31
      Step 3.1	 Select The Participants. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
      Step 3.2	 Verify The Objective And Outcomes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34
      Step 3.3	 Organize The Design And Delivery Team. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
      Step 3.4	 Assemble The Knowledge Exchange. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  36


     IMPLEMENT 	                                                                                                      57
      Step 4.1	 Guide The Participants Along Their Learning Journey . . . . . . . . . . .  58
      Step 4.2	 Orchestrate Engagement And Build Relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  61
      Step 4.3	 Document Implementation And Track Results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  63


     MEASURE & REPORT THE RESULTS	                                                                                    67
      Step 5.1	 Synthesize Implementation Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  68
      Step 5.2	 Measure Results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  70
      5tep 5.3	 Report Results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  79


     GLOSSARY	85


     ART OF KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE TOOLBOX	87
VI




     Introduction




     WHAT CAN KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
     HELP YOU ACHIEVE?
     Knowledge exchange — or peer-to-peer learning — is a powerful way to share, replicate,
     and scale up (to put simply) what works in development. Development practitioners are
     seeing the beneficial returns of learning from the practical experience of others who have
     gone through, or are going through, similar challenges of finding working solutions. They
     want to be connected and have ready access to practical knowledge and proven results.
     When done right, knowledge exchange can build the capacity, confidence, and conviction
     of individuals and groups to act. Taken from recent exchanges, examples of direct results
     or intermediate outcomes include:
       »» Technical water specialists in several sub-districts of Bangladesh learn new skills to
          replicate good practices (shared by their peers) for building and maintaining a safe
          water supply.
       »» Political leaders and senior government officials from Peshawar gain a deeper
          understanding of the enabling environment needed for institutional reform in the water
          sector based on South Africa’s successful experience in setting up new water facilities.
       »» Farmers in Kenya adopt an innovative rice-growing methodology — System of Rice
          Intensification (SRI) — to increase the yield from their land after learning from the
          experience of countries that pioneered a new irrigation methodology
     The direct results from knowledge exchange can also influence results at the institutional
     and even systemic levels as shown in figure 1. Participants of successful knowledge
     exchanges are empowered and motivated to make things happen. They seek to change
     the environment in which they operate, affect policies and norms that influence the way
     people behave, and strengthen the institutions where they work. For example:
       »» With their enhanced proficiency and successful replication of good practices, the technical
          water specialists in Bangladesh contributed to a reduction in water-borne diseases.
       »» With a deeper understanding of the enabling environment needed for institutional
          reform, the relevant political leadership in Peshawar supported the systems, processes,
          financing, and technical skills (through sustained engagement with Johannesburg and
          Durban Water Utilities in South Africa) to successfully setup Water and Sanitation
          Services in Peshawar as a corporate water company fully owned by the Government of
          Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in Pakistan.
       »» Encouraged by initial results of SRI methodology adopted by the pioneer Kenyan farmers,
          the Kenyan Government together with academia and private sector supported an SRI-
          based scale-up in several regions. This scale-up resulted in diverse initiatives, including
          the Kenyan National Irrigation Board organizing national workshops to encourage
          knowledge sharing, universities allocating funds to support doctoral research on SRI
          methodology, and the private sector manufacturing local weeders for farmers following
          SRI practice.
                                                                                               1




                                                                                Introduction




          The Direct Results and Influence Achieved from Knowledge Exchange
Figure 1. 
                                       Change Agents    Stakeholders




INDIVIDUAL AND
GROUP LEVEL




                 INSTITUTIONAL LEVEL




                                                                             SYSTEMIC LEVEL




“After visiting Kenya and Uganda I was impressed to learn how they are approaching
 performance monitoring and benchmarking as ways to improve service delivery; this can
 be very useful in Ethiopia where we are rapidly trying to increase access to hygiene and
 sanitation. Since returning we now get a monthly report from each woreda (district) on
 performance.” ~ Wassie Shiferaw, Health Bureau, Southern Nations, Nationalities and
 People Region, Ethiopia

“The knowledge exchange was essential for us to move forward. There had been some
 difficulties in reaching a shared strategy between 4 different ministries and other NGO
 sector stakeholders. The exchange allowed us to strengthen our personal relationships
 and realize we were all supporting the same goal. We started the trip as individuals with a
 common goal but we ended as a team, determined to reach the goal together.” ~ Taibou
 Maiga, Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist, The World Bank Group
2




    Case Example




    FROM FRAGMENTATION
    TO AMALGAMATION:
    PAKISTAN LEARNS FROM
    SOUTH AFRICA’S EXPERIENCE
    IN UTILITY REFORM
                   Knowledge broker: Masroor Ahmad, Senior Water and
                   Sanitation Specialist, World Bank Group


                   In this knowledge exchange with South Africa, Pakistan
                     GAINED NEW KNOWLEDGE,
                     ENHANCED SKILLS,
                     IMPROVED CONSENSUS,
                     INITIATED NEW AND IMPROVED ACTIONS.

                   One of the major bottlenecks for improved water and sanitation service
                   delivery in Pakistan is the weak articulation of an urban sector vision and the
                   inefficient structures of service provision. Over one-third of Pakistan’s total
                   population lives in urban areas. Urban settlements struggle particularly in
                   the delivery of basic services, including water, sanitation, and shelter.
                   Peshawar, the capital of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) province, was
                   the only city among the 8 city district governments (large cities with a
                   million-plus population) in Pakistan that did not have a citywide water and
                   sanitation utility until 2014. Peshawar has 2 million citizens, and growing
                                                                                                    3




                                                                                     Case Example



 at a rate of 1.5 percent yearly. The fundamental issue underlying the poor
 state of services in Peshawar was fragmentation of institutional service
 delivery among 7 institutions. This complexity often led to erratic decision-
 making, coupled with unclear lines of responsibility and accountability,
 and resulting in a poor state of water and sanitation service in the city.
“We need strong commitment to bring about change and improvements to
 the quality of life of every citizen, in every sector and segment of society. We
 need to learn how other countries are doing this in relation to water provision,”
  ~ Knowledge exchange participant from Pakistan.
 Upon concurrence of the acknowledged need in Pakistan, the Water and
 Sanitation Program of the Global Water Practice at the World Bank Group
 funded an exchange providing Pakistan an opportunity to witness and
 learn from successful urban water and sanitation sector models. The goal
 was to develop a strategy to reform the urban water sector in Pakistan,
 starting in Peshawar. South Africa was identified as an ideal knowledge
 provider having two projects — the Johannesburg Water and the Durban
 Water — that had achieved substantial progress in water and sanitation
 service and had successfully undertaken institutional reforms in early 2000.
 Two exchanges took place 18 months apart.
 During the first exchange in South Africa, a visiting senior delegation
 of political leaders from Pakistan included elected members of
 Parliament from city district governments, senior government officials
 from the planning and development departments, and representatives
 from water and sanitation utilities in Punjab and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
 provinces and Sindh. The focus of this first exchange was to gain a
 better understanding of how the cities are governed and how water and
 sanitation services are delivered, including the enabling environment
 needed for institutional reform.
“South Africa committed significant funds to support service delivery
 improvements. It has more resources and a smaller population than
 Pakistan; nonetheless, Pakistan can make better use of the resources it
 has.” ~ Knowledge exchange participant from Pakistan.
 After the first exchange in South Africa, upon official request of the
 Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, the World Bank provided high-
 value technical assistance in areas of institutional reform, governance
 arrangement, statutory provisions, technical needs, and financial analysis
 related to water and sanitation services and prepared a comprehensive
4




    Case Example



                    diagnostic blueprint. The Government appointed a high-powered
                    oversight committee that reported directly to the Chief Minister of the
                    province. The crux of evidence based on and informed by the diagnostic
                    work of the technical assistance suggested “departure from asset creation
                    and focuses on services through institutional and governance reforms”.
                    The Chief Minister approved the committee’s recommendations and gave
                    directions to move ahead with institutional reform.
                   “An autonomous yet accountable water and sanitation utility for urban
                    areas of Peshawar established on corporate patterns, governed by an
                    oversight body and run by professional managers” ~ Vision of Khyber
                    Pakhtunkhwa Chief Minister (2013).
                    With the backing of the Chief Minister, a second exchange was organized
                    to include senior technical and financial management staff from the
                    Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Government, and city development and planning
                    staff. During the exchange, which also included field visits and discussions
                    with water service beneficiaries, the focus was on how to implement
                    reforms that parallel those learned from the Johannesburg Water and
                    Durban Water — eThekwini projects.
                    As a direct result of the knowledge exchange, Water and Sanitation Services
                    Peshawar, Pakistan’s first corporate governed and fully autonomous utility
                    utility, was established in 2014. Since then, further results have included
                    ongoing collaboration between Peshawar and Durban water authorities
                    for continued peer learning and technical exchange. The respective
                    former managing directors of Johannesburg Water and Durban Water
                    also visited Peshawar to support and guide the reform process and
                    institutional strengthening. These impressive results were built upon the
                    trust and relationships cultivated during the two study tours, along with
                    the provincial leadership of the Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.
                    Based on the learning at the launch of the Water and Sanitation Services
                    Peshawar, the Chief Minister of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pervez Khattak,
                    stated, “The roles of the new Water and Sanitation Services Peshawar
                    have been clearly defined to avoid any duplication or ambiguity in
                    delivery of municipal services.”
6




    Case Example




    ALTERNATIVE PPP
    MODELS IN ALGERIA
    AND SPAIN:
    LEARNING FOR INDIA
                   Knowledge broker: Vandana Bhatnagar, Senior Institutional
                   Development Specialist, World Bank Group

                   In this knowledge exchange with Algeria and Spain, India
                     GAINED NEW KNOWLEDGE,
                     IMPROVED CONSENSUS.

                   By 2031, projections claim that 600 million people will live in India’s
                   cities. This unparalleled urbanization calls for massive investments in
                   infrastructure that cannot be addressed through public investments alone.
                   A critical need lies in the delivery of water supply and sanitation services.
                   The Government of Karnataka, a southern state with more than 23 million
                   people living in urban centers (38 percent of the state’s population), has
                   undertaken significant efforts to improve urban water and sanitation service
                   levels. These efforts recognized the need to engage service providers
                   in the sector, and also explore potential for engaging private operators
                   to deliver improvements. The World Bank-supported Karnataka Urban
                   Water Sector Improvement Project that ended in 2011, demonstrated
                   an approach for delivering transformation in service levels with the
                   involvement of the private sector. However, a lack of clarity and consensus
                   on suitable models for engaging the private sector as well as the lack of
                   trust and understanding between public and private sectors have posed
                   challenges in effectively engaging the private sector. In such a context,
                   alternative public–private partnership (PPP) models needed considerable
                   attention for the water sector, specifically in the Indian context.
                                                                                               7




                                                                                Case Example



 To address these issues, as part of the ongoing dialogue for the Karnataka
 Urban Water Supply Modernization Project, the Karnataka Government
 officials engaged in discussions with World Bank Global Water Practice
 staff to identify other countries implementing alternate PPP arrangements
 to improve urban water asset management and service delivery. Algeria
 and Spain offered a range of successful examples.
 With the goal of helping the client to make informed choices on the
 appropriate implementation model for improving service from the Urban
 Water Supply Modernization Project, the World Bank funded a knowledge
 exchange to increase awareness and understanding of how innovative
 public–private partnerships are arranged and executed. The exchange
 offered the client an opportunity to explore a range of different options
 as a basis for decision-making.
“We need to see and understand the range of PPP options to determine
 what would work best in the Indian context.” ~ Study tour participant
 from India.
 A study tour delegation from India that visited Algeria and Spain included
 senior officers from the Ministry of Urban Development and Planning
 Commission, officers from the Department of Economic Affairs, and
 representatives from the Government of Karnataka. During the study
 tour, the Indian delegation had an opportunity to visit project sites; have
 meetings with key policy-makers, senior managers, and technical staff of
 water utilities; share the India water supply experience; and interview key
 stakeholders involved in these projects.
“We were able to meet and interview all cadres of staff within the utility
 in Algeria to get candid feedback from them about what they felt
 about the change process and their roles before and after the change.”
  ~ Study tour participant.
 After the study tour, two workshops were organized in India, one at the
 national level and one at the state level. At the workshops, the experiences
 from Algeria and Spain were shared with a broader stakeholder group; the
 group reached a consensus on what elements of the Algeria and Spain
 PPP models could be adopted or adapted for the India context.
 Informed by the exchange, new service delivery arrangements have been
 incorporated in the design of the Karnataka project to enable 24/7 water
 supply with private sector participation.
“This knowledge exchange was a great opportunity to help participants
 consider innovations outside the normal way of doing business. It was also
 very useful to explore many of the trust issues currently existing between
 the public and private sectors and which needed to be addressed as a
 priority within the India context.” ~ Task team leader.
8




    Anchor the
    Knowledge
    Exchange




    IN STEP 1 YOU WILL
        Identify the development goal and tie it to the
    1.1	
         knowledge exchange initiative
        Define the institutional challenges to reaching the
    1.2	
        development goal
    1.3	 Determine the change objective with your counterparts
                                                                            9




                                                               Anchor the
                                                               Knowledge
                                                                Exchange




ANCHOR THE
KNOWLEDGE
EXCHANGE
Knowledge exchange initiatives can be used as part of a change process
to powerful effect. At its best, an exchange generates relevant knowledge
and timely insights for designing, developing, and implementing
innovative development initiatives in water and sanitation. But for the
knowledge exchange to work well, it should be anchored in the larger
development context and driven by the global water sector priorities.
Before committing to an exchange initiative, work with your clients and
project counterparts to:
  »» Agree on the development goal that the knowledge exchange
     will support and how it links to the development objective of
     your program or project,
  »» Identify the major challenges limiting achievement of this goal,
  »» Consider what will change as a result of the knowledge
     exchange initiative..
                10




                     Anchor the
                     Knowledge
                     Exchange


                     STEP 1.1 IDENTIFY THE DEVELOPMENT GOAL
                     What beneficial results do the stakeholders, including key beneficiaries, seek to achieve?
                     The development goal focuses on a major objective your stakeholders hope to achieve. It
                     derives from a long-term regional, national, or local development strategy. The knowledge
                     exchange initiative should bring your stakeholders closer to realizing this goal by targeting
                     the institutional constraints preventing its achievement.
                     An effective development goal is locally owned and provides clear economic and social value
                     to stakeholders. In most cases, the knowledge exchange initiative will be part of a program
                     that targets a specific development goal. It is important to recognize that a knowledge
                     exchange initiative alone will not achieve the development goal but will contribute to it


                     Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Development goal
                     The development goal in Peshawar, Pakistan, was to enable greater access to safe and
CASE EXAMPLES




                     clean drinking water for its urban population.


                     India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Development goal
                     The development goal in Karnataka, India, was to ensure continuous 24/7 water supply
                     to its growing urban centers.


                     STEP 1.2 DEFINE THE INSTITUTIONAL CHALLENGE(S)
                     What challenges are blocking the achievement of the development goal?
                     Reaching a development goal often requires reform in one of three, sometimes overlapping,
                     institutional areas: environment for change, policy instruments, or organizational arrangements.
                     Challenges in these institutional areas may include:
                       »» Weak environment for change characterized by weak stakeholder/client ownership,
                          lack of consensus on a development approach, or failure to conceptualize or
                          consider a better approach;
                       »» Inefficient policy instruments characterized by weak administrative rules, laws,
                          regulations, standard operating procedures, and other formal incentives that guide
                          action toward a development goal;
                       »» Ineffective organizational and institutional arrangements characterized by
                          inadequate systems, financing, staffing, incentives, citizen feedback mechanisms,
                          and other resources for achieving a development goal.
                     Use a knowledge exchange to help address challenges in these three areas. Work with your
                     clients and other stakeholders to identify the most important impediments. What needs
                     to change?
                                                                                              11




                                                               Anchor the
                                                               Knowledge
                                                                Exchange


The following questions can guide your assessment of institutional challenges.
Assessing the Environment for Change
  »» Do all stakeholders agree on the challenge? On a possible solution?
  »» Is there evidence that a solution exists? Has the solution been tried elsewhere in the
     country or in other countries?
  »» Are relevant leaders committed to the goal?
  »» Are leaders informed and inspired to pursue a new course of action?
  »» Is there a mechanism for stakeholders to voice their opinions about the challenge or
     goal? Do leaders act on opinions shared?
  »» Is relevant information shared regularly with stakeholders? Is that information
     easily accessible?
  »» Are people holding government officials and institutions accountable in this area?
Assessing Policy Instruments
  »» Can existing policies adequately address the challenge? Are new policies needed?
  »» Is there an established regulatory agency (e.g., Parliament, Ministry) or a mechanism
     that can support efforts and formally guide the new approach?
  »» Is the current process for defining and achieving the development goal transparent?
  »» Is the process of formulating policies participatory?
  »» Do people and institutions comply with existing policies?
  »» Is there sufficient technical and administrative capacity to implement the policy?
  »» Do new policies adequately consider the risks (e.g., unintended negative effects)?
  »» Can the policy instrument accommodate revisions if needed?
  »» Do new policies and regulations minimize opportunities for corruption?
Assessing Organizational Arrangements
  »» Can existing institutions realize the development goal? Do new institutions need to
     be developed?
  »» Do existing institutions have to be reformed?
  »» Does the institution have:
     ›› Legal mandate (e.g., vision and mission) to implement the new approach?
     ›› Viable business plan with clear objectives?
     ›› Defined set of activities accompanied by a budget, timeline, and assigned personnel?
     ›› Robust monitoring and evaluation system?
     ›› Funds to sustain its operating costs?
     ›› Adequate financial systems in place?
     ›› Sound leadership?
     ›› Governing board or system to oversee management?
     ›› Adequate staffing with technical and administrative skills to meet business needs?
                12




                      Anchor the
                      Knowledge
                      Exchange


                        »» And does it
                           ›› Report regularly on progress?
                           ›› Issue annual income and expenditure reports?
                           ›› Find ways to regularly improve its processes?
                           ›› Adapt to changing circumstances?

                      Pakistan and South Africa exchange sought to address 3 interrelated challenges:
                        »» Weak environment for change. Pervasive environment of mistrust and conflict; water
                           bureaucracy had not transitioned from the role of a builder to manager.
                        »» Inefficient policy instruments. Weak institutional accountability processes for
                           governance, finance, and service delivery were present.
CASE EXAMPLES




                        »» Ineffective organizational arrangements. Moving water to users was poorly managed
                           and corruption was common.

                      India, Algeria, and Spain exchange sought to address 2 key challenges:
                        »» Weak environment for change. Lack of consensus on models for effective engagement
                           of the private sector, as well as lack of trust between public and private actors, to
                           deliver service delivery goals in the water supply sector.
                        »» Ineffective organizational arrangements. Insufficient technical knowledge to be able
                           to manage and maintain effective public–private partnerships.


                      STEP 1.3 DETERMINE THE CHANGE OBJECTIVE(S)
                      What results will help overcome the institutional challenges?
                      A change objective is the change your clients and stakeholders believe will best address the
                      institutional challenge(s) they’ve identified. Work with your counterparts and stakeholders to
                      answer the questions “How will we know when we have achieved the desired change?” and
                     “What will be different?” Their answers will shape the change objective and ensure that the
                      knowledge exchange targets measurable results. When translating an institutional challenge
                      into a change objective, use action verbs to describe the desired results.


                                         Make sure the change objective is
                                            »» Relevant to your clients and other stakeholders,
                                            »» Timely, in that stakeholders are ready to make changes,
                                            »» Consistent with other changes or activities they are implementing,
                                            »» A good match with their social norms and values.
                                                                                              13




                                                                                 Anchor the
                                                                                 Knowledge
                                                                                  Exchange



Common Trap
  »» Deciding to conduct a knowledge exchange initiative that may
     include, for instance, a study tour or a conference before anchoring
     the exchange can waste money and effort.



Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Change Objective in Light of Institutional Challenge

 Institutional Challenge                         Change Objective

                                                 Build trust among stakeholders
 Pervasive environment of mistrust and
                                                 and enable the conceptualization
 conflict; water bureaucracy had not
                                                 of a different (corporate) approach
 transitioned from builder to manager.
                                                 managing water services.

 Weak institutional accountability               Introduce accountability, efficiency,
 processes for governance, finance and           transparency and competition into
 service delivery.                               water supply business.

                                                 Improve and modernize water
 Moving water to users is poorly                 management, with a focus on
 managed and corruption is common.               instruments to engage communities




                                                                                                   CASE EXAMPLES
                                                 receiving the water supply.



India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Change Objective

 Institutional Challenge                         Change Objective

                                                    »» Foster dialogue between public
                                                       and private sector officials on
 Lack of consensus, trust and                          effective models for public–private
 understanding between public and                      partnerships.
 private sector officials.                          »» Increase trust and create stronger
                                                       relationships between public and
                                                       private sector officials.

 Insufficient technical knowledge to be
                                                 Set realistic performance standards for
 able to manage and maintain effective
                                                 public–private partnerships.
 public–private partnerships.
 14




                    Define the
                    Knowledge
                    Exchange



                                                                                   KNOWLEDGE
                                                                                    EXCHANGE
RURAL SANITATION IN NIGER: DEFINING PUBLIC AND                                        STORY

PRIVATE SECTOR ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES



üü The Challenge                       üü The Solution – Who did what?         Association of Niger’s Municipalities;
Niger, one of the world’s poorest      The Government of Niger request-        and the Journalists Network for
countries, continues to face the       ed support from the Water and           Water and Sanitation. The diverse
challenge of access to sanitation,     Sanitation Program of the World         team was able to address the issue
particularly in rural areas. Only 27   Bank to learn how other countries       of fragmentation. The journalist
percent of Niger’s population has      were addressing issues of rural         documented the visit and wrote
access to any type of sanitation       sanitation and in particular the        about it in the national press as a
services. The country has one of the   difficulties in the involvement of      way to keep the team accountable
highest rates of open defecation       multiple ministries. Kenya and          to commitments they made on the
globally (73 percent). The             Ethiopia were identified as countries   study tour.
Government of Niger, with support      that had already achieved significant
                                                                               üü Results
from its development partners, has     social indicators on access to
implemented various hygiene and        hygiene and sanitation services.        Continued interaction with private
sanitation projects, but these have                                            sector players in Kenya on how to
been disparate and isolated actions.   Working with facilitators from the      get products into Niger or set up
These actions are based on sparse,     Water and Sanitation Program in         a manufacturing plant in the West
stand-alone intervention strategies    Niger and Kenya, participants from      Africa region. Several actions have
and methodologies developed            Ethiopia, Kenya, and Niger met          taken place since the exchange.
by the respective supporting           initially through videoconferencing.    Products are being imported
partners. The Government wanted        Each described what they had to         from Kenya as samples for some
help to clarify institutional roles    offer and what was needed. The          sector specialists. Niger’s disaster
and responsibilities in addressing     following objectives were agreed        risk management project plans to
rural sanitation, including creating   upon: (a) learn about approaches        import plastic slab for improved
opportunities for engaging the         to setting up transformative policy     latrines in the Diffa region. The
private sector.                        and legislation; (b) approaches         Government of Niger is developing
                                       to formalizing institutional            an action plan to accelerate the
Three key problems were identified:    arrangements for strengthened           implementation of the operational
 »» Lack of synergy between            delivery; and (c) how to create         strategy for sanitation.
    different actors due to the        behavioral change among users and
                                       how to involve the private sector.      üü Instruments
    fragmentation of roles between
                                                                               Workshop; Field Visit, Study
    several line ministries;
                                       Niger sent a multi-disciplinary         Tour, Multi-stakeholders dialogue/
 »» Ineffective guidance to            team on the tour, including             consultation.
    policy-makers to ensure that       representatives from Ministry of
    they include sanitation sector     Water and Sanitation; Ministry of       üü Knowledge broker:
    promotion among                    Public Health; Ministry of Primary      Taibou Adamou Maiga, Senior
    government priorities;             Education, Literacy, Promotion          Water and Sanitation Specialist,
 »» Lack of a unified framework        of National Languages and Civic         The World Bank Group
    for action.                        Education; Ministry of Urban
                                       Development and Housing;
                                                           Define the
                                                          Knowledge
                                                           Exchange




DEFINE THE
KNOWLEDGE
EXCHANGE
IN STEP 1 YOU ANCHORED YOUR KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
INITIATIVE BY:
üü Linking it clearly to the development goal,
üü Defining the challenges to meet the development goal,
üü Determining the change objectives with your counterparts.


IN STEP 2 YOU WILL:
2.1	 Identify the groups of people who are needed to
     achieve the change,
2.2	 Determine the intermediate outcomes that
     participants will seek from the exchange,
2.3	 Identify groups and individuals with relevant and
     transferable knowledge and experience to share.
16




     Define the
     Knowledge
     Exchange


     STEP 2.1 IDENTIFYING PARTICIPANTS
     Which individuals or groups are most likely to make this change happen?
     Why are they best placed to do so?
     The success of a knowledge exchange initiative depends on having the right people involved.
     First, think about those who have a stake in the issue. Then, consider those who can and will
     initiate the actions needed to achieve the change objective. This is a stakeholder analysis in
     its simplest form. These change agents can belong to different stakeholder groups (academia,
     civil society, government, municipalities or utilities, private sector) and be at the executive,
     managerial, or professional/technical level, or a combination. What they have in common
     is the ability to lead, influence, convene, or act on the institutional challenge. Sometimes
     individuals are not yet aware of the vital role they can play. In these cases, you may need to
     inspire them to become change agents.



                         IDENTIFYING PARTICIPANT PROFILES
                        To begin, talk to your clients about potential individuals and groups of
                        people who are needed to achieve the change objective, and ask the
                        following questions:


                         Who will lead?
                          üüWho will champion the cause and give momentum and enthusiasm
                            to the knowledge exchange?
                         Who will influence?
                          üüWho are opinion leaders on the topic and have a broad profession-
                            al network across the various stakeholders?
                         Who will convene?
                          üüWho has the capacity to bring people together to discuss the topic?
                         Who will act?
                          üüWho is in a position to apply what they learn?
                                                                            17




                                                            Define the
                                                           Knowledge
                                                            Exchange
Putting people with diverse backgrounds and perspectives together can
result in a powerful learning experience as well as inspire networks that
continue long after the knowledge exchange initiative has ended.
18




     Define the
     Knowledge
     Exchange


     Table 1. Profiles of Potential Change Agents

      Stakeholder Groups                         Potential Change Agents

                            Executive Level         Managerial Level   Technical/
                                                                       Professional Level

      Government Agency     Ministers
                                                                       Technical specialists
       National             Vice ministers          Managers
                                                                       Team leaders
       Regional/            Agency heads            Program leaders
                                                                       Program staff
       Provincial           Directors


      Governing Body/                               Senior aides
                            Elected officials/                         Analysts
      Parliament/                                   Senior
                            Parliamentarians                           Office staff
      Congress                                      committee staff



                            CEO/President                              Technical specialists
      Civil Society                                 Managers
                            Directors                                  Team leaders
      Groups/ NGOs                                  Program leaders
                            Board members                              Program staff


                            CEO/President
      Private Sector
                            Vice presidents/        Managers           Team leaders
        Businesses
                            Directors               Program leaders    Staff
        Associations
                            Board members



                            Chief editor            Section editors    Journalists
      Media
                            News director           Producers



                            President
                                                    Program leaders    Professors
      Academia              Directors
                                                    Department heads   Students
                            Board members
                                                                                           19




                                                                              Define the
                                                                             Knowledge
                                                                              Exchange


The following example highlights the role of change agents and the direct result of a
knowledge exchange initiative.



  ROLE OF A CHANGE AGENT
  After a learning visit to see how Kenya was addressing supply-side
  issues for sanitation, two Bangladesh government officials from the
  Department of Public Health and Engineering were keen to more fully
  involve the private sector in developing low-cost plastic sanitation
  solutions for poor households. In Kenya, they had learned how the
  government had created partnerships with several large-scale private
  companies to foster innovation of new technologies designed to meet
  the needs and aspirations of the poor.
  Although this had not been one of their original learning objectives,
  the two officials were so motivated that immediately on their return
  they started a dialogue with a large-scale manufacturing company,
  including a visit to the factory. Within three months they had drafted
  a concept note; and within a year, the private company had begun
  manufacturing of a new range of sanitary products with special focus
  on the poor. Since this initial move, more manufacturers in Bangladesh
  have developed products that now provide more affordable choices to
  consumers from poor households.
  Story contributed by Rokeya Ahmed, Water and Sanitation Specialist,
  The World Bank Group.




  Selecting participants is a juggling act. The list of knowledge exchange
  participants will change again and again as your planning progresses.
  This is a natural part of the process, so don’t get discouraged.
  Tailoring the exchange to the capacity needs of the participants is
  what is most important. At the same time, be careful not to lose sight
  of the change objective.
                20




                     Define the
                     Knowledge
                     Exchange



                     Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Participant profiles
                       »» Political leadership and administrative representatives; senior leaders from the
                          Planning and Development Departments and infrastructure Development Authorities.
                       »» Water and sanitation utility representatives from Punjab and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and
                          Sindh provinces.
CASE EXAMPLES




                     India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Participant profiles
                       »» Senior officers from the Ministry of Urban Development and Planning Commission
                          who have helped develop PPP programs in other states of India.
                       »» Officers from the Department of Economic Affairs who guide PPP programs.
                       »» Representatives from the Government of Karnataka who are involved in the scale up of
                          pilot 24X7 water projects in the three cities of Belgaum, Hubli-Dharwad, and Gulbarga.
                       »» Representatives from the private sector.



                     STEP 2.2 DETERMINE INTERMEDIATE OUTCOMES
                     What specific, measurable changes do participants seek?
                     What does success look like?
                     Will these changes help participants make progress toward the change objective?

                     At this point, your knowledge exchange initiative should be anchored in the development
                     goal and a change objective linked to project goals or to your results framework. While it
                     is possible to reach some change objectives just using knowledge exchange, it is not very
                     common. Since knowledge exchange is almost always a part of a larger development effort, it
                     is more likely to catalyze progress toward the change objective than to achieve the objective
                     on its own. This progress is measured by the achievement of intermediate outcomes.
                     Intermediate outcomes are what we most commonly expect to see, measure, and report
                     after a knowledge exchange initiative. They reflect what participants want to learn, how and
                     with whom they want to work, and how they want to act.
                                                                                                 21




                                                                                    Define the
                                                                                   Knowledge
                                                                                    Exchange


Knowledge exchange can result in five (sometimes overlapping) intermediate outcomes
(results). The first four outcomes can also individually or cumulatively lead to the fifth
outcome of “new and improved actions”:

          ew knowledge. A person is more likely to act because of a change in awareness,
         N
         attitude, or understanding.
          nhanced skill. A person is more capable of acting because of a new or
         E
         developed proficiency.
         Improved consensus. A group with a common interest or agenda is more likely or
          able to act because of new knowledge, changed attitudes, shared understanding,
          and improved collaboration.
         Enhanced connectivity. A group is more likely or able to act because of new or
          improved relationships, greater affinity, improved trust, and reduced isolation.
         N
          ew and improved actions. A person or group initiates or modifies its activity
         because of what was learned, practiced, realized, and/or as a result of shared
         understanding and improved relationships.


Think of intermediate outcomes as stepping stones leading to the change objective. When
Niger representatives visited Kenya, for example, they gained new knowledge on sanitation
technologies and even purchased some products to take back to Niger. The utility staff
from Pakistan used their new proficiency to implement the water utility reforms in Peshawar.
Knowledge exchange can move your participants toward the objective by helping them
address cognitive (know why), relational (know who), and behavioral (know how) gaps. Work
with your counterparts to determine what gaps to tackle first and how knowledge exchange
can address them.
When defining the intermediate outcomes, think first about what personal or group dynamics
are preventing progress toward the change objective. Perhaps participants are not sure about
how to address a challenge, or maybe they disagree on the way forward. Another possibility
is that your counterparts seek ways to take an already successful situation to the next level.
Along with defining the intermediate outcomes, you will need to figure out how to measure
their achievement. That is, you will need to identify indicators that show participants
have learned or changed in the desired way. Table 2 will help you think through possible
intermediate outcomes and indicators.
22




     Define the
     Knowledge
     Exchange


     Table 2: Sample Intermediate Outcomes and Indicators

      Table 2 illustrates the following process for developing results indicators for knowledge exchange:
         Consider whether the change you and your participants seek is at the group or individual level.
      1. 
         Think about the ideal changes participants seek from the exchange—what they want to learn
      2. 
          and how they want to grow. These are the intermediate outcomes.
         Look at the types of progress that can be made toward the outcome. Types of progress are
      3. 
          further illustrated using example indicators.
         Develop indicators based on the type of progress the exchange seeks to generate. These can
      4. 
          then be used as evidence to demonstrate the achievement of results.

      Intermediate Outcome            Type of Progress      Example Indicators of Success
      New Knowledge                   Raised awareness      At the end of the exchange, at least 70% of
                                                            participants indicate they discovered new
         A person is more likely to                         performance monitoring options for utility staff.
     act because of a change in                             25% of city government planners will be aware of
     awareness, attitude,                                   the community mapping applications for Dar es
     or understanding.                                      Salaam after the exchange.

                                      Improved              Six weeks after the exchange, 80% of
                                      motivation/attitude   participants will have taken at least two concrete
                                                            steps toward a multi-institutional agreement on
                                                            PPP standards.

                                      Greater confidence    Nine out of ten participants self-report that
                                                            following the exchange they have increased belief
                                                            in their ability to bring about desired changes
                                                            within their Ministries of Health for sanitation
                                                            demand creation.

                                      Increased             At the end of the exchange, all participants
                                      understanding         describe the value of private-public partnerships
                                                            to strengthen water service delivery in
                                                            their countries.

                                      Acquisition of        At least 90% of participants can, at the end of
                                      knowledge             the exchange, identify eight key characteristics of
                                                            sustainable water resource projects in their region.


                                                            The percentage of correctly entered micro-finance
      Enhanced Skills                 Application of
                                                            applications will increase from 45% to 95% within
                                      knowledge
                                                            three months of the workshop.
         A person is more capable
                                                            After the exchange, 75% of the farmers will be able
     of acting because of a new or
                                                            to use the new irrigation methodology to increase
     developed proficiency.
                                                            their production.
                                                                                                               23




                                                                                                Define the
                                                                                               Knowledge
                                                                                                Exchange


Intermediate Outcome            Type of Progress     Example Indicators of Success
Improved Consensus              Improved             The percentage of team members sharing and
                                communication        articulating their views during meetings will
                                                     increase from 20% to 80% within three months of
          A group with a                             the exchange.
common interest or agenda
is more likely or able to act   Stronger             By the end of the exchange, there will be
because of new knowledge,       coordination         agreement on the roles and responsibilities of key
changed attitudes, shared                            project delivery team members drawn from the
understanding, and                                   various ministries and agencies.
improved collaboration.
                                Increased cohesion   After the exchange, all participants are unified in the
                                                     need to more actively engage slum-dwellers as part
                                                     of their national safety-net programs and agree to
                                                     work together on developing a common approach.

                                Stronger agreement   Within one month of the exchange, the partners
                                                     will have agreed upon a blueprint for a national
                                                     land administration program that covers both rural
                                                     and urban water resources and outlines key roles of
                                                     federal and regional levels.

                                Increased
                                                     Following the exchange, absenteeism from group
                                commitment to
                                                     meetings will decrease from 50% to less than 10%.
                                agenda/group

Enhanced Connectivity           Increased            One year after the exchange there is 50% growth in
                                membership           the number of government institutions that report
                                                     receiving help or advice through the network on
            A group is more                          water security.
likely or able to act because
of new or improved              Increased network    The number of current network members who
relationships, greater          density              support one another in the area of social inclusion
affinity, improved trust,                            programming will double within six months of the
and reduced isolation.                               exchange.

                                Increased sense of   The numbers of members who invite others to join
                                belonging            the group will double (from 20 to 40) within one
                                                     month of the exchange.

                                Improved trust       The percentage of network members that self-
                                                     report trusting advice from other members will
                                                     increase from 30% to 50% in the next annual
                                                     member survey.

                                Faster               Within six months, questions posted to the online
                                communication        forum will be answered satisfactorily in an average
                                                     of three days (down from eight)

                                Fewer isolated       In the next quarterly member survey at least 75% of
                                members              members will report having contracted at least one
                                                     other member (e.g., by phone, email, or meeting).
24




     Define the
     Knowledge
     Exchange


      Intermediate Outcome           Type of Progress       Example Indicators of Success
     New and Improved                Preparation for        At the end of the exchange, the utility and
     Actions                         action                 ministry partners will have agreed upon an action
                                                            plan for implementing new tariff policies for
         A person or                                        water.
     group initiates or modifies                            Local governments allocate a budget to replicate
     their or its activity/actions                          the good practice approaches on rural sanitation
     because of what was                                    of other local governments observed during a
     learned, practiced, realized                           knowledge exchange.
     and/or as a result of
     improved collaboration and      Change in routine or   Following the exchange, the project team will
     relationships.                  working in new ways    begin collecting beneficiary feedback on water
                                                            quality for the first time.
                                     Maintenance of         Within three months of the exchange, the
                                     change                 ministry will produce an operational manual for
                                                            implementation of the new policy and form a
                                                            community of practice for water regulators.

     Adapted from The Capacity Development Results Framework: A Strategic and Results-Oriented
     Approach to Learning for Capacity Development, World Bank Institute, Washington DC.
     (See http://siteresources.worldbank.org/CSO/Resources/228716-1369241545034/The_Capacity_
     Development_Results_Framework.pdf.)



                         Knowledge exchange design and implementation is where you as a
                         broker have the most control. After that, it is up to the participants to
                         act on what they learned.
                         Aligning intermediate outcomes with change objectives prioritized
                         by participants will increase the likelihood that something will happen
                         once everyone goes home.
                         Use your understanding of the change process to help shape realistic
                         expectations about the direct results from an exchange and what areas
                         it may influence. Donors, providers, and participants in a knowledge
                         exchange may often expect more than can really be achieved.
                         Managing expectations (especially unspoken ones) is important since
                         they guide how success is perceived and defined.		
                                                                                                           25




                                                                                              Define the
                                                                                             Knowledge
                                                                                              Exchange



  The intermediate outcomes will vary depending on the challenges
  your clients and participants are addressing, how they want to address
  them, and who is involved. Maintain regular dialogue with participants
  as you design the exchange. Ask, “How will this empower you to lead,
  convene, influence, or act?” Ask them to weigh in on decisions and
  make sure every engagement contributes to the intended change.


Developing the right indicators is integral to your results framework. Indicators define how
progress and success are measured. Create them in close consultation with your stakeholders,
especially those who will collect and use the data during and after the exchange (Table 3).
The following questions may help you create useful indicators that are specific, measurable,
attainable, relevant, and time-bound (otherwise known as SMART indicators).*
Specific:
  »» Is it clear what is being measured exactly?
  »» Does the indicator capture the essence of the intermediate outcome?
Measurable:
 »» Is it a measure that will be defined the same way over time and across stakeholders?
 »» Can data from the measure be verified to confirm its accuracy?
Attainable:
  »» Are the results realistic considering the scope of the exchange?
  »» Are data available at reasonable cost and effort?
  »» Is baseline data available for comparison?
Relevant:
  »» Is the measurement relevant (i.e., concrete, understandable, meaningful) to the stakeholders?
  »» Do stakeholders agree on exactly what should be measured?
  »» Will measuring the indicator be useful for making better decisions?
Time-bound:
  »» When will the results be achieved (during implementation, right after completing the
    exchange, six months or one year after the exchange)?




 Doran, G. T. (1981). There’s a S.M.A.R.T. way to write management’s goals and objectives.
*
 Management Review, Volume 70, Issue 11(AMA FORUM), pp. 35–36.
                26




                     Define the
                     Knowledge
                     Exchange


                     Table 3. Poor and SMART Results Indicators
                             Examples of                 Why the poor examples                   Examples of
                            poor indicators                 are inadequate                     SMART indicators

                      Ministry of Health sanitation     Engage is not specific enough     The Director of Sanitation
                      staff will engage with            to measure progress, and          attends three of the four
                      community -nutrition              measuring engagement              quarterly meetings of
                      programs after the study tour.    among all ministry staff is       the community- nutrition
                                                        not realistic.                    coalition in the year following
                                                                                          the study tour.

                      Workshop participants will        The number of staff learning      Within six months of the work-
                      learn to use macro-economic       to use macro-economic             shop, 80% of all medium-
                      forecasting tools for water       forecasting tools is not          term budget plans for water
                      resource management.              relevant to stakeholders who      resource management will
                                                        are mostly interested in how      be developed using macro-
                                                        the tools are actually applied.   economic forecasting tools.

                      Field visit participants gained   Understanding is vague and        After the field visit, all
                      a clear understanding of the      difficult to measure. The         participants will identify at
                      value of plastic latrine slabs.   indicator is not time-bound.      least three value propositions
                                                                                          of using plastic latrine slabs
                                                                                          within their country context.



                     Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Intermediate outcomes
                       »» New knowledge. Pakistani senior officials and practitioners will gain an increased
                          understanding of institutional, governance, finance, and service delivery aspects of
                          urban water and sanitation.
                       »» Enhanced skills. Technical staff will gain new skills to be able to implement service
                          management reforms identified as relevant in the Pakistan context.
                       »» Improved consensus. Pakistani senior officials and practitioners will reach agreement
                          on a strategy for implementing institutional reforms.
CASE EXAMPLES




                       »» New and improved actions. Senior officials and technical staff will apply their
                          knowledge and skills to set up the Water and Sanitation Services in Peshawar as a
                          corporate water company fully owned by the Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.


                     India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Intermediate outcomes
                       »» New knowledge. The Indian delegation will have an increased understanding of the
                          value of the PPP models established in Algiers, Algeria, and Alicante, Spain, and their
                          application in the Indian context.
                       »» Improved consensus. The Indian delegation will have greater agreement on which
                          alternative PPP models should be considered for the water sector in Karnataka, India.
                                                                                                  27




                                                                                    Define the
                                                                                   Knowledge
                                                                                    Exchange


STEP 2.3 IDENTIFY THE MOST APPROPRIATE KNOWLEDGE PROVIDERS
Which individuals or groups have the most relevant and transferable knowledge, development
experience, or a potential solution?
Do they have the resources and capacity to share it?
A knowledge provider has a proven solution or development experience to share. Individuals,
groups, or institutions hailing from the private, public, or civil sectors can all be knowledge
providers. They can come from the same country or region as the knowledge seeker or from
somewhere completely different. In some instances, the roles of provider and seeker are not
particularly distinct, with both sides co-generating or providing and receiving knowledge on
a common topic.
As the broker, you are often tasked with finding the knowledge providers. When selecting
them, consider whether they have:
  »» Demonstrated success in effectively addressing similar development challenges;
  »» Relevant experience in providing this knowledge to people from other places, cultures,
     and learning backgrounds;
  »» Familiarity with the cultural and historical contexts of participant groups;
  »» Resources to plan and implement the knowledge exchange in the proposed time-frame;
  »» Readiness to deliver, shown by confirmed commitment and understanding
     of responsibilities;
  »» Prior relationship with the knowledge-receiving institutions, groups, or individuals;
  »» Understanding of potential logistical complications and risks such as language issues or
     travel challenges.

As you did when selecting potential knowledge-receiving participants, try to find a good
mix of knowledge providers who can share different perspectives on the issue. You want to
expose participants to many points of view to allow them to see how something has worked,
challenges that have been overcome, and pitfalls to avoid. The more complex a problem,
the harder it can be to find a suitable knowledge provider. Listen to the knowledge-receiving
participants, know when their needs have evolved and adjust your plan accordingly. You may
not — in fact, you probably won’t — get it right the first time. Don’t get discouraged. You
and the knowledge-receiving participants will explore a range of possibilities before finding
a truly fitting match.
                28




                     Define the
                     Knowledge
                     Exchange



                     Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Knowledge providers
                        South Africa’s two water authorities — Johannesburg Water and Durban Water —
                        were identified as ideal knowledge providers because they had achieved substantial
                        progress in service delivery through institutional reform, civic engagement, and
                        financial viability, including a focus on reaching the urban poor.
CASE EXAMPLES




                     India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Knowledge providers
                       »» Algeria’s SEAAL (Algiers Water and Sanitation Company), including senior management,
                          operating staff a field functionaries, and trade union representatives.
                       »» Algeria’s Ministry counterparts and government agencies.
                       »» Spain’s AEAS (Spanish Association of Water Service Operators)
                       »» Aguas Alicante (Water Utilities of Alicante) and Canal de Isabel II (Madrid), including
                          senior executives and practitioners at operational facilities.
                       »» Local government officials from Algeria and Spain who were selected for having
                          implemented a range of successful PPP arrangements in their cities to improve urban
                          water asset management and service delivery.




                                        A knowledge exchange benefits immensely from a strong, well-
                                        networked broker to facilitate dialogue and build trust. The quality of
                                        an exchange is often higher when the broker knows both demand and
                                        supply sides well.
                                        When considering knowledge providers for study tours, try to avoid
                                        high tourist-value destinations. You can reduce the “junket value” of
                                        the study tour this way.
                                                                                           29




                                                                              Define the
                                                                             Knowledge
                                                                              Exchange



AfricaSan conferences spur long-term connections
As part of the AfricaSan series of conferences organized by the African
Ministers’ Council on Water (AMCOW) in 2002, 2008, 2011, and 2015, the
Water and Sanitation Program worked with country sanitation task forces
in partnership with other agencies such as UNICEF, the Water Supply
Sanitation Collaborative Council, and WaterAid. The joint initiative was
aimed at helping countries to reflect on their learning and knowledge
so as to be prepared to share offerings at the conferences as well as be
ready with a series of ‘asks’ from other countries.
Part of the AfricaSan process has been to benchmark the progress of
countries against key political commitments. Regular meetings, updates,
and peer learning has led to the development of personal relationships
and increased trust between the convening teams and participants such
that more ‘honest’ self-assessment is now taking place when countries
submit their performance scores. In addition, countries are now more able
to report on their challenges and seek help from peers in other countries.
At the last AfricaSan meeting in Dakar in May 2015, the country peer-
learning sessions were voted the most valuable sessions of the three-
day conference. Many countries have continued their own bilateral
discussions after being ‘connected’ by AfricaSan.
Story contributed by Yolande Coombes, Senior Water and Sanitation
Consultant, The World Bank Group
 30




                     Design and Develop the
                     Knowledge Exchange




                                                                                  KNOWLEDGE
ACCELERATING UNIVERSAL SANITATION COVERAGE IN                                      EXCHANGE
                                                                                     STORY
INDIA’S RURAL AREAS: THE STATE OF BIHAR LEARNS
FROM THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL




üü The Challenge                       delegation from Bihar visited the     was learned through the exchange
To accelerate efforts to attain        districts of Nadia and Birbhum in     from Nadia district in West Bengal.
universal sanitation coverage and      West Bengal. Through a series         Inspired by the visit, Lalit Kumar
to put focus on sanitation, the        of presentations, field visits, and   Singh, Senior Deputy Collector,
Government of India launched the       interactions with political and       Jehanabad district, Bihar declared,
Swachh Bharat Mission in October       civic leaders in West Bengal, the     “I will make my district Open
2014, which partly aims to achieve     delegates from Bihar learned          Defecation Free!”
an Open Defecation Free (ODF)          about the process adopted
rural India by 2019. The sanitation    to motivate behavior change,          üü Instrument: Study Tour
challenge is particularly severe       encourage community monitoring,
                                       and convince people to change         üü Knowledge Brokers:
in Bihar, the third most populous
state in India, with more than         their mindset toward the habit of     Upneet Singh, Water and
103 million inhabitants. Nearly        open defecation. In discussions       Sanitation Specialist, The World
85 percent of the inhabitants live     among themselves, they identified     Bank Group
in rural areas. Bihar is also home     good practices they could apply       Bhavna Bhatia, Lead Operations
to 2 out of every 10 Indians who       in Bihar at state and district        Officer, The World Bank Group.
defecate in the open. On the           level. The Bihar delegates, who
other hand, just 18 months after       had visited West Bengal armed         The Water Practice team in India
neighboring state West Bengal          with a range of questions, and        organized the study tour with
launched its Nirmal Bangla (Clean      some skepticism, returned home        close coordination and support
Bengal) Mission to achieve Open        confident. “We need to shift our      from colleagues of the West
Defecation Free (ODF) status by        implementation approach from          Bengal Institutional Strengthening
2017, West Bengal’s Nadia district     individual households to a more       of Gram Panchayats (ISGP)
was declared the first ODF district.   collective, community-driven mode     Project team, the Rural Water
Bihar State sought to learn from       . . . and look beyond hierarchies,”   Supply and Sanitation Project
West Bengal’s good practices in        said delegate D.P. Singh, Chief       for Low Income States in Bihar,
implementing the Swachh Bharat         Engineer, Bihar State Water and       and the Leadership, Learning,
Mission – Gramin (Clean India          Sanitation Mission.                   and Innovation Vice Presidency.
Mission - Rural) program.                                                    The World Bank’s External and
                                       üü Results
                                                                             Corporate Relations team in India
üü Solution – Who did what?            The Jehanabad district team in        helped to disseminate information
To learn from West Bengal’s            Bihar streamlined the flow of         on the exchange through the @
success in tackling this challenge,    funds and set up a cement ring        worldbankwater Twitter handle
in June 2015 a 32-member               production center based on what       and documentation.
DESIGN &
DEVELOP THE
KNOWLEDGE
EXCHANGE
IN STEP 2 YOU DEFINED THE KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE BY
üü Identifying the types of people needed to achieve the change objective.
üü Considering the desired intermediate outcomes.
üü Identifying ideal knowledge providers.



IN STEP 3 YOU WILL
3.1	 Select the participants,
3.2	 Verify the change objective and desired outcomes,
3.3	 Organize the design and delivery team,
3.4	 Assemble the initiative.
32




     Design and Develop the
     Knowledge Exchange



     Together, you and the knowledge exchange participants will design the knowledge exchange
     journey to achieve the intermediate outcomes. Envisioning and mapping the journey is an
     iterative process that extends well into implementation as you must balance upfront planning
     with adaptive learning that allows you to react to emerging lessons from implementation.
     Your task is to closely link the design and selection of knowledge exchange vehicles/
     instruments with the intermediate outcomes sought by the participants. Also keep in mind
     that the learning needs and interests of the stakeholders may shift during implementation,
     especially when addressing a complex challenge where the capacities to tackle the problems
     are often distributed across actors and no one actor is in full control of progress towards
     an objective. For example, interactions during multi-stakeholder dialogues, study tours, or
     conferences may give rise to new ideas, generate different perspectives on complex reform
     problems and solutions, or require learning on topics unforeseen during the design phase.
     Therefore, complex challenges tend to require multiple interventions, testing, and iteration.

     STEP 3.1 SELECT THE PARTICIPANTS
     Which individuals are best placed to benefit from the knowledge exchange and act on what
     is learned?
     In Step 2 you considered the mix of participants needed for a successful knowledge exchange
     initiative. Now it’s time to choose specifically who will join you in the knowledge exchange
     from the recipient side. In this phase, work with your counterparts and any participants already
     identified. Seek the champions—those who are open to reform and can drive the desired
     change. And don’t forget influencers, those in a position to secure stakeholder support.


                        Once you have the perfect list, don't become too invested — it will
                        likely change. As plans firm up, some participants won't be available,
                        some will drop out, and others will want to join. The important thing is
                        knowing who your exchange must include for it to be productive and
                        orchestrating their participation, even if this means delays.



                         Participant Checklist
                           üüUse the development goal and change objective as a guide when
                             selecting each participant.
                           üüWork with your counterparts to identify participants who are lead-
                             ers, influencers, conveners or key actors, or who have the potential
                             to take on these roles within their institution or government.
                           üüAsk your counterparts for a brief explanation why each participant
                             should be included and what he or she will contribute. You can use
                             these explanations later to ensure that any substitute participants
                             can still make the desired contributions.
                                                                                               33




                                                                     Design and Develop the
                                                                       Knowledge Exchange




Participants were selected based on the roles and responsibilities
they had and would have at city, state and national level in facilitating
achievement of the development goal.



Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Selected participants
Participants from Pakistan were selected based on the role and responsibility they had
(and could have) with respect to starting a utility in Peshawar. The delegation included:
  »» Elected politicians from national and provincial assemblies representing Faisalabad,
     Multan, Lahore, and Gujranwala City District Governments;
  »» Senior decision-makers from the Planning and Development Department, Housing
     and Urban Development and Public Health Engineering Department, and heads
     of development authorities from the governments of Punjab, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
     and Sindh;
  »» Senior staff from Water and Sanitation Agency, Faisalabad, Gujranwala, Lahore, Multan,




                                                                                                    CASE EXAMPLES
     Rawalpindi, Government of Punjab;
  »» World Bank Pakistan staff.


India and Algeria, and Spain exchange — Selected participants
 Participants were selected based on the roles and responsibilities they had and would
 have at city, state and national level in facilitating achievement of the development goal.
  »» Joint Secretary and Economic Advisor from the Ministry of Urban Development;
  »» Section Officers, Department of Economic Affairs;
  »» Advisor, Planning Commission;
  »» Managing Director, Deputy Project Director, Sanitation Engineer, and two Task
     Managers from Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Finance Corporation;
  »» Engineer, Gulbarga City Corporation;
  »» Water and Sanitation Specialists, World Bank.



Consider including influential media personnel when the knowledge
exchange is supporting public reform efforts. In the example of Niger
exchange to Kenya and Ethiopia (page 14), they included a journalist
to not only document the tour, but to also hold the participants
accountable for implementation of recommendations that were made
as a result of their learning.
To eliminate “junket junkies,” let participants know they will be
expected to complete pre- and post-knowledge exchange activities.
                34




                     Design and Develop the
                     Knowledge Exchange



                     STEP 3.2 VERIFY THE OBJECTIVE AND OUTCOMES
                     What do the participants want to learn?
                     How do they hope to grow?
                     What do they need in order to act, convene, influence, or lead?
                     Now that you have identified all or some of the participants, revisit the initial work you did
                     when starting to plan the knowledge exchange. As a group, verify that your knowledge
                     exchange initiative is aligned with the development goal, institutional challenge, and the
                     change objective, and that everyone is on the same page in this regard. If not, work with your
                     counterparts and participants to clarify those aspects for them before tackling the next step.
                     This could be done through existing sector meetings such as a water sector coordination
                     meeting, joint sector review, or a specific event that you may have to organize.
                     Remember that intermediate outcomes are the specific changes participants seek to realize
                     as a direct result of the knowledge exchange initiative. These outcomes might be enhanced
                     knowledge of a topic or a new coalition of peers to help influence change in their organization.
                     At this time, you will need to review these as well with your participants to ensure that they
                     are attainable and measurable.

                     Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Verify objective and intermediate outcomes
                     The Pakistani participants agreed that they all wanted to achieve the same objectives
CASE EXAMPLES




                     and outcomes.

                     India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Verify objective and intermediate outcomes
                     Selected participants for the knowledge exchange validated that the objectives and goals
                     remained important.


                                         When determining and/or refining intermediate outcomes, consider:
                                           üüHolding an action planning session (either in person or virtually) to
                                             produce a draft list. You could include all or just a representative
                                             sample of the participants.
                                           üüSetting up a virtual discussion and posting the proposed interme-
                                             diate outcomes, drafted by you and your clients, for input from
                                             all participants. You can also facilitate an online conversation to
                                             encourage participants to refine/define the outcomes or propose
                                             new ones.
                                           üüChecking with the knowledge provider(s) at this time. What they
                                             know can help shape the intermediate outcomes. These conver-
                                             sations may also highlight the need for an additional knowledge
                                             provider or a replacement of the original(s).
                                                                                                 35




                                                                        Design and Develop the
                                                                          Knowledge Exchange



STEP 3.3 ORGANIZE THE DESIGN AND DELIVERY TEAM
In your role as a knowledge broker, how can you organize for a successful
knowledge exchange?
Who should be in your core design and implementation team?
While technical skills needed may vary by project, most knowledge exchange initiatives include
a few common roles. A team member may play more than one role in the knowledge exchange.
Table 4 highlights the roles and typical responsibilities of the design and delivery team.
Table 4: Design and Delivery Team Roles
#     Role             Typical Responsibilities                         Related Process Steps
1.    Instructional    • Alignment and results orientation              • Anchor
      Designer         • Participant identification and preparation     • Define
                       • Knowledge provider preparation                 • Design
                       • Participatory planning approaches
                       • Instrument and activity selection and design
 2. (Local) Delivery   • Logistics and administrative support           • Define
    Partner(s)         • Identification of key contacts                 • Design
                       • Preparation of knowledge providers             • Implement
                       • Facilitation                                   • Report
                       • Translation
                       • Results capture
 3.   Professional     •Knowledge of the participants, their goals,    • Implement
      Facilitator        roles, and challenges
                       • Participant guidance
                       • Discussion facilitation and leadership
                       • Conflict management and resolution
                       • Prep session and activity debrief leadership
                       • Identification of emerging needs
                       • Exchange adaptation, with team lead
 4.   Project Leader   •Knowledge exchange design, planning, and       • All five steps
                         implementation
                       • Participant and knowledge provider
                        selection
                       • Delivery team creation and management
                       • Results monitoring and reporting
                       •Participant engagement, inspiring them to
                         act on what they learn!
 5. Communications     •Plans for communicating among the delivery     • All five steps
    Coordinator          team and with participants before, during,
                         and after the exchange
                       •Strategies for communicating with partners,
                         stakeholders, and media before, during, and
                         after the exchange
                       • Reporting on results for varied audiences
                36




                     Design and Develop the
                     Knowledge Exchange




                                         As a knowledge broker, avoid centralized roles in yourself. This frees
                                         you up to monitor the engagement and react as needed, ensuring
                                         a meaningful exchange for your participants. For example, during
                                         implementation, consider hiring a facilitator and outsource event
                                         planning to local partners..


                     Once you have your core team on board, you will define targets, set priorities, and create an
                     implementation plan focused on participant priorities.


                     Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Design and Delivery Team
                       »» Task team lead
                       »» Local delivery partners in South Africa and Pakistan (professional facilitators)
                       »» World Bank teams offering project coordination
CASE EXAMPLES




                     India, Algeria, and Spain Exchange — Design and Delivery Team
                       »» Task team lead
                       »» Project task team lead and Co-task team lead
                       »» Local delivery partners in Algeria and Spain
                       »» Professional facilitator/synthesizer
                       »» Administrative coordinator



                     STEP 3.4 ASSEMBLE THE KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                     What blend of instruments, activities, and delivery modes will help achieve the desired
                     intermediate outcomes?
                     Every knowledge exchange initiative is a blend of instruments, activities, and delivery modes.
                     Planning for and selecting an appropriate mix — keeping in mind your operating constraints
                     and opportunities — will help participants realize the desired intermediate outcomes. When
                     assembling your initiative, follow the steps in Figure 2.
                                                                                                   37




                                                                          Design and Develop the
                                                                            Knowledge Exchange



Figure 2. Assembling the Knowledge Exchange Initiative

                         CONSIDER OPERATING CONSTRAINTS & OPPORTUNITIES




                          SELECT THE KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENT(S)




                     SELECT AND SEQUENCE THE KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE ACTIVITIES




                                      DESIGN THE ACTIVITIES
38




     Design and Develop the
     Knowledge Exchange



     Step 3.4A CONSIDER THE OPERATING CONSTRAINTS AND OPPORTUNITIES
     What are some of the key factors influencing the potential and limits of a knowledge exchange?
     The potential and the limits of a knowledge exchange initiative are most often determined
     by the budget, people (participants, providers, and brokers), time, technology and guidance
     tools, and context. In each case, however, you can often turn constraints into opportunities.

     Budget
     The costs for knowledge exchange can vary dramatically depending upon its scope (number
     of participating countries, institutions, and activities), duration, and choice of instruments. A
     series of virtual dialogues can cost a few hundred dollars whereas an elaborate study tour
     involving participants from many countries can easily cost several thousands.

     Opportunities to consider:
      »» Look for cost-efficient ways to achieve the same results. Bring people together virtually
         instead of flying them across the world. Use of technology such as webinars, video-
         conferencing, and WhatsApp groups have dramatically changed how we can connect.
      »» Build knowledge exchange into larger operations. You may include it in the capacity
         building component of a new loan or program for results.
      »» Seek funding from multiple sources and other funding partners to ensure sustained
         and in-depth exchanges. Consider sharing the costs between different institutions or
         development partners who are all supporting a common goal.
      »» Ask knowledge providers or participant institutions to provide in-kind support. For
         example, the Bolivian government provided hosting services and facilities to support a
         community of practice it was involved in.
      »» For Web-based work, use available technologies (many of which are free for use) instead
         of building costly customized solutions.
     People
     People can include anyone involved in the exchange — knowledge-receiving participants,
     knowledge providers, brokers, implementation partners, team members, and others.
     Common constraints revolve around availability, willingness to participate, number of
     participants, preparedness, staffing, familiarity with the subject matter or a technology, role
     in the organization, and travel.

     Opportunities to Consider
     Participants
       »» Focus on champions and influencers of the reform effort.
       »» Meet with the potential candidates to help ensure have the right mix of people. Try to
          mitigate against last-minute substitutions.
       »» Ask partners and sector/country experts to help identify appropriately knowledge
          able people.
       »» Convene participants on their terms. For example, ministers tend to prefer to meet in
          person or in a private video-conference.
                                                                                                     39




                                                                        Design and Develop the
                                                                          Knowledge Exchange



  »» Make preparation a requirement of participation. This helps to ensure that you have the
     right level of commitment.
  »» Think ahead about how to remove participants who are not performing. Sharing explicit
     criteria for participation in advance of the exchange will help to minimize such a situation.
  »» Be sensitive to cultural and social norms around rank, hierarchy, and gender in mind
     when selecting participants.

Providers
  »» Work with recommended providers or those with whom you are familiar.
  »» Work with the knowledge providers to help document and package the learning material
     ahead of the exchange. Oftentimes, institutional knowledge and practical experiences
     are not well-documented and readily available.
  »» Encourage providers to share learning materials prior to exchange to ensure readiness
     and quality.
  »» Ask knowledge providers to share their challenges and failures as well as their successes
     to provide a realistic view of real world issues.
  »» As a broker, look to building long-term relationships with knowledge providers and
     between the knowledge receiving and providing countries. For example, the water
     utilities in Pakistan and South Africa have entered into a long-term twinning arrangement.
  »» Think about ways to reward knowledge providers through public recognition such as
     awards, certificates, and press releases and interviews with media outlets.

Brokers
  »» Explain to your partners the importance of the knowledge exchange and how it can
     influence change.
  »» Seek support from local delivery partners.
  »» Help the participants manage the change process that might arise as a consequence of
     the knowledge exchange.


  Gaining Insight on Potential Challenges
  The Government of Ghana wished to introduce public–private
  partnerships (PPPs) to improve the financing and management of
  irrigation projects, but lacked exposure to existing programs. Brazil’s
  experience in designing and implementing the Pontal Irrigation
  Scheme was a rich source of learning. Through a World Bank- facilitated
  knowledge exchange, Ghanaian officials not only learned about
  Brazil’s successes but also its failures. A realistic and balanced view of
  what Ghana may encounter in implementing PPP irrigation schemes
  heightened the participants’ abilities to handle risks, negotiate
  contracts, and build up pertinent government institutions.
  Knowledge Broker: Christopher Paul Jackson, Lead Economist/Cluster
  Leader for Agriculture and Rural Development, The World Bank Group
40




     Design and Develop the
     Knowledge Exchange




                         Engage early on with the knowledge providers and prepare them for
                         their role.




     Time
     People always underestimate the time it takes to plan and complete a knowledge exchange.
     The knowledge exchange Toolbox in the last tab of this guide lists typical time durations of the
     instruments and activities from past exchanges; it is impossible to give a precise time-frame
     for any one exchange. There are just too many variables, including the level of complexity
     and the nature of the outcomes sought. Raising awareness, for example, is often easier to
     achieve than building consensus.

     Opportunities to Consider
       »» Divide tasks (design, logistics, facilitation) among team members and local partners.
       »» Consider whether the exchange is part of a longer-term initiative or if it needs to meet
          immediate learning needs. You might be able to delay or cut some parts of your exchange.
       »» Use available technologies to minimize back-and-forth in things like logistics, planning,
          meetings, and preparation of materials, monitoring, and reporting. See the Quick Look
          at Social Media in Figure 3.

     Technology and Planning Resources
     Technology and guidance tools hold enormous potential for knowledge exchange. However,
     not everyone has the same level of access, familiarity, or ability to use them.

     Opportunities to Consider
       »» Use the exchange to increase participant ability with a technology that facilitates the
          knowledge exchange.
       »» Meet participants at their technological comfort level. Start with technologies and
          communication methods that they most often use.
       »» Develop contingency plans in case technology fails.
       »» Facilitate the use of well-tested knowledge exchange guidance tools, planning resources,
          templates, and road maps such as those available on the World Bank’s Knowledge
          Sharing Web-page: www.worldbank.org/knowledgesharing
       »» Use social media, as appropriate.
                                                                                                                                                                       41




                                                                                                          Design and Develop the
                                                                                                            Knowledge Exchange



Figure 3. A Quick Look at Social Media                                                5. MEASURE                                  Learn by doing: Learn and adapt
                                                                                           Hootsuite                              every day by tracking, analyzing
                                                                                                        Spredfast                 and measuring data in realƟme,
                                                                                                                                  cross data for new perspecƟves
                                                                                                                    Sysomos       and insights.


                       1. CONNECT
                                                                                  SOCIAL MEDIA
                                                                                    ANALYTICS
                                                                                   Measure, manage and
                                                                                 understand the behavior and
                                                   SOCIAL                            impact of your social media
                                                                                                               ia
                      Facebook                   NETWORKS                      presence using social media analyƟcs
                                                                                                                tools.
                                                Let you interact
               Google Plus                  constantly with your
                                               audience (wriƩen
                LinkedIn
                                        content, images, video
                                      and links); connect any                                                                       4. RECORD
                                             Ɵme and from
                                             anywhere via
                                         desktops, smart
                                       phones, tablets or
                                           social media.                                                                         VIDEO
                                                                                                                                SHARING
                                                                                                                                                         YouTube
                                                                                                                           Convey complex
                                                                                                                          ideas, start
                                                                                                                         conversaƟons and                 Vine
                                                                                                                         engage audiences
                                                             Over 1 billion users worldwide,                               by sharing your
                                                                                                                           content,
                                                                  most on mobile (ITU*)                                    tesƟmonials, and
                                                                                                                                                          Vimeo
                                                                                                                           short interviews
                                                                                                                          onli
                                                                                                                            nli Share them
                                                                                                                          online.
                                                                                                                               social
                                                                                                                           via soc
                                                                                                                                  wo or
                                                                                                                               networks
                                                                                                                               netwo
                                         MICRO-                                                                                  microb-
                                                                                                                                      rob
                                                                                                                                 microb
                                        BLOGGING                                                                                        s
                                                                                                                                    logs.
                                     Increases your client's
                                      realƟme exposure and
                                       interacƟon with your key
    2. UPDATE                           content and ideas through
                                         sound bytes. You should
                                           synchronize your microblog-                                 PICTURE
                                             ging tool to your other                                  SHARING
                      TwiƩer                   social media tools.
                                                                                             Use images to spark
                                                                                     interest
                                                                                         r in your content/key
                                                                                     inter
                           Blogger                                                        ideas and increase your
                                                                                    target
                                                                                       ge audience engagement.
                                                                                    targe
                                                                                           Share them via social
                                                                                     networks
                                                                                      et
                                                                                     net       or microblogs.


    Synchronize for greater engagement: Content from video
    and picture sharing sites can be shared on your social                                                          Pinterest
    network and microblogging sites. Content from social
    networks and microblogs can be linked to content on video                                          Flickr
    and picture sharing sites.                                                 Instagram   Picaza


                                                                               3. ILLUSTRATE
   THE PROS                                                                                  THE CONS
   + Facilitates the development and sustainability of professional networks across          – Corporate structures may allow limited use of social networks
     countries, sectors and economic levels                                                  – May require negoƟaƟon with stakeholders
   + Available almost in every country of the planet                                         – Diﬀerences in digital literacy levels may impact viability /usability
   + Most oŌen free to use                                                                   – Access and cost of internet services may vary between and
   + Most stable, safe virtual environments                                                    within countries
   + Desktop, mobile, tablet, SMS accessible                                                 – Technological infrastructure may limit how social media is used
   + User friendly, short learning curve                                                     – Some corporate cultures do not accept/embrace social media or
   + DemocraƟzes knowledge creaƟon, collaboraƟon, and disseminaƟon                             have appropriate digital strategies
   + Widely recognized as a key element in professional pracƟce                              – In some contexts use may be discouraged as content is held by
   + Provides easy access to success stories and lessons learned                               third parƟes
   + Facilitates access to knowledge, those that produce it and those who wish to use it
                                                                                                                                             * hƩp://www.itu.int/
42




     Design and Develop the
     Knowledge Exchange



     Operating Environment
     Common contextual constraints include political transition, civil or armed conflict or unrest,
     cultural and social norms, and language. It helps to be aware of the political economy of
     knowledge exchange when dealing with recipients and providers.

     Opportunities to Consider
     Political Context
       »» Take advantage of elections and political transitions, which can bring in new thinking and
          eagerness for reform. Clients and local partners can help identify change agents. Seize
          the moment!
       »» In conflict-affected areas, identify knowledge providers who have overcome similar
          challenges and can offer strong leadership and guidance.


     Social and Cultural Context
       »» Leverage team members and partners who are aware of cultural norms around
          rank, hierarchy, and gender to ensure the broadest, most rewarding experience for
          all participants.
       »» Use local facilitators in culturally and politically challenging environments, especially
          when participants will work in interactive groups.


     Language
       »» In multi-language exchanges, ask knowledge providers to simplify messages and
          reduce jargon.
       »» Use interpreters to ensure everyone understands each other and to encourage
          greater engagement.
       »» Seek knowledge providers who speak the same languages as participants.
       »» If you need to reach participants with limited literacy, select activities that focus
          on conversation and demonstration, and invest in learning materials with rich
          audio-visual components.




                        Try not to interpret through multiple language levels (for example, from
                        Lao to English, then English to Bahasa Indonesia). Also avoid forming
                        mixed-language groups, if possible. Language interpretation slows the
                        pace of an exchange considerably, can limit knowledge transfer, and
                        results in additional logistics.
                                                                                    43




                                                       Design and Develop the
                                                         Knowledge Exchange




Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Operating environment
  »» Budget: US$97,000.

  »» Participants: Government departments (senior officials and practitioners).

  »» Providers: South Africa mirrored participants from Pakistan.

  »» Brokers: The World Bank acted as a broker for the exchange.

  »» Timeframe: Initial timeframe was 1 year from planning to implementation.

  »» Technology and Resources: Audio- and video-conferences and e-mail.

  »» Operating Environment: One of the biggest challenges was to deliver
     institutional reform in Peshawar, which was facing immense security
     concerns as a zone on the front-lines of conflict in war against terrorism.
     However, achieving major institutional reforms in this challenging
     operating environment in Peshawar was an opportunity to build a softer
     image of a conflict-torn city, to show the government’s concern for the




                                                                                         CASE EXAMPLE
     basic needs of its citizens, and deliver despite fighting against terrorism.

India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Operating environment
  »» Budget: US$70,000.

  »» Participants: Government departments (senior officials and practitioners).

  »» Providers: Senior executives, government officials, and practitioners.

  »» Brokers: The World Bank acted as a broker for the exchange.

  »» Timeframe: Three-months planning phase for a week-long study tour
     that took place during the first quarter of 2013.

  »» Technology and Resources: Mostly audio-conferencing was used.

  »» Operating Environment: With no local presence of the World Bank in
     Algeria and Spain, the design and delivery team worked closely with the
     local knowledge provider in Algiers and coordinated all the logistical
     details for exchange. Similarly, the team worked closely with contacts at
     Agbar in Spain to structure the program in Alicante.
44




     Design and Develop the
     Knowledge Exchange



     Step 3.4B SELECT THE BLEND AND SEQUENCE OF KNOWLEDGE
     EXCHANGE INSTRUMENT(S)
     Which instrument(s) will help participants achieve the intermediate outcomes?
     Instruments are the vehicles for knowledge exchange. They move the participants closer
     to realizing their change objectives. These instruments (Table 5) can be used alone or in
     combination. Each instrument has its own strengths and limitations (Table 6), with some more
     suitable for particular types of intermediate outcomes than others. Some instruments such
     as conferences require shorter term and more intense individual engagement (with other
     participants and content) while others such as communities of practice require a longer term
     and a less intense degree of individual engagement (Table 7). The strength of the instruments
     is fueled by the knowledge exchange activities (Table 8), which form the building blocks
     of instruments. The knowledge exchange Toolbox (last tab of the guide) provides detailed
     descriptions of each instrument, when and how to use it, and case examples.
     Instrument roles can vary:
       »» One instrument can help achieve multiple intermediate outcomes. Study tours
          expose participants to new ways of doing things and offer opportunities to share tacit
          knowledge, which may help clients recognize new opportunities, build networks, and
          build consensus — three distinct potential intermediate outcomes. You may design with
          this in mind. And be mindful that you could discover some unexpected outcomes as well.
       »» The same instrument used in a different project or program phase can yield different
          outcomes. An expert visit can help raise awareness and build consensus at the project
          identification stage; in the project implementation phase, it can help overcome
          bottlenecks and build skills through coaching and hands-on support.
       »» A combination (blend) of instruments can be very effective. This is especially evident
          when there are entrenched development issues or complex challenges such as those
          requiring political buy-in or the transfer of substantial technical know-how. You might
          start a knowledge exchange initiative, for example, with a conference to raise awareness
          of new development options, then form a community of practice to enhance networking
          and trust, and follow up with a study tour and expert visits to gain technical know-how in
          preparation for action.




                        The choice and blend of activities should always target the intermediate
                        outcomes the group would like to achieve.
                                                                                                                          45




                                                                              Design and Develop the
                                                                                Knowledge Exchange



Table 5: Knowledge Exchange Instruments




   COMMUNITY OF               COMPETITION/            CONFERENCE                  EXPERT VISIT           KNOWLEDGE FAIR
   PRACTICE (COP)              CHALLENGE             A formal event in           Sending a practi-           A face-to-face
  A group of people         A contest aimed at      which a large num-          tioner or technical       knowledge sharing
  that interacts regu-     finding and support-     ber of participants          specialist from a        event designed to
  larly on a common          ing new ideas and       come together to           knowledge provid-          showcase partici-
  topic to learn from      accelerating innova-      share knowledge            er country/region/        pants’ experiences,
      one another.          tions, usually culmi-    and their experi-           organization to a        achievements, and
                           nating in a showcase     ences on a specific         knowledge seeker            innovations and
                             event to recognize        topic/theme.             country/region/or-         market new pro-
                           the competitors and                                 ganization to assess      grams to donors and
                                  winner(s).                                   current circumstanc-       potential partners.
                                                                                es and/or provide
                                                                                  guidance on a
                                                                                specific challenge.




 KNOWLEDGE JAM                      MULTI-              STUDY TOUR                    TWINNING               WORKSHOP
    A facilitated con-         STAKEHOLDER           The visit or series of       The pairing of one      A structured event
   versation between         DIALOGUE AND           visits by an individual    institution with a sim-    focused on having
   knowers and doers          CONSULTATION           or group to one or         ilar, but usually more     participants solve
   (change agents) to        A facilitated series     more countries or        mature institution for     problems by work-
 surface hidden know-          of conversations      within a country or       a mutually beneficial       ing together on a
 how around targeted       among stakeholders/       sites with a specific            partnership.       common issue, be it
   topics and channel       peers to gain multi-    learning goal and to                                 a problem or a task.
 insights into action or   ple perspectives and     experience firsthand
   a concrete deliver-      deeper understand-      how something was
           able.             ing, reach consen-       or is being imple-
                              sus, or encourage             mented.
                                    action.
46




     Design and Develop the
     Knowledge Exchange



     Keep in mind that the choice and blend of instruments will also be influenced by
       »» Nature of the challenge (straightforward or complex),	 » Time,
       »» Participant profile, 					                             » Logistical constraints,
       »» Group size,						» Resource availability.

     Table 6: Strength of Knowledge Exchange Instruments for Intermediate Outcomes
      Intermediate Outcomes      Stronger                         Weaker
                                 study tour, knowledge fair,      multi-stakeholder dialogue
                                 conference, community            and consultation, knowledge
                                 of practice, competition/        jam, twinning
                                 challenge, expert visit,
          New Knowledge          workshop

                                 workshop, expert visit,          knowledge fair, conference,
                                 twinning, study tour,            multi-stakeholder dialogue
                                 knowledge jam, just-in-time      and consultation, community
                                 support                          of practice, competition/
          Enhanced Skills                                         challenge

                                 multi-stakeholder dialogue       community of practice,
                                 and consultation, study tour,    competition/challenge,
                                 expert visit workshop            conference, knowledge fair,
       Improved Consensus                                         knowledge jam, twinning

                                 community of practice,           competition/challenge, expert
                                 conference, knowledge            visit, knowledge jam
                                 fair/marketplace, multi-
                                 stakeholder dialogue/
      Enhanced Connectivity      consultation, study tour,
                                 workshop, twinning

                                 expert visit, workshop,          conference, knowledge fair,
                                 study tour, knowledge jam,       community of practice
                                 competition/ challenge, multi-
                                 stakeholder dialogue and
        New and Improved         consultation, twinning
            Actions
                                                                                                   47




                                                                          Design and Develop the
                                                                            Knowledge Exchange



Table 7. Instruments Clustered by Duration and Degree of Individual Engagement
You can use this table as a guide to design your exchange based on participant profiles,
group size, time and logistical constraints.


                                            Degree of individual Engagement

                                          Low						                             High
                       Long-term
                       Short-term						
Length of Engagement
                48




                      Design and Develop the
                      Knowledge Exchange




                      Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Instrument selection and sequencing
                      Comprising representatives of the two countries, a working group planned the exchange
                      that began with a multi-stakeholder dialogue in Pakistan to build consensus on the next
                      steps for water reform. The initial dialogue was followed by two study tours in 2009 and
                      2013. The first study tour took high-level political leaders to South Africa for first-hand
                      observation and understanding of the challenges South Africa had faced and overcome.
                      The second study tour was for technical staff to enable implementation of the pending
                      reforms. A range of multi-stakeholder dialogues and consultations were held after each
                      tour. These talks afforded a chance to share the knowledge from the study tours with
                      a broader group of stakeholders and to reach consensus on localizing the experience
                      and learning from South Africa. Expert visits from South Africa were also organized to
                      mentor and coach the Pakistani technical specialists and support their new skills and
CASE EXAMPLES




                      implementation know–how.


                      India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Instrument selection and sequencing
                      The study tour to Algeria and Spain was planned to enable the India delegation to learn
                      how these two countries have implemented public-private partnership in the water
                      sector. In addition to the study tour, a case study from Colombia was also presented to
                      the participants. In order to attain the desired intermediate outcomes, the tour program
                      ensured that participants met senior officials and technical staff in both Algeria and Spain
                      to get candid feedback about the change process and their roles before and after. During
                      interviews, the Indian team explored issues relating to the trust between the public
                      and private sector counterparts, especially in those areas where they were anticipating
                      problems in India. After the study tour, one national-level and one state-level workshop
                      were organized in India. During these workshops, the tour participants shared their
                      experiences and led discussions with a broader group of stakeholders. At the end of the
                      workshops, action plans were created for next steps to adopt or adapt the Algeria/Spain
                      PPP models for the Indian context.



                     “Sometimes twinning arrangements have a lot of bureaucracy because of the formal official
                      procedures and protocols; we found that having a more informal agreement through
                      expert visits allowed us to reach our results much faster.” ~ Masroor Ahmad, Senior Water
                      and Sanitation Specialist, The World Bank Group


                      Step 3.4C SELECT AND SEQUENCE THE KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE ACTIVITIES
                      Which activities will most help participants achieve the desired intermediate outcomes?
                      What’s the best way to sequence them?
                                                                                                    49




                                                                        Design and Develop the
                                                                          Knowledge Exchange



Activities are the building blocks of the instruments and where learning takes place. As with
the instruments, each activity has its own strengths and limitations and is more or less suitable
for particular types of learning. The blend and sequencing of activities is more important than
the activity in and of itself. Let your choice be guided by the intermediate outcomes you
seek, keeping in mind the participant profile group size, timeframe, logistical constraints,
and resources.

  Remember that the success of a knowledge exchange rests on
  achieving the targeted intermediate outcomes, not on delivering
  a predetermined set of activities. You may need to adjust individual
  activities within an instrument, or even the instrument itself, to ensure
  that learning goals are met.


When trying to decide which activities to select and how they should be sequenced, consider
the type of communication and interaction the participants need to engage in. The activities
included in this guide are organized into four categories (Table 8). Each category emphasizes
different types of communication and interaction among participants:
    Presentation activities primarily consist of a one-way flow of information and require
    use of creative techniques to engage and involve the audiences. These activities include
    demonstrations, expert panels, lightning talks, poster sessions, and storytelling.
    Discussion activities consist of multi-directional knowledge sharing requiring group
    participation and are often conducted after presentation-type activities. These activities
    include brainstorming, buzz sessions, e-discussions, knowledge cafés, peer assists, and
    anecdote circles.
    Experiential activities move beyond knowledge sharing and discussion and allow
    participants to experience something new, reflect on the experience, and translate the
    knowledge into action. These activities include action planning, field visits, fishbowls,
    role playing, secondments, and simulation.
    Analytical activities enable participants to examine and make sense of topics or
    situations from a prospective and/or retrospective lens. These activities include after-
    action reviews, focus groups, interviews, self-assessments, surveys, and SWOT analyses.

Well-designed activities should allow participants to
 »» Experience something new;
 »» Internalize the significance of the new experience;
 »» Observe, question, reflect, and contribute their experience;
 »» Interact with experts and other participants and consider new ideas;
 »» Develop a collective understanding based on shared experience;
 »» Translate the knowledge into action plans;
 »» Summarize new knowledge in written and audiovisual formats and make these
    available for other stakeholders.
50




     Design and Develop the
     Knowledge Exchange



     Table 8: Knowledge Exchange Activities
     Presentation Activities                              Discussion Activities
     Demonstration                                       Anecdote Circle
     An expert showing how to use a                      An exercise that involves the use
     product or perform a procedure; also                of story themes and story-eliciting
     used to showcase a new product or                   questioning to engage a group in
     process in order to market and                      sharing their experiences.
     spread innovations.
                                                         Brainstorming
     Expert Panel
                                                         The generation of ideas or solutions
     A moderated set of presentations on                 about a specific topic by tapping into
     the same topic addressed from various               the wisdom of peers and encouraging
     angles by a group of people with                    them to think of novel ideas.
     specialized knowledge.
                                                         Buzz Session
     Lightning Talks
                                                         A very short discussion on a narrow
     A series of short presentations on the              topic that involves simultaneous small
     same or diverse topics by different                 group-work (usually in pairs) and
     speakers lasting a few minutes each as              stimulates contribution from each
     part of a single session.                           member of the participant group.
     Poster Session                                      e-Discussion
     A presentation in a poster format,                  A discussion that takes place on-line
     usually combining text and graphics,                either synchronously or asynchronously.
     that engages presenters and
     participants in a conversation around               Knowledge Café
     the content of the poster.                          Open, creative, facilitator-led
                                                         conversations to surface collective
     Report
                                                         knowledge, share ideas, and encourage
     An oral or written presentation that                collaborative dialogue in a relaxed,
     summarizes and highlights topic- or                 café-type environment.
     theme-based key points (concepts,
     data, processes, lessons learned, etc.).            Peer Assist
                                                         A facilitated event where peers
     Storytelling
                                                         with relevant experience share their
     A purposeful use of narrative that                  knowledge and experience, usually in
     describes a practical outcome and                   the form of best practices and lessons
     is meant as a trigger for individuals,              learned, with a team that has requested
     communities, or organizations to                    help on a specific problem, project,
     consider future action.                             or activity.

                         Liberating Structures!
                         In addition to the activities in Table 8, explore the use of Liberating
                         Structures — “simple rules that make it easy to include and unleash
                         everyone in shaping the future” http://wwwliberatingstructures.com.
                                                                                        51




                                                      Design and Develop the
                                                        Knowledge Exchange




Experiential Activities                      Analytical Activities
Action Planning                              After-Action Review (AAR)
A strategic exercise that results in         A structured review process for project
a personal or group road map or              teams to analyze what happened, why
timetable describing the specific steps      it happened, and what can be done
that need to be taken to achieve a           better or differently in the future.
single or multiple objectives.
                                             Focus Group
Book Sprint                                  A structured discussion protocol that
A facilitated process that brings            brings together a group of people,
together a group of people to                typically unfamiliar with each other but
collaboratively produce a book in            with a common interest, to give their
three to five days.                          opinions on a particular topic or area.
Field Visit                                  Interview
Physically going to a location that          A question-and-answer session
enables partici- pants to experience         with an individual/- expert about a
project realities directly and meet          specific topic, usually following a
with implementation teams and                pre-determined set of questions.
beneficiaries.
                                             Self-Assessment
Fishbowl                                     A survey technique to gather
A small group conversation or a dialogue     information on how an individual
process held in a setting which includes a   rates him/herself on a specific set
larger group of observers/listeners.         of competencies, behaviors,
                                             and/or attitudes.
Role Play
An interactive exercise in a contrived       Survey
environment that allows participants to      The gathering of data or opinions
experience the situation from another’s      from participants using a structured
point of view, apply or develop skills       set of questions.
to handle a conflict or a problem, and
analyze the experience with the help of      SWOT Analysis
observers.                                   A structured examination to identify
                                             a program or organization’s internal
Secondment                                   strengths and weaknesses as well as
The temporary assignment of a person         any external/internal opportunities
to another department or organization.       and threats (Strength, Weakness,
                                             Opportunity, Threat Analysis).
Simulation
A realistic, structured situation designed
to engage participants in various
interactions within a particular setting
                52




                     Design and Develop the
                     Knowledge Exchange




                     Pakistan and South Africa exchange – Activity selection and sequencing
                     Instrument   Stage   Activity                                    Description
                                                     »» Brainstorming focused on identifying specific expectations in relation to what
                                                        the participants would gain from the study tours.

                                                     »» Through the action planning process, participants built consensus on what
                                                        they wanted to learn from the study tour. The delegation made a power point
                                                        presentation to the Chief Minister of Punjab Province.

                                                     »» Participants prepared a report outlining their expectations regarding benefits
                                                        from the study tour. The delegation made a power point presentation to the
                                                        Chief Minister of Punjab Province..

                                                     »» Discussions resulted in more focused planning for study tours that included
                                                        field visits, demonstrations, interview, and reporting.

                                                     »» Participants visited 3 utilities, provincial departments, water and wastewater
                                                        treatment plants, and communities; conducted one-on-one and group
                                                        meetings/interviews with technical experts; benefited from demonstrations from
                                                        technical experts; and rotated responsibility for chairing meetings/reporting
CASE EXAMPLES




                                                        output from field visits, facilitating Q&A sessions and debriefing sessions.




                                                     »» A second study tour was recommended and planned. This second tour had
                                                        the backing of the Chief Minister of KP Province and included technical,
                                                        finance, human resources, administration and information technology officials
                                                        of the province.

                                                     »» The planning detailed the focus and scope of the expert visits.


                                                     »» The final delivery was built on the trust and relationships cultivated during the
                                                        two study tours. The visits by former managing directors of Johannesburg Water
                                                        and Durban Water to Peshawar in 2011 and 2015 brought valuable guidance and
                                                        hands-on support for the emerging reform process to help Pakistan customize
                                                        learning from the South African model. The directors also went on field visits to
                                                        fully understand the local context in which the reforms have to be implemented.




                                                     »» Participants continued discussions among themselves and with the
                                                        Johannesburg Water Utility and Durban Water Utility for peer-to-peer and
                                                        expert guidance during the entire reform process.
                                                                                                                    53




                                                                                   Design and Develop the
                                                                                     Knowledge Exchange




India, Algeria, and Spain exchange – Activity selection and sequencing
Instrument   Stage    Activity                                   Description
                                 »» Brainstorming enabled the key stakeholders who participated in the study tour
                                    to come to an agreement on scope of workshop.




                                                                                                                         CASE EXAMPLES
                                 »» After the brainstorming, key stakeholders determined that it was important to
                                    conduct two workshops, one focusing on participants at the national level and
                                    the other targeted at the state level.

                                 »» Reports and presentations focused on learning from the experiences of
                                    the study tour. Discussion-based activities yielded consensus for follow-up
                                    action planning.




                                 »» Knowledge that emerged from the workshops was documented and
                                    disseminated to key stakeholders.




  Participatory monitoring at village level
  The field visit to the monitoring system in the Churu district in Nambale,
  Kenya, was influential in strengthening the system by introducing
  participatory monitoring.

  Stenciled lettering was used to designate those
  households that had stopped OD.



  Participatory monitoring
  map at village level, with
  markings to show
  houses surveyed.
                54




                     Design and Develop the
                     Knowledge Exchange



                     STEP 3.4D DESIGN THE ACTIVITIES
                     How should each activity be designed and delivered?
                     After selecting and sequencing the activities, you need to think about how to design and
                     deliver them. When designing an action planning session for example, you would start with
                     a preparatory meeting to:
                       »» Define what you hope to accomplish,
                       »» Assign roles and responsibilities (facilitator, key participants,
                          other resource people for content preparation),
                       »» Agree on a tangible output from the exercise,
                       »» Prepare the agenda and a list of materials needed,
                       »» Create a timeline with major milestones,
                       »» Review budget and logistics.

                     A single knowledge exchange initiative will consist of many activities. Some are more complex
                     than others and will require greater planning. For example, an immersive learning experience
                     will take serious thought and may require additional staff support to pull off, whereas a group
                     discussion is probably something you can organize with little help.


                     Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Designing and delivering the activities
                       The activities included in the study tours and followed by expert visits were designed
                       and delivered by the planning and delivery team that involved participants who formed
                       part of the Pakistani delegation. The World Bank supported this process by identifying
CASE EXAMPLES




                       opportunities to enable increased connectivity among participants and by offering
                       project coordination and facilitation support.

                     India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Designing and delivering the activities
                       Much of the design and delivery of the activities was done by local partners,
                       including representatives from the public and private sectors. They also
                       coordinated logistical support.




                                         Consider the way in which the activities will be delivered: in real time
                                         or staggered, face-to-face or virtual. Some methods are better for
                                         building trust and consensus, others promote greater participation
                                         and deeper reflection. Some are cheap, others expensive.
                                                                                                       55




                                                                          Design and Develop the
                                                                            Knowledge Exchange



STEP 3.4E ACTIVITY DELIVERY MODES
What is the best way for participants to interact?
How knowledge exchange participants interact with one another or with learning content is
called the delivery mode, and it can be either synchronous (occurring at the same time) or
asynchronous (occurring at different times).
Synchronous knowledge exchange formats include face-to-face, audio, online chat, and
videoconferencing. Synchronous delivery modes are useful for encouraging dialogue and for
building trust and consensus.
Asynchronous knowledge exchange formats include e-learning, online discussion forums,
online social networking, and e-mail. These methods are increasingly being blended with face-
to-face delivery, as they provide participants with greater flexibility in access and participation,
allow for sustained interaction in a cost-effective way, and encourage deeper reflection.
You will need to consider these factors when choosing your delivery mode.
  »» Cost: Face-to-face and videoconferencing behave similarly in terms of cost. Cost per
     participant is less with videoconferencing, but in both cases there are few economies of
     scale. E-learning, on the other hand, requires a lot of up-front investment, but once it is
     ready it is the cheapest delivery mode.
  »» Access to technology: Videoconferencing, e-learning and other online activities require
     connectivity and technology. Many good communication platforms are free to use, or
     cost very little. Videoconferencing requires special equipment and facilities.
  »» Audience characteristics: The schedules and profiles of high level people are best suited
     for synchronous delivery modes such as face-to-face sessions and videoconferencing,
     while large or distributed audiences are best reached through asynchronous
     delivery modes.
  »» Literacy (including digital literacy): Your participants should feel comfortable with the
     technology used for delivery in order to engage effectively in the activity.
  »» Language: Accommodating multiple languages can be challenging. Simultaneous inter-
     pretation is easier for presentations and more structured activities. Asynchronous activi-
     ties allow time for translation.
  »» Cultural background and individual learning styles: Some people prefer learning
     passively (for example, through presentation or demonstration) and others prefer active,
     experiential learning (for example, through role play, simulation, or dialogue).
  »» External environment: Disasters and unrests/conflicts can affect the possibility of
     travel, convening, or access to technology.
ü ü The Challenge
 56                                       Disaster RiskManagement
Honduras is   among   the  countries
            IN STEP 3 YOU DESIGNED        Agency   (COPECO), the
                                           THE KNOWLEDGE             Ministry
                                                                   EXCHANGE   BY
most affected by climate change           of Environment (MiAmbiente),
               selecting by
           üü triggered
and disasters              the  participants
                              natural     the Ministry of Planning and
events. Its high vulnerability to         External Cooperation (SEPLAN),
hurricanes,  ü verifying
           üfloods,        the change objective
                     and landslides               and desired outcomes.
                                          and the Honduran Association of
           üü organizing
poses significant            your delivery
                   development
                      Implement    the      team.
                                          Municipalities (AMHON).
                       to the safety
challenges and risks Knowledge
           üü assembling
of its population. In light ofthe knowledge
                               this,      The exchange    initiative.
                                               exchange group     held
                      Exchange            preparatory  workshops    before
Honduras has taken
                                          embarking on a visit to Colombia

IMPROVING DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT IN
      IN STEP
HONDURAS:         4 YOU WILL
            INCORPORATING       RISK MANAGEMENT
                                                                                   KNOWLEDGE
                                                                                    EXCHANGE
                                                                                      STORY
INTO LAND       PLANNING
           USE the
      4.1 Guide    participants along their learning journey
          4.2 Orchestrate engagement and build relationships
important steps toward adopting       in May 2014. The study tour          üü Results
            4.3 Systematically document
a more proactive disaster risk
                                                your implementation and
                                      included lectures and Q&A
                                                                             track results
                                                                           Honduran authorities agreed
management (DRM) approach.            sessions and semi-structured         on a Strategic Action Plan to
It established a formal national      peer-to-peer learning activities     continue refining disaster risk
DRM system (SINAGER) in               with national policymakers, and      management in the country. This
2009 to develop capacities for        visits to national and local techno- plan included recommendations to
risk reduction, preparedness,         scientific agencies. Delegates met   clarify institutional responsibilities,
response, and recovery from           with the Colombian entities that     formulate guidelines and tools for
disasters. However, Honduran          led the development of policy        resilient development planning,
authorities lacked the institutional  frameworks and instruments in        and implement a national strategy
capacity for mainstreaming            land use planning for regional       to enhance technical assistance
disaster risk considerations into     and municipal governments.           to municipalities. The Action Plan
development planning processes.       They visited the municipalities      is under implementation with
Specifically, Honduras needed         of Bogota and Manizales,             support from the Bank-financed
to find ways to better define         which have implemented the           Disaster Risk Management Project.
institutional responsibilities and    approach. A perception survey        Inter-institutional coordination has
enhance technical assistance to       was designed and implemented         been strengthened, particularly
municipalities to achieve resilient   during the exchange to measure       between central agencies and
development planning.                 objectives reached and results       local government. Support to
                                      attained. Participants also gave     municipalities is underway to help
üü Solution – Who did what?           semi-structured interviews and       them integrate DRM considerations
Honduras requested help to learn      videotaped testimonies to illustrate into development planning
more about how other countries        how this knowledge exchange          processes through technical
have implemented strategies           contributed to building capacities.  assistance and capacity building.
to integrate DRM initiatives into                                          In the medium term, these efforts
                                      After the study tour, a workshop in  will contribute to land use planning
territorial planning practices at all
                                      Honduras helped to systematize       that incorporates DRM aspects
administrative levels. Colombia,
                                      the learning experience. Attendees more effectively, thus promoting
selected as the knowledge-
                                      included officials of COPECO; the
providing country, has more                                                more resilient local development..
                                      Ministry of Justice, Human Rights,
than 15 years of experience with
                                      Government and Decentralization      üü Instruments
consolidated policy and planning
                                      (SDHJGD) with responsibility for     Study tour, workshops.
frameworks that mainstream DRM
                                      land use policies; MiAmbiente;
and environmental concerns
                                      and AMHON. This participation        üü Knowledge Brokers
across watershed and municipal
                                      from the widely assorted relevant    Enrique Pantoja, Operations
boundaries. The World Bank
                                      entities facilitated detailed        Adviser, The World Bank Group
Group brokered the exchange
                                      discussion about lessons learned
based on its long-standing
                                      in Colombia and how these might      Ana Campos Garcia, Senior
DRM engagement in Colombia
                                      apply to the Honduran context.       Disaster Risk Management
and Honduras. The Honduran
delegation included participants                                           Specialist, The World Bank Group
from the Honduran
                                                      Implement the
                                                         Knowledge
                                                          Exchange




IMPLEMENT
THE KNOWLEDGE
EXCHANGE
IN STEP 3 YOU DESIGNED THE KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE BY
üü Selecting the participants,
üü Verifying the change objective and desired outcomes,
üü Organizing your delivery team,
üü Assembling the knowledge exchange initiative.




IN STEP 4 YOU WILL
4.1	 Guide the participants along their learning journey,
4.2	 Orchestrate engagement and build relationships,
4.3	 Systematically document your implementation and track results.
58




     Implement the
     Knowledge
     Exchange


     In order to translate your design into real-world results you need to become a brilliant
     navigator and facilitator, shifting course as participants’ needs evolve and taking advantage
     of opportunities as they arise. This is not an easy role to assume; you will have to take a step
     back and release some control. Your aim should be to provide opportunities for participants
     to assume leadership over their own learning journey.


                         »» Don’t fall in love with your plan!
                         »» Even if you began with the perfect design, expect to make some mid-
                           course corrections. Implementation happens in the real world, not at
                            the desk.
                         »» Planning is key, not the plan!
                         »» Remember that this is not about you. It is about the participants.
                            Make decisions based on a clear understanding of their needs.


     STEP 4.1 GUIDE THE PARTICIPANTS ALONG THEIR LEARNING JOURNEY
     How can you facilitate a genuine learning experience for participants and empower them to act?
     As a knowledge exchange guide, your role is to help participants:
       »» Overcome any obstacles they might have in achieving their desired learning outcomes;
       »» Reflect on and internalize their learning and document their experience;
       »» Coalesce around action plans to achieve change.

     STEP 4.1A HELP PARTICIPANTS ACHIEVE THEIR LEARNING OUTCOMES
     It helps to recognize that participants think and react at different speeds. Some will get it
     right away and take off running. Some will not. Others will wait and see before making any
     commitments. Try and find a pace that is acceptable to all, even if it is not perfect for everyone.
     Discuss possible course corrections with participants whenever possible. If you need to make
     a change without consulting first, inform participants and other stakeholders of the decision
     and make sure you have majority support before proceeding too far.
     Focus on facilitating an experience that allows participants to:
       »» Plan and prepare for what they will see, learn, and do;
       »» Try something new;
       »» Internalize the significance of what they do and reflect on its application in their
          own contexts;
       »» Observe, ask questions, share thoughts, and contribute their own experiences;
       »» Interact with experts, other participants, and new products and approaches;
       »» Develop a collective understanding with other participants;
       »» Take action on what they learn.
                                                                                                        59




                                                                                     Implement the
                                                                                        Knowledge
                                                                                         Exchange



   Check in with participants frequently to determine where they
   are relative to the change objective, intermediate outcomes, and
   indicators. You may find that you have to adjust the activities within
   a knowledge exchange instrument, or even the combination of
   instruments to ensure that goals are met. You may also have to realign
   resources and revise timelines.


 STEP 4.1B HELP PARTICIPANTS REFLECT ON AND INTERNALIZE THEIR LEARNING AND
 DOCUMENT THEIR EXPERIENCE
 During implementation, one of your key contributions is helping participants internalize
 their learning and document their experience. The Toolbox (last tab of this guide) provides
 detailed guidance on activities to achieve this. Here are a few additional tips:
   »» Introduce simple techniques for self-documentation early in the exchange. Provide
      examples, templates, and guidelines. This step is especially useful for field visits and
      other learning expeditions.
   »» Encourage participants to keep a journal (written, photo, audio, or video). A simple
      notebook and a pen is a great enabler. Go the extra mile and print the knowledge
      exchange title and date on the cover. People will use it, keep it, and refer back to it.
   »» Allocate reflection time at the end of each day. Ask participants to use this time to journal
      and share with the group.
“During a study tour to Uganda and Kenya with participants from India, Pakistan and
 Bangladesh, we used hand-held videos to capture thoughts and reflections on the field
 visits each evening and during the journeys between sites. As a result, we collected video
 recordings that were very useful to understand evolving participants’ concerns, emergence
 of ideas, and proposals for action.” ~ Emily Rand, Water and Sanitation Specialist, The World
 Bank Group
   »» Set up an online group space and ask participants to post content, questions, and
      thoughts from the day. Monitor it and regularly refer to it to increase participant
      engagement.
   »» Encourage participants to create a simple, visual representation of day or event highlights.
      Hang the results on the wall and ask participants to tour the “group gallery.” As an extra
      step, have them add to one another’s representations as they walk around.
   »» Capture group reflection on flip charts or, even better, on post-it notes that you stick to the
      wall. This “data wall” is a great way to collaboratively capture and sort information. It can
      help a team surface new insights and identify emerging patterns during implementation.
   »» Track contributions by developing meaningful and frequent checkpoints and refining
      indicators for the expected outcomes. This will help you improve activities and respond
      to the “real” needs of participants. Indicators are covered in detail in Step 2 (see page 15).
                60




                      Implement the
                      Knowledge
                      Exchange



                      Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Reflecting, internalizing, and documenting
                        During the exchange, there were several opportunities for interaction that encouraged
                        participants to look beyond immediate results. The first study tour focused on functional
CASE EXAMPLES




                        issues which ended up leading to discussions on broader issues such as management
                        and sustainability with the subsequent instruments used.

                      India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Reflecting, internalizing, and documenting
                        Participants were encouraged to take notes, photos, and videos throughout the
                        study tour.


                                         At the end of each segment of a knowledge exchange, ask participants
                                         to reflect on what they learned and share their key takeaways or “big
                                         ideas.” Record these for your evidence base.


                      STEP 4.1C HELP PARTICIPANTS COALESCE AROUND ACTION PLANS TO
                      ACHIEVE CHANGE
                      Another aim of the implementation journey is that participants will come together around action
                      plans and feel empowered to change things. You can facilitate this group enthusiasm by:
                        »» Having participants apply their learning early on in the exchange initiative, following
                           up with “application check-ins” at regular intervals, and concluding with more detailed
                           action planning.
                        »» Asking them, during application check-ins, to identify how this experience helps them
                           address their unique challenges. How does it apply to their context? What constraints or
                          gaps still need to be addressed before change can happen?

                      End-exchange action planning will be guided by participants’ desired intermediate outcomes
                      and change objectives (which may shift during the exchange). This activity can range from
                      drafting a simple road map of next steps for individual participants to creating a group action
                      plan with multiple stakeholders.
                     “On return from the study tour to Brazil, a round-table was held in India to share the
                      learning and inferences from the visit with other functionaries in the Ministry of Urban
                      Development and Planning commission, several of which were incorporated into
                      the approach note on regulation of the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation (UWSS)
                      sector. The note formed the basis for the Ministry of Urban Development to articulate its
                      position on and support for UWSS regulation in deliberations held for the 12th Five-Year
                      Plan in 2011. One of the study tour participants from West Bengal is also leading the
                      thought process and reforms of the Kolkata Municipal Water and Sanitation Authority.”
                       ~ Vandana Bhatnagar, Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist, The World Bank Group
                                                                                              61




                                                                              Implement the
                                                                                 Knowledge
                                                                                  Exchange



  Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Action plans for change
  The political leadership was engaged right from the start. For this exchange, the




                                                                                                   CASE EXAMPLE
  engagement of political leadership was not only instrumental in arriving on a consensus
  but was also useful in addressing the bureaucratic hurdles.

  India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Action plans for change
  A technical expert conducted a session at the end of the study tour to help participants
  identify and synthesize the key takeaways that could help inform decision-making on
  the project design and that could also be shared with others upon their return.


  What participants take away from the knowledge exchange will help
  them change the way they (and others) do things. These change agents
  will contribute to better policies, products, and services for others.

STEP 4.2 ORCHESTRATE ENGAGEMENT AND BUILD RELATIONSHIPS
How can you ensure participant needs are being met?
How can participants support one another and become collaborators for change?
Orchestrate engagement. As stressed in earlier steps, engaging with your participants and
knowledge providers is integral to good knowledge exchange. During implementation this
is especially true. Here is a checklist on how to engage for success:


  Orchestrating Engagement
    üüSolicit input early. This helps stakeholders get involved and
      stay involved.
    üüDeal with people at a personal level.
    üüBuild trust. The more participants are involved and the more you
      listen, the more they will trust you.
    üüEscalate and resolve doubts, and deal with entrenched and non-
      cooperative participants at an early stage.
    üüAcknowledge active participation.
    üüBe a model “host”; encourage similar behavior from your delivery
      team and even participants.
    üüMake sure this is a consultative process. Your participants are your
      best allies in making this journey successful. Publicly acknowledge
      the good work of knowledge providers and delivery partners.
62




      Implement the
      Knowledge
      Exchange


      Build relationships. Delivery is about relationships — aligning people intellectually, emotionally,
      and psychologically. Relationships can inspire, support, inform, and facilitate the learning
      process and action toward the change objective. As a broker, you should look to strengthen
      relationships with knowledge providers as well as between knowledge seekers and providers.
      Most importantly, you should help participants build relationships among each other. They
      will gain big dividends later in terms of collaboration and ongoing learning and support.

     “The exchange allowed us to strengthen our personal relationships and realize we were all
      supporting the same goal. We started the trip as individuals with a common goal but we
      ended as a team, determined to reach the goal together” ~ Taibou Maiga, Senior Water and
      Sanitation Specialist, The World Bank Group


                          Building relationships with and among participants
                            üüBe personable. Get to know everyone, know their work, be
                               cognizant of their primary learning objectives, and ask them to
                               share their experiences with the group.
                            üüBuild in ample time for participant networking, socializing, and
                               group collaboration. These networks may endure and perhaps
                               become the most significant driver of change in the longer term.
                            üüEncourage participants to mingle. Ask them to work, talk, meet,
                               eat, and play with members of the group they don’t know well, or
                               in certain activities pair up participants from different streams of
                               work. Mixing things up like this not only gives them a chance to
                               learn about areas outside their immediate expertise, it also helps
                               them build a richer set of relationships to tap into.
                            üüRecognize commitment. Openly recognize and commend
                               participants for taking time away from their desks, families, and
                               lives for this exchange to grow personally and professionally.
                               Encourage them to make the most of this special opportunity and
                               get to know each other.




                          Remember that building relationships is an incremental process, so
                          you will want to be sure to systematically allocate enough time for it in
                          your knowledge exchange.
                          Your delivery team is now more important than ever. You can’t get
                          bogged down in the daily planning and logistics. You will need to be
                          paying attention to what’s happening (or not!), anticipate challenges,
                          and steer participants to their desired destination.
                                                                                                    63




                                                                                  Implement the
                                                                                     Knowledge
                                                                                      Exchange



  Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Relationship building
  The collaboration between officials of Peshawar (Pakistan) and Durban (South Africa)




                                                                                                         CASE EXAMPLE
  was cultivated during the exchange and continues several years on.


  India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Relationship building
  Debriefing sessions were organized throughout the study tour so that participants had
  a chance to reflect on what they were learning and to consider their next steps.



STEP 4.3 DOCUMENT IMPLEMENTATION AND TRACK RESULTS
How can you adjust to necessary changes in direction?
How can you track these changes?
How can you capture real-time evidence of results?
As you navigate the implementation terrain, change objectives may shift (especially in
more complex situations) as will the indicators you initially identified with your participants.
Unexpected results may also emerge. That is why it is critical to capture results as they happen.
Doing so will help you and your participants know whether you’re on the right path or need
to take another route.
Find simple ways to document milestones, highlights, and lessons. Consider the following
questions as you begin implementation:
  »» Is the effort to capture more than the value of what you can get?
  »» How will you use this information once you’ve collected it?
  »» What decisions can be made based on this information?


  Keep it simple! Lots will happen in the course of a single knowledge
  exchange. You can’t capture it all.
                64




                     Implement the
                     Knowledge
                     Exchange


                     If you systematically document and organize findings as you implement, you will:
                         »» Dramatically reduce the time you spend in post-implementation reporting,
                         »» Help translate new learning and experience into future planning and action,
                         »» Facilitate future check-ins and progress tracking with participants and key stakeholders.
                     Here are a few simple ways to gather feedback during implementation.
                       »» Get together over dinner and drinks with the group. This is the simplest (and tastiest)
                          way to capture participants’ impressions. It also builds relationships and trust.
                       »» Record your own impressions, including key decisions, in a simple journal or blog.
                       »» Ask participants to share photos and videos after each activity. Lead by example. Create
                          a group distribution list or community page to facilitate sharing. (Refer back to Figure 3,
                          A Quick Look at Social Media in Step 3 for more ideas.)
                       »» Include a documented after-action review process. (See Toolbox in last tab of guide.)
                       »» Seek regular feedback. Often the best feedback makes you rethink the plan. If
                          possible, redesign with participants as a way of engaging them and empowering
                          them in the process.
                       »» When possible, use a shadow documenter to achieve objectivity.



                                         Implementation is a full-time engagement, so do not expect to keep
                                         up with your regular work. Take care of any other urgent business up
                                         front and block out your schedule well in advance.




                     Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Documenting the implementation journey
                       The implementation journey was documented through:
                         »» Session summaries from chairs (participants),
                         »» Photos,
                         »» Key points documented for follow up.
CASE EXAMPLES




                     India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Documenting the implementation journey
                       The implementation journey was documented through:
                          »» Individual participant notes,
                          »» Joint report by the knowledge facilitators,
                          »» Notes from debriefing sessions,
                          »» Interviews with staff in the utilities,
                          »» Expert interviews.
                65




Implement the
   Knowledge
    Exchange
 66




                    Measure &
                    Report the
                    Results



                                                                                      KNOWLEDGE
                                                                                       EXCHANGE
SPREADING THE WEALTH: LOCAL LEARNING                                                     STORY

BROUGHT TO SCALE




üü The Challenge                         replicate                              a safe water supply helped 1.67
Bangladesh has a wealth of             5.	 
                                           Commit their own budget for          million people. And disseminating
excellent development projects,            replication                          lessons learned for running open
but many of them remain                                                         budget meetings and union
                                           Allocate resources through open
                                       6.	                                     information service centers
isolated when they should be
                                           budget planning                      benefited 0.55 million people.
shared and brought to scale.
In order to address this, the              Support peers in replicating
                                       7.	                                     The total number of beneficiaries
Horizontal Learning Program                projects                             of HLP good practice sharing is
(HLP) fosters collective learning          Collectively inform policy changes
                                       8.	                                     steadily increasing; in FY13, the
and accountability amongst             These learning initiatives               projected number of beneficiaries
local government institutions,         recognize that expertise lies in         is approximately 5 million people.
enhancing local capacity to scale-     experience, not in income level or       “While visiting Chowgacha I
up and sustain good practices.         schooling. They prioritize building      discovered a unique solution
üü The Solution – Who Did What?        on local practices and knowledge,        to arsenic contamination. After
                                       and help increase networking             coming back [from this knowledge
In Bangladesh, the Ministry
                                       and communication across social          exchange] we adapted and
of Local Government, Rural
                                       and cultural divides. The HLP also       replicated this approach in our
Development and Cooperatives
                                       monitors and evaluates good              own context. This has now spread
facilitates the HLP with support
                                       practice replications, budget            to the entire upazila and beyond.”
from 32 Developing Partners. The
                                       commitments and the number of            - Ranihati Union Parishad
HLP offers a filter for policymakers
                                       people reached through                   Chairman, Chapai Nawabganj
to view what can be replicated
                                       each exchange.                           Sadar Upazila
at scale with local knowledge
and resources. It focuses on a         üü Results                               üü Instruments
broad range of good practices          From 2007 to 2012, 303 union
related to good governance and                                                  Community of Practice
                                       parishads in Bangladesh allocated
improved service delivery. Local       6 million dollars for the replication    Workshop
stakeholders decide what, how and      of 17 good practices learned from
when to learn through knowledge        their peers. These allocations           Study Tours
exchange. Together they                yielded amazing results. In FY12
                                       alone, 3.6 million people benefited      Multi-stakeholder Dialogue and
1.	Identify their own good practices                                            Consultations
   with concrete and measurable        from the replication of good
                                       practices through HLP. Scaling-up        üü Knowledge Brokers
   indicators
                                       good practices in total-sanitation       Santanu Lahiri and Mark Ellery,
2.	 Share good practices with peers    eco-friendly villages aided 1.37         Water and Sanitation Program,
3.	 Select what they want to learn     million people. Sharing success          Bangladesh, The World Bank
4.	 
    Choose what they want to           tactics for building and maintaining
                                                            Measure &
                                                            Report the
                                                               Results




MEASURE &
REPORT THE
RESULTS
IN STEP 4 YOU IMPLEMENTED THE KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE BY:
üü Guiding the participants along their learning journey.
üü Orchestrating engagement and building relationships.
üü Systematically documenting your implementation and tracking results.



IN STEP 5 YOU WILL
5.1	 Synthesize implementation data,
5.2	 Measure effectiveness across expected and unexpected results,
5.3	 Report results.
68




     Measure &
     Report the
     Results


     In many ways your knowledge exchange journey is almost complete.
        üüBy anchoring the exchange you set the context and identified the players.
        üüYour stakeholders defined their intermediate outcomes and established indicators for
          determining whether they successfully achieved them.
        üüTogether, you and the knowledge exchange participants designed the knowledge
          exchange journey to achieve the intermediate outcomes.
        üüLastly, you used knowledge exchange instruments and activities to help participants
          gain experiences they needed to tackle the institutional challenges to reaching their
          development goal.
     In Step 5, it’s time to focus on what came out of the exchange—what worked and led to
     learning and inspiration, what did not work and why. You will share the story of your journey,
     prepare participants to share their stories, and think about next steps to maintain the
     momentum for change.
     Remember that this knowledge exchange may be just one leg of a much longer journey
     toward achieving the development goal. The importance of this segment of the journey will
     depend on how well you can demonstrate the exchange moved participants farther along
     toward the desired change.


                        Reporting on Long-term Exchange Initiatives
                        Large knowledge exchange efforts (i.e., those involving various
                        instruments and spanning years such as the AfricaSan example in Step
                        4) require a different approach than smaller, short-term exchanges. In
                        these cases, you need to develop a monitoring plan to examine the
                        initiative’s direct results and influence at multiple stages. These stories
                        take longer to develop but often have more substance. If possible,
                        describe how one or two individual participants have benefited and
                        applied their learning from one exchange to the next. Personal stories
                        add depth to the numbers and analysis.


     STEP 5.1 SYNTHESIZE IMPLEMENTATION DATA
     Measuring your results starts with synthesizing your data. During implementation you
     documented the experiences and feedback of both knowledge seekers and providers. This
     information, along with your own reflections, describes what the exchange was achieving.
     When you begin your synthesis, this information may look like a bunch of random notes,
     flip charts, journal entries, videos, or photos. However, as you review and translate these
     records into something more useful, you will be able to see how change is progressing.
     Look for the direct results that arose from the knowledge exchange as well as what the
     exchange has influenced.
                                                                                                              69




                                                                                                 Measure &
                                                                                                 Report the
                                                                                                    Results



  Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Synthesis
  Because of the pace of reforms in Pakistan, synthesizing the implementation data was
  incorporated as part of the exchange. Each session ended with a summary provided by




                                                                                                                   CASE EXAMPLE
  one of the delegates, who also chaired that session. In addition, a consultant/professional
  facilitator was present in South Africa to capture these summaries and synthesize them
  during action planning sessions. Another facilitator was available in Pakistan to support
  the reporting of the results.

  India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Synthesis
  A multimedia presentation with narrated/storytelling was created by the team leader
  using a collection of pictures taken during the study tour.

Here are steps to help you synthesize your data:
1.	 Write down the intermediate outcomes and associated indicators that you decided on in Step 2.
2.	 Collect and review any notes captured during implementation.
3.	 Look for patterns or connections within the data and synthesize these. For example, similar
    reactions from participants to a particular activity or relating to a common idea could be
    synthesized by a word, phrase, or participant quote.
4.	 Group data as contributions to intermediate outcomes. Refer to the indicators as evidence
    that intermediate outcomes were achieved.
5.	 Single out any indicators that provide a strong potential for, or evidence of, a broader
    effect on a change objective/institutional challenge (for example, a participant who said
    she would draft a new law to improve early childhood education).
6.	 As you synthesize and group, look for gaps in results data. For example, perhaps you don’t
    know what participants plan to do differently after the exchange.
7.	 Consider ways to fill information gaps. You may, for instance, interview the participants or
    ask them to share with you their post-event reports, key takeaways, or action plans.

  Here is a great way to organize your results and identify unexpected outcomes.


    Write each intermediate          Then transfer your data     Stand back and observe.
     utcome and associated
    o                                points to sticky notes      Try different configurations.
    indicator/s on a sticky note
                                    of a different color        You’ll most likely see
    and place these on a wall
                                    (synthesize similar ideas   some data points don’t fit
    
    in a horizontal line like       into one note) and          your expected outcomes.
    headers in a table.              place them where you        Separate these from the rest
                                     think they best fit.        and see if you can come up
                                                                 with an appropriate heading.




  In many cases you will have to supplement the data you collected
  during an exchange with additional information to tell the full story.
70




     Measure &
     Report the
     Results


     STEP 5.2 MEASURE RESULTS
     A well-designed and implemented knowledge exchange initiative achieves many results.
     Some can be directly attributable to participants’ experiences with the knowledge exchange
     instruments and activities. Some results occur only after everyone goes home (literally or
     figuratively) and apply what they have learned.

     STEP 5.2A MEASURE ACHIEVEMENT OF INTERMEDIATE OUTCOMES
     Showing that participants have achieved their intermediate outcomes is as simple as providing
     data relating to your identified indicators. Use the Template 1 below (or adapt if needed) to
     log evidence of expected outcomes. If you did not develop indicators earlier, do so now.
     Template 1. Measuring Achievement of Intermediate Outcomes
      Were participants expected to …          To what extent was this     How do you know?*
                                               achieved?

      Gain new knowledge? Participants
      are more likely to act because
      of changed attitude, improved            Small	Large
      understanding, or learning.	

      Enhance skills? Participants are more
      capable of acting because of what
      they have learned or how they have       Small	Large
      applied new knowledge or skills.

      Improve consensus? Participants
      with a common interest or agenda
      are more likely or able to act because   Small	Large
      of new knowledge, changed
      attitudes, shared understanding,
      and improved collaboration.

      Enhance connectivity? Participants
      are more likely or able to act because
      of new or improved relationships,        Small	Large
      greater affinity, improved trust, and
      reduced isolation.

      Initiate new and improved actions?
      Participants or groups of participants
      modify their activity because of what    Small	Large
      was learned, practiced, or realized.

     * Link to the measurable indicators you established in Step 2.
                                                                                             71




                                                                                Measure &
                                                                                Report the
                                                                                   Results


Table 9. Ways to Gather Information on Results
 Intermediate Outcomes     Sample Ways to Measure Results

 New Knowledge            üüE-mail participant survey 6 weeks after the exchange.
                          üüInterview participants in person at the end of the exchange.
                          üüAsk participants to give presentations on the last day of
                            the exchange.
                          üüUse a knowledge-based pre-test and post-test with
                            exchange participants.
                          üüVideo participants each day on a study tour
 Enhanced Skills          üüReview monthly application of skills (e.g., error logs, number
                            of reports) at 1, 2, and 3 months after the exchange.
                          üüUse a skills-based pre-test and post-test of exchange
                            participants.
                          üüSurvey participants about the application of skills 9 months
                            after the exchange.
                          üüDirectly observe participant performance 6 months after
                            the exchange.
 Improved consensus       üüAttend weekly team meetings to observe collaboration.
                          üüReview meeting minutes to determine if the group has been
                            able to reach consensus on key issues.
                          üüFollow-up with group members to assess progress toward
                            change objective.
                          üüSend email survey to team members at 3, 6, and 9 months after
                            the exchange to self -assess effectiveness of collaborations.
 Enhanced connectivity    üüReview documentation of group to determine if it is
                            growing (e.g., more individuals, strategic partners, member
                            organizations) at 3, 6, and 9 months after the exchange.
                          üüInterview members about their experience with group (e.g.,
                            numbers of conversations with other members, trust in peers,
                            satisfaction with peer responses) before and then again 6
                            months after the exchange.
                          üüTrack data from quarterly surveys of group member activity
                            (e.g., conversations with group members), satisfaction (e.g.,
                            useful guidance), and results (e.g., what came from
 Improved actions         üüDocument participants’ agreement on an action plan at the
                            end of the exchange.
                          üüCall (or e-mail) participants 3 months after the exchange to
                            learn if they have started new (or improved) processes within
                            their organizations.
                72




                     Measure &
                     Report the
                     Results


                     We can rarely anticipate everything that will come out of an exchange. There will always be
                     surprises, which you will also want to capture. These unexpected outcomes are, hopefully,
                     positive. Yet even less-than-desirable results offer useful lessons and opportunities for future
                     knowledge exchange initiatives.
                     Refer to the steps you took to synthesize your data in Step 5.1. If any notes are not aligned
                     with your expected outcomes, add these to your list of unexpected outcomes, along with
                     any evidence of particular improvement.
                     If you lack evidence of results at this stage, Table 9 suggests how to obtain additional input
                     from your participants.

                     Pakistan to South Africa exchange — Intermediate outcomes and results
                         »» New Knowledge. Senior officials and practitioners from Pakistan gained a deeper
                            understanding of the institutional reform process that took place in Johannesburg
                            and Durban, South Africa. Their observations of practical examples provided the
                            basis for identifying bottlenecks and developing a road map of what was required
                            to undertake institutional reforms in Peshawar.
                         »» Enhanced Skills. During the second study tour, technical staff benefited from in-
                            depth training on many aspects of the service and delivery management.
                         »» Improved Consensus. The Pakistani delegation, impressed by the decentralized
                            urban management in South Africa, and in particular with the institutional and
                            governance structure of water and sanitation utilities in Johannesburg and Durban,
                            became determined to find ways, together, to move forward with reforms.
CASE EXAMPLES




                         »» New and Improved Actions. Ongoing collaboration between Peshawar and
                            Durban water authorities resulted in the implementation of the reform process with
                            the leadership of the provincial government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.


                     India to Algeria and Spain exchange — Intermediate outcomes and results
                          »» New Knowledge. Alternate models for service delivery arrangements based on
                             public private partnership arrangements are being explored for implementation of
                             24/7 water supply projects within the India context. In particular this helped inform
                             thinking among the project counterparts at the state level.
                          »» Improved Consensus. There was improved agreement among various state/ local
                             counterparts on the model for engagement of private sector under the Karnataka
                             Urban Water Supply Modernization Project. This included provisioning for a
                             municipal company model to enable improved coordination and accountability
                             vis-à-vis the private operator.
                                                                                                     73




                                                                                        Measure &
                                                                                        Report the
                                                                                           Results



  To measure results, focus on observable or easily documented changes
  such as an increase in the number of team members sharing their views
  during meetings or in products delivered on time and within budget.
  It is also much more efficient if you can find information that illustrates
  the results of your knowledge exchange (for example, a formal
  agreement between two partners in a coalition) without having to
  collect your own data.


STEP 5.2B ASSESS PROGRESS ON THE CHANGE OBJECTIVE
Knowledge exchange initiatives are also designed to address an institutional challenge. Look
for evidence that participants have been able to have influence on the change objective they
set out for themselves. It may be that the exchange propelled participants down a different
path altogether. In this case, there may be unexpected results at this level as well.
Use the following template to guide your inquiry about the influence of your knowledge
exchange on the change objective(s). To attribute these results to your exchange you will need
to describe how it was achieved, including measuring the effectiveness of what happened.
Template 2: Assessing Progress Toward Change Objectives**

 Which category(ies) of change objectives           Was it                How do you know?**
 did you expect the knowledge exchange              influenced?	
 to influence?	

Weak environment for change characterized                Yes
by weak stakeholder ownership, lack of
consensus on a development approach,                     No
or failure to conceptualize or consider a
better approach.	         	                              Somewhat

Inefficient policy instruments characterized             Yes
by weak administrative rules, laws, regulations,
standards, and other formal incentives that              No
the sector uses to guide actions toward a
development goal.	                                       Somewhat

Ineffective organizational arrangements                  Yes
characterized by inadequate systems,
financing, staffing, incentives, and other               No
resources that institutions use to achieve a
development goal.	                                       Somewhat


   Strong intermediate outcomes can often indicate success or progress toward a
** 
   change objective.
74




     Measure &
     Report the
     Results



                            Systematically look for unexpected results. If you do not purposefully
                            look for them, they will not likely surface.


     If possible, follow up with participants six to nine months after the exchange. Using social
     media, online survey tools, or interviews can further your understanding of what else the
     exchange may have influenced.


                            Sample Post-Exchange Participant (or Client) Checklist
                            üüWho has been able to apply what they learned?
                            üüWhat have they been able to achieve?
                            üüWhere have they been able to bring about change?
                            üüWhen were they able to do it?
                            üüWhy are the changes important (i.e., to the change objective and/or
                              development goal)?
                            üüHow did the knowledge exchange enable these results?


     It generally takes a fair amount of time for institution-level changes to happen. When they
     do, multiple variables are usually involved, not just a knowledge exchange initiative. This
     makes attribution tenuous; still, reviewing for connections with your knowledge exchange is
     an important step. It will help you determine whether a knowledge exchange initiative is the
     right strategy or whether a different approach may be needed.


                            Quantitative techniques, with their various analytical tools, may be
                            limited for examining complex systems. To design a good survey, for
                            example, you must already know what you are looking for and how
                            that information may manifest in the particular context. Qualitative
                            research, on the other hand, can help you build rich portraits of a
                            people or place, and map relationships among people, places,
                            cultures, and institutions.***




     ***Based on Design Research for Media Development, published by Internews and available for free online
      at http://www.internews.org/
                                                                                                             75




                                                                                                Measure &
                                                                                                Report the
                                                                                                   Results



Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Direct results and influence achieved in Pakistan

Knowledge         Direct results                                 Influenced results
exchange          (Intermediate outcomes)                        (i.e., influences on
instruments                                                      institutional challenges)
                  Pakistani senior officials and practitioners
                  came together to discuss and reach
                  agreement on strategy development for
      MULTI-      implementing institutional reforms.
  STAKEHOLDER
   DIALOG AND
  CONSULTATION
                  This resulted in solidifying the plan for
                  moving forward in relation to enhancing
                  their knowledge as to how other
                  countries implemented such reforms.
                  The Pakistani delegation was impressed         In December 2013, Water and
                  and deeply motivated by South Africa’s         Sanitation Services Peshawar (WSSP)
                  decentralized urban management of              was incorporated as Pakistan’s first
   STUDY TOUR     water and sanitation. This improved            corporately governed and autonomous
                  consensus in finding ways to move              citywide urban utility with its own Board
                  forward strategically to implement             of Directors.
                  institutional reforms.
                                                                 In September 2014, the services delivery




                                                                                                                  CASE EXAMPLE
                  A government-appointed committee               mandate was transferred to WSSP along
                  worked on carrying out analytical              with staff and assets through a Services
                  and diagnostic studies for water and           and Asset Management Agreement
                  sanitation improvement and proposed            (SAMA).
                  three institutional and governance
                  options to the Chief Minister:                 Informal twinning arrangements resulted
                                                                 from the initial exchange between
                  »» Establish a water and sanitation            Durban and Peshawar.
                     agency/authority.
                  »» Establish new citywide utility.
                  »» Establish an autonomous, ring-fenced
                     company carved out from the existing
                     seven institutions through “functional
                     amalgamation.”
                  After visiting South Africa, the Government
                  of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa requested
                  technical assistance from the World
   EXPERT VISIT   Bank’s Water and Sanitation Program
                  in carrying out institutional and service
                  delivery assessment of the water sector
                  in Peshawar city to improve services. The
                  assistance also included having the former
                  Managing Director of Johannesburg
                  Water and Durban Water visit Peshawar
                  in 2012 and 2015 to share, support,
                  and guide the reform process with the
                  leadership of the provincial government.
               76




                    Measure &
                    Report the
                    Results



                    India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Direct results and influence achieved in India

                     Knowledge          Direct results                           Influenced results
                     exchange           (Intermediate outcomes)                  (i.e., influences on
                     instrument(s)                                               institutional challenges)

                                        Participants gained a better
                                        understanding of the different
                        STUDY TOUR
                                        models as well as how public and
                                        private engagement works.

                                        It became apparent to the Indian
CASE EXAMPLE




                                        delegation how a municipal
                                        company can be helpful in enabling
                                        alternate structures of public-private
                                        partnerships (PPP).

                                        Increasing awareness of models           Ongoing discussion and knowledge
                                        through sharing of the results from      sharing about PPP models that
                        WORKSHOPS       the study tour. Results at national      would be applicable in the Indian
                                        level focused on innovation and          context.
                                        policy. Results at state level focused
                                        on the regulatory processes and the
                                        role of the public counterpart. At
                                        the city level results focused on the
                                        technical steps needed to move
                                        forward.



                    STEP 5.2C ASSESS DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
                    Now that you have measured results, take time to reflect on the factors that contributed
                    to the successes (or failures) of the exchange. Demonstrating the quality of the design and
                    implementation is a necessary — though not the only — factor in even indirectly attributing
                    results to the exchange. The following questions related to each step will help you uncover
                    what made your exchange successful (or not).
                    Step 1 Anchor
                      »» Was the exchange focused on a high priority issue for key stakeholders?
                      »» Was the exchange initiated and completed in a desirable timeframe for building capacity?
                    Step 2 Define
                      »» Were the right people and institutions (providers, seekers, broker) involved?
                      »» Was the exchange prepared by both the knowledge provider and seekers?
                                                                                                  77




                                                                                    Measure &
                                                                                    Report the
                                                                                       Results


Step 3 Design
  »» Was there a clear alignment between the development goal, change objective,
     intermediate outcomes, and selected instruments and activities?
  »» Was there enough time and adequate resources (human, financial, technological, etc.)?
Step 4 Implement
  »» Did the exchange have adequate attendance and participation?
  »» Were you and participants able to adapt to changing circumstances as necessary?



  Knowing what did not work and why is another form of success!




  Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Design and implementation changes
  In order to enable participants to fully benefit from the multiple opportunities for engaging
  with the knowledge providers and to appropriately apply lessons learned, the design and
  implementation of the exchange were accordingly adjusted.

  India, Algeria, and Spain exchange — Design and implementation changes
  The exchange was grounded within the existing Bank-funded Karnataka Urban Water
  Supply Modernization Project. Consequently, some working relationships were already in
  place when the exchange was approved and the knowledge providers and the participants




                                                                                                       CASE EXAMPLE
  from India were selected. The participants included senior officers from the Ministry of
  Urban Development and Planning Commission, officers from the Department of Economic
  Affairs, and representatives from the Government of Karnataka who were already involved
  in the scale-up of the pilot 24/7 project in three cities (Belgaum, Hubli-Dharwad, and
  Gulbarga). One of the major challenges was arranging logistics for on-the-ground support
  in Algeria and Spain. Without a local World Bank presence in these countries, the project
  team relied heavily on logistical and coordination support from the local delivery partners.
  And although the planning took longer, the direct involvement of the local delivery
  partners helped to build stronger ownership from the knowledge providers with whom
  they already had strong ties. Overall, the knowledge exchange was successful both in
  terms of logistical support and in relation to the intermediate outcomes sought (gaining
  new knowledge and improving consensus). The participation of the project’s joint team
  leaders in the study tour was invaluable in facilitating dialogue with senior government
  officials on key takeaways and drawing relevant inferences for project design.
78




     Measure &
     Report the
     Results



                  Results from Other Knowledge Exchanges
                   Knowledge           Direct Results (i.e.,        Influenced Results
                   Exchange            intermediate outcomes)       (i.e., influences on
                   Instrument                                       institutional challenges)
                                       An effective knowledge       Increased advocacy
                                       sharing network created      for policies that offer
                                       that supports training and   small-scale rural farmers
                     COMMUNITY OF      research related to policy   government-backed
                       PRACTICE
                                       implications of climate      financing to address the
                                       change on small-scale        impacts of climate change
                                       rural farming.               on their yields.
                                       Program staff at the         Increased the number of
                                       Ministry of Health           programs administered
                                       learned and used new         by the Ministry of
                      WORKSHOPS
                                       project management           Health that achieved
                                       techniques to improve        annual budgetary and
                                       the effectiveness of their   performance objectives.
                                       programs.
                                       Roles and responsibilities   Strengthened
                                       clearly defined among        stakeholder ownership in
                                       the different government     implementing an effective
                   MULTI-STAKEHOLDER   agencies involved in the     e-government strategy.
                      DIALOG AND
                     CONSULTATION      maintenance of a new
                                       e-government portal.


                  Immediately after the exchange
                  üüHave you asked participants what tools would help them put their
                    new knowledge into action?
                  üüIf it would help for participants to stay connected, is there a simple
                    way to arrange that such as setting up a listserv, providing a list with
                    contact information, or creating a Facebook or LinkedIn group)?

                  Following Up 3, 6, or 9 Months after the exchange
                  üüHave you sent periodic reminders and tools for sharing what
                    participants learned such as a one-page summary of key results to
                    date, or PowerPoint slides that they can include in a presentation to
                    colleagues)?
                  üüHave you reminded participants to notify you when they see changes
                    that have been influenced by your exchange?
                  üüDo the initial results achieved by some participants offer ideas on
                    how to expand those results to others?
                  üüHave participants reported back to you when they have presented
                    what they learned to others in their organization or elsewhere?
                                                                                                   79




                                                                                     Measure &
                                                                                     Report the
                                                                                        Results


STEP 5.3 REPORT RESULTS
Now it is time to pull everything together. The approach and format, which you use for
reporting results, depends on the audience that you are trying to reach as well as your goal(s).
Identify the audience. Typical audiences include management, exchange sponsors, exchange
participants, decision-makers (parliamentarians and policy-makers), civil society groups, and
others interested in learning more about knowledge exchanges.
Define goals. What do you want to communicate to your target group(s)? Your aim might be
to raise awareness of the outcomes achieved, influence behavior of mid-level management,
advocate for reform among policy-makers, or inform sponsors about next steps. Your
communication goals will shape what, how, and when you connect with each target audience.
Develop a plan. Results can be conveyed in many different ways. The right plan depends on
your audience and goals. Determine what each audience would need to know in order to
meet the goals for that group and how often they should be updated. You should then decide
on the minimal information needed to meet those requirements. To raise awareness of civil
society groups, for example, you might decide to share results on a few key progress indicators
three months after the exchange; whereas to influence the behavior of policy-makers, you
may choose to report on the whole exchange, including the participants, instruments, results,
lessons learned, etc., at both six months and one year after the exchange.
Pick a reporting format. For your audiences, determine what reporting format(s) will most
effectively achieve your goals (see Table 10.)
Disseminate the results. You now have all the pieces for reporting on the results of your
knowledge exchange. In most situations, however, sharing (or disseminating) the results
requires more than just announcing that the results are available. You will often have to
promote your results to garner people’s attention. You may, for example, want to present the
results at professional conferences or as brown-bag lunch events for colleagues. E-mailing
influential stakeholders such as bloggers, funding agencies, or leading academics can also
help spread word about the information available.
Share your experiences. Sharing your own experiences will give you insights into your
next knowledge exchange journey as well as add to the collective understanding of what
works and what doesn’t in knowledge exchange. Share your results, for example, in a brief
video or a blog post. You can post at South-South Opportunity (www.southsouth.info), the
Knowledge Management for Development community (www.km4dev.org), the Knowledge
Hubs Community of Practice (www.knowledgehubs.org), or email to your colleagues and also
share your results with the team that prepared this guide at http://wbi.worldbank.org/sske/.
                80




                     Measure &
                     Report the
                     Results



                                        When it comes to communicating results to most audiences, less
                                        is more.




                     Pakistan and South Africa exchange — Reporting results
                     Participants prepared a report of the results of the overall exchange and disseminated it
                     within their provincial governments.
                     Key lessons learned by Pakistani participants:
                       üüA happy customer is a paying customer. Viable and sustainable service provision rests
                         on good revenue collection, and good payment levels depend on delivery of good
                         quality services that meet citizens’ needs.
CASE EXAMPLES




                       üüPrivatization of water services is not a precondition for success. Public sector utilities
                         achieve high-level performance by contracting out selected aspects of service
                         provision as appropriate. Outsourcing can also be used to gain cost efficiencies or
                         quality — the work can be done better or more cost-effectively by a contractor.
                       üüCrises and conflict situations provide opportunity; it’s how you avail and maximize
                         the opportunity.


                     India to Algeria and Spain exchange — Reporting results
                     The results from the exchange were shared with key stakeholders (internal unit and
                     management) via email. In addition, a report of the results, including all technical
                     presentations as well as documents and other materials, were shared with the government
                     agencies that participated in the exchange.
                                                                                             81




                                                                                Measure &
                                                                                Report the
                                                                                   Results


Table 10. Sample Formats for Reporting Results

          Type                               Use when you want to…

   Summary report
                          Convey key results to audiences who only require limited
                          information and have limited time.


   Final report
                          Inform audiences who want to understand the exchange
                          process and get detailed results (for example, others that might
                          undertake similar exchanges, funding organizations, academics).


   Results story
                          Communicate to a broad audience, including those less familiar
                          with the topic area.


   Other short written
   formats such as        Convey key information on the exchange process and results to
   synopses, memos,       audiences who only require an overview, especially useful when
   press releases         reporting on results during implementation.


   Presentation,
   briefing, or webinar   Have two-way communications with audiences who require
                          brief summaries of results and are oriented toward decisive
                          action (for example, executives, management staff) or when you
                          want to customize information for several different audiences.


   Periodic informal
                          Update those involved with the exchange, especially
   meetings, Facebook
                          stakeholders such as internal audiences or partners to build
   update, or blog
                          rapport around the goal and foster on-going relationships.
   postings

   Internet-based
   resources: Web         Communicate to the general public and other audiences
   page, e-mail blog,     quickly and at relatively low cost. Can allow audiences to
   Facebook page          customize content so they get only the results they want. This
                          method should generally be used in combination with others
                          to accommodate audience biases due to differing patterns of
                          technology use.
82




     Measure &
     Report the
     Results


     END ONE JOURNEY, BEGIN THE NEXT
     Now that you have reached the end of the knowledge exchange journey, it is time to take
     stock of what you learned as a broker. You can then use this knowledge to scale-up the
     experience or to inform the design of future exchanges. Applying lessons to future decisions
     and actions is an important component of the journey.
     This is also a good moment for a team debrief and lessons sharing through an after-action
     review (in Toolbox, page 163). After designing, implementing, and reporting on a knowledge
     exchange initiative, take a moment to reflect — on your own and with your team — on what
     went well, what did not work, and what could be done differently next time.
     Review your assessment of the design and implementation from Section 5.2C and consider
     the following:


     Step 1 Anchor
       »» Were you able to work closely with counterparts and stakeholders to anchor the exchange?
       »» Did you set (and communicate) realistic expectations for the knowledge exchange?


     Step 2 Define
       »» Did stakeholders agree on practical results that participants could actually achieve
         during or after the exchange?


     Step 3 Design and Develop
       »» Were the right people part of the design and delivery team? Could you improve how the
          design process was managed?


     Step 4 Implement
       »» What should you have been watching for more closely? Did you wait too long or act
          too quickly?


     Step 5 Measure and Report Results
       »» Does the data adequately illustrate what the exchange achieved?
                                                                                                               83


                                                  KE STORY
                                                ( placeholder)
                                                                                    Measure &
                                                                                    Report the
                                                                                       Results



                                                                                      KNOWLEDGE
                                                                                       EXCHANGE
  LEARNERS BECOME TEACHERS: MULTIPLYING                                                  STORY
  THE IMPACT OF BREAKTHROUGHS THROUGH
  KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE




üü The Challenge                        September 2009, linking Kenya         SRI in several regions. Over the
In 2008 and 2009, Kenya suffered        with India, where SRI practices       years, three more knowledge
severe droughts leading to              were already seeing success           exchanges were organized by
water and food shortages. The           at scale; with Rwanda, where          WBI to track SRI results, provide
government was looking for ways         farmers in International Fund for
                                                                              timely knowledge, and facilitate
to address these problems.              Agricultural Development (IFAD)
                                        projects have achieved tangible       peer support for practitioners
üü The Solution – Who Did What?         results; and with Madagascar,         and researchers. As a follow-up
In 2008, the World Bank Institute       where SRI was first developed.         to the knowledge exchange
(WBI) produced a learning toolkit,      For many participants, especially     over the GDLN, WBI facilitated
based on experience in Asia, on         farmers, it was the first time they   SRI expert visits from India and
a new method of rice cultivation,       ever met their peers from another     Japan to Kenya, to give hands-on
called System of Rice Intensification   continent. Some claimed it “an        field training. The WBI and IFAD
(SRI). This set of innovative rice      eye opening event,” and “such         also organized a study tour for
growing practices required less         an encouragement,” boosting
                                                                              Kenyans to visit India. As a result,
water and fewer seeds, and yet          their morale.
                                                                              the number of SRI farmers in
brought higher yields. It is a
                                        That year, two farmers in Mwea,       Kenya increased steadily into
good example of climate-smart           Kenya’s most important rice
agriculture that can build farmers’                                           the thousands.
                                        growing region, obtained the WBI
resilience to climate change.           learning toolkit and became the       üü Results
In 2009, at the request of the          first farmers in Kenya to try SRI     Witnessing solid farmer field
World Bank Nairobi Office and           techniques. “I got eleven bags of     results from SRI for two to three
local researchers, the WBI team         paddy from my quarter-acre trial,     seasons, the Kenyan national
designed and organized a series of      compared to the usual eight bags      irrigation board organized
South-South knowledge exchange          for that plot. But what’s amazing
                                                                              national workshops and farmer
initiatives on SRI. These initiatives   was that each bag weighed 95kg
                                                                              field days to share experiences;
included video-conference based         for the SRI paddy but only 80kg
                                        for the conventional method. In       universities allocated funds to
multi-stakeholder dialogues, peer                                             support PhD students to research
consultations, and discussions          the following year, I converted all
                                        my two acres to practice the SRI      SRI; the private sector made
organized through the Global
Development and Learning                method,” said Moses Kareithi,         local weeders for farmers as
Network (GDLN), as well as expert       pioneer SRI farmer, Kenya.            demand rose; innovative farmers
visits and national workshops.          Encouraged by the initial             developed new tools to adapt the
The first knowledge exchange            results, Kenya researchers and        practices to their local soil and
was launched through GDLN in            government decided to scale up        climate conditions, and
some even started biochar and        learn from Kenya’s SRI application.        »» Keep the knowledge practical,
organic composting in SRI fields.    The World Bank team responded                 aided by visual learning tools.
The government engaged Jomo          quickly organizing a knowledge                The goal is that within a short
Kenyatta University of Agriculture   exchange in October 2012 that                 time, participants can observe
and allocated funds to facilitate    connected Malawi with Kenya                   the results and impact. This
farmer-to-farmer learning and        over the GDLN. This time Kenyan               will encourage up-scaling.
cross-region learning.               farmers and researchers became             »» Go beyond just spreading
                                     proud knowledge providers,
By 2012, over 3,000 farmers were                                                   knowledge, to create new
                                     sharing their first-hand experience           “teachers” to increase
adopting SRI methods in Mwea         with about 50 Malawians. This
alone, and more farmers followed                                                   learning impact.
                                     knowledge exchange also
in three other regions. Over the     engaged practitioners from India,        üü Instruments
years, the farmers who adopted       who were happy to see Kenya’s            Multi-stakeholder Dialogue and
SRI have reported consistent         progress and the new interest            Consultation
increases in yields, more crop       from Malawi. Recently, Norway
resilience during droughts, and                                               Expert Visit
                                     has launched a new program to
reduction in farm input, such        support scaling up SRI in Malawi         Workshop
as labor, seeds, and water.          and other Africa countries.
Farmers noted less conflict over                                              Study Tour
water during water shortages         üü Lessons Learned                       üü Knowledge Broker
due to much lower demand for           »» Identify/target the right group
                                                                              Mei Xie, Senior Water Resources
water under SRI. Pumping was              of stakeholders for a sustained
                                                                              Specialist, The World Bank
subsequently reduced, saving              period of time, for the
                                                                              Institute
energy and minimizing carbon              knowledge to take root.
emissions, both from fuel and from     »» Ensure that the change agents
paddy fields.                             include a critical mass of multi-
Hearing about this success, the           stakeholders. This helps build
Malawi Ministry of Agriculture in         local ownership of the new
2012 asked the Bank to help it            knowledge and a community
                                          of practice.
                                                                                                   85




                                                                                      Glossary




»» Change agent. An individual who has a stake in the issue and who can and will initiate the
   actions needed to achieve the change objective.
»» Change objective. The change needed for participants to address the institutional challenges.
»» Counterpart. The individuals or groups with whom you engage in relation to a project or
   program and/or whom you identify as your clients. Counterparts often request the support
   of the broker to facilitate a knowledge exchange and are consulted at the earliest stages of
   planning and design. Counterparts can refer to knowledge seekers or providers, depend-
   ing on who you work with. Some counterparts may be involved as actual participants.
»» Development goal. The result or achievement that would address a problem of ultimate
  concern to your stakeholders.
»» Indicators. Evidence of the achievement of intended intermediate outcomes from your
   knowledge exchange that is specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and time-bound
   (otherwise known as SMART indicators).
»» Institutional challenges. Problems in three areas that limit the realization of the develop-
   ment goal. These include the environment for change, policies for change and organiza-
   tional arrangements for change.
»» Intermediate outcomes. New knowledge, enhanced skill, improved consensus, increased
  connectivity, and new and improved actions; these are results at the individual and group
   levels and are stepping stones towards the change objective.
»» Knowledge exchange broker. An intermediary organization or person that facilitates the
  exchange of knowledge through the creation of linkages between knowledge seekers
   and providers.
»» Knowledge provider. A knowledge provider is someone who has a proven solution or
  development experience to share.
»» Knowledge seeker. A knowledge seeker is an individual or institution who would like to
  explore solutions to a challenge.
»» Participant. A participant is an individual who is taking part in the knowledge exchange
   initiative. Participants may be knowledge providers or seekers.
»» Stakeholder. A stakeholder is an individual and/or institution that has a stake in the
   success of a knowledge exchange initiative.
86
     THE ART OF KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE TOOLBOX
            87




ART OF
KNOWLEDGE
EXCHANGE
TOOLBOX
88
     THE ART OF KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE TOOLBOX
                                                                             89




TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction	                       90

SECTION I. INSTRUMENTS 	91                SECTION II. ACTIVITIES	139
1.	 Short-term Engagement	                1.	 Presentation
    1.1	Conference	                  93       1.1	Demonstration	       141
    1.2	Expert Visit	                97       1.2	Expert Panel	        142
    1.3	Knowledge Fair	             101       1.3	Lightning Talks	     143
    1.4	Study Tour	                 105       1.4	Poster Session	      144
    1.5	Workshop	110                          1.5	Report	              145
2.	 Medium-term Engagement                    1.6	Storytelling	        146
    2.1	Competition/Challenge	      115   2.	 Discussion
    2.2	Knowledge Jam	              119       2.1	Anecdote Circle	     148
    2.3	Multi-stakeholder Dialogue/           2.2	Brainstorming	       149
        Consultation	123                      2.3	Buzz Session	        146
3.	 Long-term Engagement	                     2.4	E-Discussion	        147
    3.1	Community of Practice	      129       2.5	Knowledge Café	      148
    3.2	Twinning	133                          2.6	Peer Assist	149
                                          3.	 Experimental
                                              3.1	Action Planning	     155
                                              3.2	Book Sprint	         156
                                              3.3	Field Visit	         157
                                              3.4	Fishbowl	            158
                                              3.5	Role Play	           159
                                              3.6	Secondment	          160
                                              3.7	Simulation	          161
                                          4.	 Analytical
                                              4.1	After-action Review	 163
                                              4.2	Focus Group	         164
                                              4.3	Interview	           165
                                              4.4	Self-assessment	     166
                                              4.5	Survey	              167
                                              4.6	SWOT Analysis	       168
90
     THE ART OF KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE TOOLBOX




     INTRODUCTION

     Every knowledge exchange initiative is a blend of instruments, activities,
     and delivery modes.
     This toolbox is your resource to plan for and select an appropriate mix to
     help participants realize their desired intermediate outcomes. It includes
     brief descriptions, practical how-tos, and case examples for a range of
     instruments and activities introduced in step 3 of this guide.
     The toolbox has two sections:
     Section 1: Instruments provide a detailed description of each instrument
     (vehicles for knowledge exchange), when and how to use it, and case
     examples.
     Section 2: Activities provide detailed description of each activity (building
     blocks of instruments) when and how to use it, and case examples.
                                                                                                  91




INSTRUMENTS
The role of instruments can vary; some instruments require shorter term and more intense individual
engagement while others require a longer term and less intense degree of individual engagement.


SHORT-TERM ENGAGEMENT            MEDIUM-TERM ENGAGEMENT               LONG-TERM ENGAGEMENT
92
     THE ART OF KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE TOOLBOX




        INSTRUMENTS
                   SHORT-TERM ENGAGEMENT
                                                                                            93




WHAT IS A CONFERENCE?

A formal event in which a large number of participants come together to
share knowledge and experiences on a specific topic/theme.


BEST USED FOR

  »» gaining new knowledge.
  »» outreach to a large number of participants, especially when
     targeting high-level audiences
     ›› as single or multi-day events.
     ›› with multiple thematic tracks / immersion in select topics.
     ›› with parallel workshops and knowledge fairs dealing with the same
        topic or theme.
  »» networking, building partnerships, and strengthening communities.
  »» in-depth knowledge exchange activities designed to support
     knowledge transfer.
  »» giving a topic high visibility or launching global initiatives.
  »» communicating program impact or changes in strategy.




                                                                            KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                                                                                   INSTRUMENTS
94
     KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


     HOW TO USE IT


           PLANNING PHASE

     6+ MONTHS before event:	
       »» Prepare a concept note
       »» Determine budget and sources of funding
       »» Decide on target audience
       »» Identify implementation team
       »» Select event location (country, city)
       »» Identify possible partners
       »» Visit event location to identify possible venues or seek help from local partners
       »» Create project database and conference action plan
     3+ MONTHS before event:
       »» Select hotel/conference venue
       »» Contract all vendors, including hotel/venue, local event manager, catering,
          transportation, and interpretation (if needed)
       »» Contract speakers and resource persons (TORs)
       »» Send out invitation and registration materials
       »» Make travel arrangements and prepare per diem for sponsored participants and
          speakers
       »» Monitor progress on logistics
       »» Create conference handbook for participants/speakers, including agenda, resources,
          bios, hotel information, and travel information
     1 MONTH before event:
       »» Follow up and confirm all logistics (hotel, travel, transport, per diems, catering,
          conference room/s, media, technology)
       »» Ensure all participants have proper documentation to travel


            DELIVERY PHASE

       »» Coordinate with local event manager on all logistics, including hotel, participants,
          catering, transportation, technical support, etc.
       »» Disburse per diem as needed
       »» Monitor participants’ attendance
       »» Debrief daily with implementation team and prepare for next day


           FOLLOW-UP PHASE

       »» Gather all invoices and cross-check with receipts
       »» Close out finances and create a statement of expenditures
       »» Conduct evaluation
       »» Create a final report, including lessons learned and follow-up actions
                                                                                                               95



ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE — SEQUENCING ACTIVITIES FOR YOUR CONFERENCE


                            Brainstorming and action planning meeting to agree on key
                            change objectives
 PLANNING
                            e-Discussion to identify participants, key speakers, and
                            partners and to decide on implementation team



                            Expert panel to discuss trends and challenges, followed
                            by a Q & A session
  DELIVERY
                            Buzz session on the challenges presented by experts

                            Report on key findings and proposed possible solutions

                            Field visit organized on second day to get firsthand
                            experience

                            Poster session organized on last day to present main
                            takeaways of field visit and other key findings



                            Survey distributed to assess impact and usefulness of
                            conference
FOLLOW-UP
                            Action planning to prioritize key findings and follow-up
                            actions



CASE EXAMPLE — CONFERENCES CAN HAVE MORE IMPACT WITH FIELD VISITS
Reclamation projects in China’s Loess Plateau provide a powerful example of how environmental conservation can
be integrated with poverty reduction and sustainable agriculture. To learn from the Loess Plateau experience, 24
watershed officials from ten African countries attended a two-day conference in Beijing, and visited reforestation
and watershed programs in Shaanxi and Gansu Provinces. The delegates learned about ecosystem rehabilitation,
the Community Driven Development approaches to watershed/soil management, and ways to design, finance,
and monitor watershed projects. The knowledge and skills they gained helped improve the confidence and
motivation of African delegates to implement successful water and soil conservation efforts. “The challenge is to
bring all the concerned parties together to have one integrated watershed management approach,” said John
Philip Olum, CEO of the National Water Resources Authority in Kenya. “I now see that multi-sector collaboration
is possible, because I have seen it [in China].” Tanzania has since applied new knowledge to improve irrigation
practices, Ghana to help implement new watershed programs, and Malawi to incorporate local knowledge into
an integrated watershed management project.
Source: The World Bank, Improving Water and Soil Conservation in Africa to Enhance
Sustainable Agriculture and Poverty Reduction Efforts, http://wbi.worldbank.org/sske/result-story/2123
96
     KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS




     TIPS FROM THE FIELD


     Planning
       »» Remember that conferences require in-depth planning and early engagement
          with partners.
       »» During the planning stage, decide on the activities you want to capture in
          their entirety and the ones for which you only want to record key messages.
       »» Consider having a welcome team greet participants at the airport, hotel, and
          conference venue.
       »» Don’t over-schedule participants! Allow for sufficient breaks during sessions
          for participants to network. A lot can happen over coffee!

     Delivery
       »» Run a few sessions such as a knowledge café or a world café, which require
          groups to share their knowledge while working on a common theme.
       »» Capture participant experience and feedback via brief video interviews.

     Consider Social Media
       »» Tweeting or microblogging tools, such as Twitter: Attendees frequently
          use these to report out conference activities, network, and engage with
          participants beyond the conference.
       »» Photo sharing tools, such as Flickr or Instagram, are a great way to
          crowdsource conference photos by using a designated hash tag. Build buzz
          by occasionally sending a sneak peek of the conference preparations — the
          planning team in action, samples of food to be offered, etc. A hash tag can
          link the photos by theme.
       »» Social networking sites such as LinkedIn, Google+, and Facebook can
          facilitate conference registration and engagement with the participants.
          These sites have tools to promote the event and manage event entry on-site
          as well as extend networking opportunities beyond the conference.
                                                                                        97




WHAT IS AN EXPERT VISIT?

Sending a practitioner or technical specialist from a knowledge
provider country/region/organization to a knowledge seeker
country/region/organization to assess current circumstances and/
or provide guidance on a specific challenge.


BEST USED FOR
  »» enhancing skills and developing a new proficiency.
  »» gaining an in-depth diagnosis of a development challenge and
     recommendations for adapting a good practice or solution to the
     local context
     ›› over the span of several days or as a series over the span of
        months, as needed.
     ›› with small groups of participants.
     ›› with expert-to-expert interaction.
     ›› at the institutional level.
  »» getting hands-on guidance and coaching or mentoring through
     various stages of implementation.
  »» times when travel to the knowledge supplying country is not
     possible (for whatever reason).




                                                                        KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                                                                               INSTRUMENTS
98
     KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


     HOW TO USE IT

            PLANNING PHASE


     3+ MONTHS before event:
       »» Prepare concept note
       »» Identify experts:
          ›› prepare TORs
          ›› start contract process
          ›› prepare briefing package with all relevant material including cultural, social and
             political landscape of recipient country
       »» Decide on type of interaction (face-to-face, virtual, or both)
       »» Identify logistical needs and relevant vendors

     2+ MONTHS before event:
       »» Contract vendors, resources needed for documenting visit (photographer, equipment,
          etc.), and interpreters if needed
       »» Organize pre-visit session with all concerned parties (through video-conference or
          conference call)
       »» Follow up and confirm all logistical arrangements (visas, hotel, flights, etc.)

     1+ MONTH before event:
       »» Design post-visit evaluation and monitoring
       »» Provide briefing package and knowledge materials to experts


           DELIVERY PHASE

       »» Start with local participants/expert hosts sharing their challenges and expectations
          from the visit
       »» Capture content through video, blogs, note taking, etc.
       »» Organize daily check-ins and briefings to stay on track with objectives


           FOLLOW-UP PHASE

       »» Document process and lessons learned
       »» Evaluate each partner (vendors)
       »» Organize follow-up activities (face-to-face or via video-conference)
       »» Consider return expert visit or study tour
       »» Close out finances
                                                                                                             99



ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE — SEQUENCING ACTIVITIES FOR YOUR EXPERT VISIT

                           Brainstorming through video-conference to meet and agree on
                           the scope of the mission
 PLANNING
                           e-Discussion to prepare concept notes



                           Expert panel, face-to-face, and webcast with visiting experts,
                           government officials, implementing agencies, civil and private
  DELIVERY                 sector representatives to understand multiple perspectives on
                           the topic

                           Demonstration, face-to-face, with visiting experts and
                           implementing agencies to share how similar solutions have
                           worked in another context

                           Focus group, face-to-face with different stakeholder groups
                           for experts to understand views of wider stakeholder groups or
                           communities on local challenges as well as on solutions being
                           proposed

                           Fishbowl, face-to-face with experts and wider stakeholder group
                           to support multiple perspectives and as an alternative to debate
                           on difficult topics



                           Action planning session, face-to-face and online, to develop a
                           road map of next steps
 FOLLOW-UP




CASE EXAMPLE — EXPERT VISITS TRANSFER SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE QUICKLY AND EFFICIENTLY
Nepal learned quickly from Pakistani experts and avoided a financial crisis. By 2009 financial experts could see
that banks in Nepal were dangerously overexposed to inflated real estate and equity markets. Nepal’s Central
Bank needed assistance to evaluate the country’s commercial banks and assess the damages that could result
from economic shocks. Models used in developed economies for evaluating banks were unsuited to the
circumstances of a small developing country and an international search for help would take too long and be
too public. Nepal needed help quickly and quietly. Experts from the State Bank of Pakistan were brought in
to demonstrate a simple model for evaluating and stress testing bank exposure. The skills gained through the
exchange helped Nepal’s Central Bank to quantify the level of risk to which its commercial banks were exposed,
pass regulations to maintain financial stability, and helped the Government of Nepal establish contingency plans
in the case of a bank failure. All this in just six weeks!
Source: The World Bank, Using Stress-Testing to Enhance Bank Regulatory Capacity and Maintain Financial
Stability in Nepal, http://wbi.worldbank.org/sske/result-story/1720Planning
100
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS




      TIPS FROM THE FIELD


      Planning
        »» Choose experts with a strong background in the area of development challenge
           being addressed.
        »» Set clear goals and expectations. Make sure you know what you want to get out of an
           expert visit. If you have not thought through how to involve participants, the exchange
           can end up being just a series of presentations.

      Delivery
        »» Conduct an in-depth diagnosis and analysis through problem solving.
        »» When possible, include field visits and interaction with wider stakeholder groups for
           the experts.

      Consider Social Media
        »» Tweeting or microblogging using tools such as Twitter allows you to broadcast
           interesting findings or reports from the expert visit and engage a wider stakeholder
           group.
        »» Blogs available through Google+, WordPress, and other sites can be used to
           document expert visit progress, gather feedback, and build a community around the
           topic.
                                                                                            101




WHAT IS A KNOWLEDGE FAIR?

A face-to-face knowledge sharing event designed to showcase
participants’ experiences, achievements, and innovations and market new
programs to donors and potential partners.


BEST USED FOR

  »» forging networks and partnerships
     ›› at a global, country, community, or institutional level.
     ›› as a single-day or multi-day event.
     ›› for a large number of attendees.
     ›› in multiple modes (face-to-face and/or virtual).
  »» raising awareness.
  »» sharing innovations and/or identifying good practices.
  »» getting visibility for team efforts on a particular project or topic.




                                                                             KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                                                                                    INSTRUMENTS
102
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


      HOW TO USE IT

           PLANNING PHASE

      12+ MONTHS before event:
       »» Prepare a concept note
       »» Prepare call for proposals
       »» Send out call for proposals
       »» Create communication, promotion, or public relations strategies
       »» Develop visual identity and graphic design of the fair
       »» Identify venue
       »» Invite target groups to prepare booths and provide guidelines

      6+ MONTHS before event:
       »» Evaluate proposals
       »» Prepare press releases and news items
       »» Use social media to encourage discussion and report about the event
       »» Create or update website
       »» Analyze proposals to design and facilitate sessions
       »» Reserve or loan facilities, meeting rooms, IT devices, and catering
       »» Recruit and instruct an audiovisual support team managing amplification, video,
          demos, music, IT requests

      3+ MONTHS before event:
       »» Draft agenda and program
       »» Hire and prepare facilitators
       »» Prepare stationery and promotional materials
       »» Support participants with travel and accommodation arrangements
       »» Finalize list of participants
       »» Finalize structure of sessions applying appropriate methods and tools
       »» Meet with participants to clarify session objectives


           DELIVERY PHASE

       »» Ensure booths are set up
       »» Open the fair by welcoming participants and introducing each booth
       »» Ensure the fair is properly documented with video and/or photographs
       »» Interview participants



           FOLLOW-UP PHASE

       »» Conduct evaluation
       »» Update the fair site with videos, photos, stories
       »» Disseminate highlights
       »» Send thank you notes
                                                                                                                 103



ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE — SEQUENCING ACTIVITIES FOR YOUR KNOWLEDGE FAIR



                              Discussion, face-to-face or virtual, among organizers to agree
 PLANNING
                              on scope of knowledge fair



                              Knowledge café to enable creative sharing of ideas around
  DELIVERY                    common interests among those in attendance

                              Peer assist to draw lessons from practitioners’ experience

                              Poster session to enable informal knowledge sharing

                              Anecdote circle to enable knowledge sharing and reflection
                              in smaller groups



                              After-action review session with leader of each booth to draw
                              on lessons learned
 FOLLOW-UP




CASE EXAMPLE — A KNOWLEDGE FAIR CAN HELP GIVE VISIBILITY TO
BEST PRACTICES
The Regional Caribbean Initiative on Keeping Boys Out of Risk was showcased in a knowledge fair at the World
Bank’s Annual Meetings in 2010. The objective was to provide an opportunity to share innovative ideas, experiences,
and best practices that target at-risk youth. The Fair highlighted and promoted successful replicable activities that
prevent youth from engaging in risky behavior. It also showcased the finalists of the Caribbean Contest, Keeping
Boys Out of Risk, who shared their activities for keeping at-risk youth engaged.
Source: The World Bank, Regional Caribbean Initiative on Keeping Boys Out of Risk,
http://go.worldbank.org/Z6LCE8JI0
104
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


      TIPS FROM THE FIELD

      Planning
        »» Start with a clear idea of who the knowledge suppliers and knowledge recipients will
           be.
        »» Consider combining knowledge fairs with conferences and as a follow up to
           competition/challenges to showcase winning projects.
        »» Make sure you have a communication or marketing plan in place for widely publicizing
           the fair.
        »» Select a venue that allows for a lot of foot traffic.
        »» Plan to have technicians on hand in case things break down.


      Delivery
        »» For overall cohesiveness, use a common structural look for the displays; however, let
           individual vendors decide what will be part of their own display.
        »» Encourage innovative presentations and poster sessions.
        »» Capture what happens during the knowledge fair with photos, videos, interviews, etc.


      Consider Social Media
        »» Tweeting or microblogging tools such as Twitter can be an effective way to engage
           your audience on the topic of your knowledge fair by sharing photos and stimulating
           real-time conversations.
        »» Networking tools such as Facebook and Google+ can help you market your
           knowledge fair and generate buzz before the event. Share the schedule and photos to
           engage your champions and prompt conversations.
                                                                                                105




WHAT IS A STUDY TOUR?

A visit or series of visits to one or more countries or sites by an individual
or group with a specific learning goal in mind; participants experience
firsthand how something was or is being implemented.


BEST USED FOR

  »» gaining new knowledge.
  »» raising awareness of what is possible
     ›› with a designated coordinator for the host and the visitors.
     ›› with no more than 25 participants; ideally less than 20 participants.
     ›› as single or multi-country/area tours.
     ›› over the span of several days or even weeks.
  »» seeing and learning different ways of doing things.
  »» forging networks and partnerships with people working in similar
     areas.
  »» developing shared understanding and motivation for collaborative
     action among different stakeholder groups.




                                                                                 KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                                                                                        INSTRUMENTS
106
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


      HOW TO USE IT

          PLANNING PHASE
                                                            DELIVERY PHASE
      4+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Prepare concept note with dedicated          »» Coordinate with local event manager
           budget                                          on all logistics, including hotel,
        »» Confirm participants                            participants, catering, transportation,
        »» Get formal agreement with host                  technical support, etc.
           countries or knowledge providers             »» Disburse per diem as needed
        »» Identify implementation team                 »» Monitor participants’ attendance
        »» Develop tentative agenda to help plan        »» Debrief daily with implementation
           for logistics                                   team and prepare for next day
        »» Prepare TORs for facilitator
        »» Start coordination of logistics: security
           clearance, medical requirements                  FOLLOW-UP PHASE
           (vaccination, etc.) flights, visas, hotel,
           local transportation; translator if          »» Document process and lessons learned
           needed                                          and share with participants
        »» Contract vendors                             »» Conduct complete assessment of
                                                           exchange
      2+ MONTHS before event:                           »» Evaluate each partner (vendor)
                                                        »» Process participants’ expenses
        »» Share draft agenda with host country/        »» Close out finances
           knowledge provider
        »» Ask host to provide background
           materials
        »» Decide how to document study tour
           and contract resources (photographer,
           cameraman, journalist)
        »» Secure per diems
        »» Check for dietary restrictions and
           medical insurance
        »» Consult with participants on draft
           agenda and desired field visits
        »» Finalize participants list

      1+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Create study tour handbook (including
           agenda, resources, participant and
           speaker details, surveys, health
           information, hotel location and country
           protocol)
        »» Confirm all logistics are in place (visas,
           hotels, flights, etc.)
        »» Share study tour handbook with
           participants
                                                                                                            107



ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE — SEQUENCING ACTIVITIES FOR YOUR STUDY TOUR


                             Action planning with participants and host/s to prepare a road
                             map for the study tour
 PLANNING

                             Discussions, face-to-face or virtually with key partners and
                             participants both in provider and recipient countries to discuss
                             agenda and scope of study tour



                             Presentations from both provider and recipient countries to
                             share experiences
  DELIVERY
                             Field visits to see firsthand what is possible and interact with
                             project implementers and beneficiaries

                             Peer assist sessions to gain input on specific challenges from
                             peers and practitioners from knowledge provider country

                             Interviews with key decision-makers, practitioners, and project
                             beneficiaries and to record feedback from participants



                             Poster sessions to share findings and lessons learned with a
                             larger stakeholder group
 FOLLOW-UP
                             Surveys and interviews to gain feedback from participants

                             Action planning sessions to define how to adapt findings in
                             own context


CASE EXAMPLE — A STUDY TOUR CAN HELP BUILD NEW PARTNERSHIPS
The Indian state of Himachal Pradesh recognized the need to better prepare its officials with skills required in
designing new policies in promoting inclusive, environment-friendly green economic growth. Added to this
need were the tools required to coordinate the roles of different sectors involved. Mexico had made progress
in stipulating green economic growth across different sectors of its economy and so was a clear choice to be
a knowledge provider. In May 2013, Indian officials visited Mexican counterparts at the federal level and in
the states of Oaxaca and Quintana Roo. These visits afforded first-hand learning about Mexico’s experience in
making urban and rural development more environment friendly and inclusive of all social groups. The Indian
officials transferred that acquired knowledge into new green growth-oriented policies that now include a benefit-
sharing mechanism in hydropower development and payment for ecosystem services. Stronger coalition building
and network coordination among different stakeholders, including civil society and academia, resulted in the
amendment of existing legislation and the adoption of the Himachal Pradesh Sustainable Tourism Development
Policy in November 2013.
Source: The World Bank, Sharing Experience in Promoting Green Growth, http://wbi.worldbank.org/sske/story/
sharing-experience-promoting-green-growth
108
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


      TIPS FROM THE FIELD

      Planning
        »» Involve all participants (hosts and visitors) in the planning, to understand expectations
           on both sides.
        »» Plan your study tour in-depth, not only in terms of venue and logistics, but also in terms
           of overall sequencing of activities and participant engagement before the actual visit.
        »» Get the right people involved. When selecting participants, consider not only what
           they can contribute but also what they bring to the group dynamic.
        »» Identify local partners to help you navigate a country’s cultural, social, and political
           landscape.
        »» Decide on how to distribute per diems (up front, daily, in cash, etc). Check with local
           banks for cash limits.
        »» For longer study tours, include down time to re-energize participants and keep them
           motivated.
        »» Plan to document lessons learned and disseminate them among participants within
           one month of visit. A follow-up workshop can also be considered to check how
           participants are taking forward their learning.


      Delivery
        »» Know the level of each participant in the delegation. Protocols may differ depending
           on seniority.
        »» Allow adequate travel time for field visits and dedicate enough time in the field.
        »» Have interactive sessions with relevant stakeholders to maximize visit.
        »» Create a social space for participants to network and explore ways to adapt lessons
           learned to their own context.
        »» Be prepared for emergencies. If possible, try to involve colleagues from host country.


      Consider Social Media
        »» Social networking tools such as LinkedIn, Facebook, and Google+ can help spread
           the word and create a buzz in advance of the study tour. Social networking also
           enables participants and knowledge providers to connect early.
        »» Tweeting/microblogging tools such as Twitter or Tumblr provide a unique
           opportunity for participants to report out activities and engage a wider global
           audience.
        »» Photo sharing tools such as Flickr are a great way to share photos taken during the
           study tour.
        »» Blogging platforms such as WordPress can be used to document progress and
           gather related materials.
                                                                                                 109




WHAT IS A WORKSHOP?

A structured event focused on having participants work together to solve
a common problem or perform a task.

BEST USED FOR

  »» enhancing skills or developing a new proficiency.
  »» addressing specific knowledge and learning needs that require a
     structured learning environment
     ›› at a global, regional, country, community, and/or institutional levels.
     ›› for a small number of people (maximum 35).
     ›› in multiple modes (face-to-face or virtual).
  »» writing reports, documenting opinions and suggestions, or creating
     collaboratively developed plans on a specific issue.
  »» building networks and skills to help launch new initiatives.




                                                                                  KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                                                                                         INSTRUMENTS
110
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


      HOW TO USE IT

            PLANNING PHASE


      3+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Prepare concept note
        »» Identify and select location
        »» Identify and select facilitator, speakers, and other resource people


      2+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Create an agenda
        »» If possible, visit location in advance to determine if it fits objectives of the workshop -
           space, technology, catering, etc.
        »» Select, invite, and register participants
        »» Consider travel arrangements for sponsored participants and speakers, including
           accommodation, travel, per diem, visas, etc.


      1 MONTH before event:
        »» Finalize all content and materials, including facilitation materials (flip charts, note
           pads, name tags, etc.)
        »» Arrange and finalize all technology equipment needed (laptops, projectors,
           microphones, recording instruments, etc.)


            DELIVERY PHASE

        »» Prepare all facilitation materials before the start of the workshop (pens, copies, flip
           charts, etc.)
        »» Review objectives for the day with participants, including agenda and methodology
        »» Summarize results of the day and go over next steps
        »» Conduct evaluation

            FOLLOW-UP PHASE

        »» Close out all finances - invoices, travel reimbursements, expenditures
        »» Prepare a completion report and report the results of evaluations
        »» Document the process and share lessons learned with key stakeholders
                                                                                                            111



ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE — SEQUENCING ACTIVITIES FOR YOUR WORKSHOP


                            Action planning, face-to-face and virtual, with key stakeholders
                            to define scope of workshop, agree on participants, and select
 PLANNING
                            facilitator



                            Buzz session to engage every member of the audience group
                            early in the workshop (can also be used as an effective ice-
  DELIVERY                  breaker)

                            Expert panel to get multiple perspectives on a topic of focus

                            Presentation to communicate key concepts

                            Role play to apply newly learned proficiency/skills and
                            practice key concepts

                            Action planning to determine next steps and how to
                            implement them



                            e-Discussions via video-conference to keep up momentum
                            from the workshop
 FOLLOW-UP
                            Report to share learning from the workshop with a wider
                            stakeholder group

                            Book sprint to further develop and engage the workshop
                            participants as an ongoing community of practice


CASE EXAMPLE — WORKSHOPS CAN DEEPEN KNOWLEDGE
Honduras has been one among those countries most affected by climate change and disasters triggered by
natural events. This unwelcomed distinction made Honduran officials recognize the need to strengthen the
country’s institutional capacity for mainstreaming disaster risk considerations into development planning.
Colombia had experience with this disaster risk management effort. A Honduran delegation was organized
with officials from various agencies. Before embarking on a study tour to Colombia in May 2014, the Honduran
delegation held preparatory workshops with Colombian participants and also with World Bank staff who acted
as the knowledge brokers. The workshop helped to set the agenda for the study tour. Delegates met with
the Colombian entities that led the development of policy frameworks and instruments in land use planning
for regional and municipal governments. After the study tour, another workshop in Honduras, attended by
representatives from all the relevant agencies, helped to systematize the learning experience. This participation
facilitated detailed discussion about lessons learned in Colombia and agreement on a strategic plan for applying
these to the Honduran context.
Source: The World Bank, Improving Disaster Risk Management in Honduras: Incorporating Risk Management
into Land Use Planning, http://wbi.worldbank.org/sske/story/improving-disaster-risk-management-honduras-
incorporating-risk-management-land-use-planning.
112
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


      TIPS FROM THE FIELD

      Planning
        »» Have clear and concise objectives so participants are aware of the expected
           outcomes.
        »» Determine your team’s existing expertise to plan, conduct, and follow-up. Pay
           particular attention to content and facilitation expertise.
        »» Make sure you test any audio-visual systems ahead of time.
        »» Ensure location is large enough for participants to separate into small groups.


      Delivery
        »» Create a detailed workshop agenda, taking time to list exactly which activities will
           occur.
        »» Include activities that allow participants to apply learning in their own context.
        »» Reinforce key concepts you want participants to apply.
        »» Consider whether to implement the workshop synchronously, asynchronously, or both,
           depending on whether the participants are scattered geographically and on the size
           of your travel budget.


      Consider Social Media
        »» Tweeting or microblogging with tools such as Twitter provides a unique platform
           for attendees to report out workshop activities, as well as engaging other attendees
           using a designated workshop hash tag.
        »» Social networking sites such as Facebook, Google+, Tumblr and others allow you to
           promote the event easily. They can also serve as a repository from which participants
           can access all materials and sessions/activities during and after the workshop. Many of
           these sites have tools for conducting online surveys to gather feedback, as well.
        »» Photo sharing tools such as Flickr and Instagram are a great way to share photos
           taken during the workshop using a hash tag. Those unable to attend can access
           workshop content through these tools.
                                                                                                  113




One instrument can help achieve multiple intermediate outcomes. For example, study
tours expose participants to new ways of doing things and offer opportunities to share tacit
knowledge, which may help clients recognize new opportunities, build networks, and build
consensus – three distinct potential intermediate outcomes. You may design with this in
mind, and remember that you may discover some unexpected outcomes as well.




                                                                                   KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                                                                                          INSTRUMENTS
114
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS




        INSTRUMENTS
                    MEDIUM-TERM ENGAGEMENT
                                                                                        115




WHAT IS A COMPETITION/CHALLENGE?

A contest aimed at finding and supporting new ideas and accelerating
innovations, usually culminating in a showcase event to recognize the
competitors and winner(s).

BEST USED FOR

  »» gaining new knowledge.
  »» providing recognition and rewards for innovative ideas.
     ›› at a global, regional, country, local, or institutional level.
     ›› in multiple modes (face-to-face or virtual).
     ›› with jury of experts.
     ›› according to a set of guidelines.
  »» helping launch new initiatives.
  »» showcasing quality work.
  »» generating new ideas.




                                                                         KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                                                                                INSTRUMENTS
116
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


      HOW TO USE IT
            PLANNING PHASE


      6+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Prepare concept note
        »» Identify organizing committee
        »» Identify facilitator
        »» Set meeting with organizing committee, facilitator, and key players to define scope of
           competition, nature of awards, and juror profile, and assign roles and responsibilities

      2+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Identify and set a date for competition or deadline for receiving proposals
        »» Identify and select the tools for launching the competition and define the process for
           the competition
        »» Solicit proposals or market and promote competition
        »» Set meeting with organizing committee, facilitator, and key players to go over the
           selection and award process

      1+ MONTH before event:
        »» Appoint award committee
        »» Depending upon how you plan to announce the awards, arrange for logistics of the
           award ceremony
        »» You may also decide to announce the winners online and then later honor the awardees
           in a knowledge fair

      1 WEEK before event:
        »» Review and finalize all logistical aspects


            DELIVERY PHASE

        »» Register participants/competition winner(s)
        »» Document award ceremony with video, photographs
        »» Conduct interviews with competition winner(s)
        »» Hold networking and knowledge sharing activities

           FOLLOW-UP PHASE

        »» Conduct evaluation
        »» Disseminate the results of the competition
        »» Close out finances
                                                                                                         117



ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE — SEQUENCING ACTIVITIES FOR THE COMPETITION
AND AWARD CEREMONY

                            e-Discussion with staff and consultants to create a set of criteria
                            for judging submissions
 PLANNING
                            Survey used by a team of judges to determine winners and
                            runners-up



                            Poster session where each winner presents their idea visually

  DELIVERY                  Lightning talks for contestants to very briefly and convincingly
                            market their idea

                            Interview of winner(s)




                            Survey to document lessons learned

 FOLLOW-UP                  After-action review to determine what needs to be adjusted
                            for future competitions




CASE EXAMPLE — A COMPETITION/CHALLENGE CAN LEAD TO ACTION
St. Lucian program managers and technical staff in the Ministries of Youth, Education, and Labor and some
NGOs visited Brazil, Honduras, Panama, Jamaica, and Costa Rica to learn best practices used in programs
for reducing crime among boys and promoting tourism. After the visits, the St. Lucian delegation supported
a regional competition to identify best practices in school, school-to-work, and community-based programs
for at-risk boys. Competition winners received funding to attend a conference in Jamaica and produce and
disseminate brochures about their winning proposals. Subsequently, each country team participating in the
conference drafted an action plan for promoting and developing at-risk youth programs in their country. Before
this initiative there was no evidence-based approach available in St. Lucia; now successful case stories are
available online to assist the entire region.
Source: The World Bank, St. Lucia and the Caribbean Collaborate to Support “At-Risk” Boys,
http://wbi.worldbank.org/sske/result-story/2592
118
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


      TIPS FROM THE FIELD

      Planning
        »» Identify a set of criteria for jurors.
        »» Make sure you select experienced professionals as jurors.
        »» Identify and roll out a marketing plan for the competition.
        »» Consider pairing a competition with a knowledge fair.


      Delivery
        »» Maintain a transparent and fair process for selecting the finalists and winners of the
           competition.
        »» Determine what type and level of incentives you need to interest people in the
           competition.


      Consider Social Media
        »» Microblogging tools such as Twitter generate buzz and build awareness of the
           competition. Use them for open dialogue on the benefit of the competition and its rules
           and solicit feedback to help improve the competition’s overall implementation.
        »» Use photo sharing tools such as Instagram to visually document your event and invite
           audience members to submit photos using a designated hash tag. This will drive traffic
           back to your site.
        »» If you need to market your competition and generate buzz before the event, use a social
           networking site such as Facebook to share the logistics and rules of the competition,
           engage your champions, and prompt conversations.
                                                                                              119




WHAT IS A KNOWLEDGE JAM?

A facilitated conversation between knowers and doers (change agents)
to surface hidden know-how around targeted topics and to translate
knowledge into action.


BEST USED FOR

  »» initiating new and improved actions.
  »» eliciting hidden know-how around targeted topics
     ›› with brokers (doers or change agents) who are driven to make sense
        of the ideas, as they are charged with the responsibility to act.
     ›› in a systematic and efficient way. It is a five-step process and the
        primary elicitation process takes approximately 90 minutes.
  »» channeling knowledge into action by explicitly propelling the group
     towards a deliverable from the knowledge exchange.
  »» solving problems using a task force model: the brokers’ deliverables
     drive the agenda.
  »» surfacing facts, ideas, and insights that no one person could have on
     their own.
  »» inquiring safely into what did or could happen, capturing participants’
     words, protecting anonymity.




                                                                               KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                                                                                      INSTRUMENTS
120
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


      HOW TO USE IT

            PLANNING PHASE

      3+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Prepare concept note stating where tacit knowledge of experts and teams could improve
           processes, accelerate innovation, or expand margins
        »» Identify originators (knowers) and brokers
        »» Set topic and scope of project
        »» Identify facilitator

      2+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Conduct planning meeting with facilitator and representatives from originator and
           broker groups
        »» Draft the agenda for the “discover-capture” step. The discover-capture step is
           the central piece of the five-step knowledge jam process and is where the tacit
           knowledge is elicited and captured.
        »» Choose virtual or in-person forum
        »» Plan social media role
        »» Identify champions in originators’ and brokers’ organizations
        »» Have facilitator interview several participants

      1 MONTH before event:
        »» Prepare logistics for the discover-capture step, including templates and Web
           conference technology
        »» Set up collaboration or social media tools


            DELIVERY PHASE

        »» Set up space -- physical or virtual (if physical, originators face brokers)
        »» Open discover-capture event by describing why it’s needed
        »» Set ground rules: e.g., use shared data, drive for clarity, offer anonymity, use a parking
           lot, demonstrate “common curiosity” (everyone must participate and help grow the
           shared insights)
        »» Use scaffolding to capture participants’ words
        »» Capture all comments for everyone to see using an overhead projector or a shared
           desktop tool, using the discover-capture template


           FOLLOW-UP PHASE

        »» Finalize all notes from discover-capture event with the help of participants, who
           validate quotes, and guard appropriate anonymity
        »» Draft executive summary and send to all participants
        »» Facilitator assists brokers to extend insights to fit their organization’s issues
        »» Brokers follow up with originators on open issues
        »» Brokers translate discovery into action
        »» Facilitator works with the brokers and originators to ensure action is taken, measured,
           and reported back to the sponsor
                                                                                                              121



ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE — SEQUENCING ACTIVITIES FOR YOUR KNOWLEDGE JAM

A knowledge jam involves a five-step process:

       1. Select
         »» Brainstorm with sponsor face-to-face or virtually, to select the topic

       2. Plan
         »» Interview participants to foster curiosity
         »» Organize the knowledge jam, agree on role of each player, and prepare
            scaffolding (e.g., agenda)
         »» Conduct focus group with knowledge originator and broker to draw up a list of
            topics for discover-capture step

       3. Discover-capture
         »» Use scaffolding and good facilitation to engage the group in sharing experiences
         »» Use conversation disciplines: Poster of openness, Pursuit of diversity, and
            Practices of dialogue

       4. Broker
         »» Share collective knowledge draft with brokers and originators and refine with
            their input. Brokers can meld learning into methods, products, and solutions for
            their home organizations
         »» Use e-discussions to follow up with brokers and originators regarding
            implementation

       5. Reuse
         »» Measure the use of the knowledge in practice and the return on investment


CASE EXAMPLE — KNOWLEDGE JAM CAN MAKE AN “IMPROVISED” SUCCESS REPEATABLE
A team of engineers with Intel Solution Services did a proof of concept for the first Wifi installation on commuter
trains in August 2006. Heralded in the local press, the team had overcome considerable obstacles within a
tight time frame, and Intel wanted to streamline, codify, and potentially offer the process to other clients. The
knowledge jam helped Intel Solutions Services designers (brokers) understand how the team of engineers
(originators) met their design objectives, despite antennae deterioration issues, vibration issues, challenges of
negotiating track time with rail operators, and insufficient poles to back haul the signal to a network operating
center. During the knowledge jam the brokers were able to get a clear picture of the hidden costs and time
requirements in such an effort and to begin to define the full construction strategy beyond this proof of concept.
Source: Sharing Hidden Know-How. 2011, Jossey Bass/Wiley 
122
                  KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


                  TIPS FROM THE FIELD

                     »» Make sure that the brokers have the authority to act. Hold a
                        planning meeting with representatives of the originator and broker
                        groups to outline the agenda and determine what the participants
                        will capture during the knowledge jam.
                     »» The process can be accelerated to capture knowledge before it
                        “walks out the door.” As knowledge jams are usually done virtually,
                        do pre-interviews and get participants’ photos to improve trust.
                     »» Edit the knowledge jam notes and send them to participants within
                        24 hours. Have them make corrections or share additional thoughts.
                     »» Don’t let up – work with brokers to help them translate the knowledge
                        into action.
                     »» Sometimes you need multiple knowledge jams as topics need more
                        attention, or you need to include another originator or broker.
                     »» Use a template for capturing notes in real-time with three columns:
                        Topics (prepared ahead, with one row each), Discussion (to capture
                        words of the speakers), and Summary (often filled in after the event).
                     »» Consider using social media:
                        ›› Collaborative tools are great for knowledge jams: Google docs
                           for sharing and editing documents concurrently, Google Hangouts
                           for video conferencing, YouTube for sharing video, and a photo
                           sharing app to create a photo album of the knowledge jam
                            (if participants agree).



IDEA JAMS VS KNOWLEDGE JAMS
Idea jams (face-to-face or virtual) involve the wisdom of the crowds principle; in contrast, knowledge jams focus
on a generative conversation among a smaller group of people. If virtual, an idea jam involves many people
interacting in an online space during an allotted timeframe. Online jams maintain the same principle of any
online forum. Registered users add comments, respond to other users, and generate dialogue by interacting
with other users from around the world in real time.

The Jam methodology was designed by IBM and has been used since 2003 to promote virtual debate that is
focused, involves asynchronous participation, and is held for a limited time. It is concerned with the exchange
of ideas based on experience, knowledge, and lessons learned.
                                                                                                 123




WHAT IS A MULTI-STAKEHOLDER DIALOGUE
AND CONSULTATION?

A facilitated series of conversations among stakeholders/peers to gain multiple
perspectives and deeper understanding, reach consensus, or encourage action.


BEST USED FOR

  »» facilitating trust and communication among key stakeholders.
  »» enhancing commitment to agenda/group.
  »» sharing practical experience and diverse perspectives.
  »» strengthening multi-stakeholder coalitions.
  »» increasing access to resources and practitioners.




                                                                                  KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                                                                                         INSTRUMENTS
124
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


      HOW TO USE IT


            PLANNING PHASE

       4+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Prepare concept note
        »» Identify delivery/ implementation team
        »» Determine budget and funding
        »» Select dialogue/consultation format (face-to-face, virtual, or both)
        »» Identify possible venues
        »» Develop an action plan

      2+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Select and confirm venues
        »» Contract all vendors, including hotel/venue, event manager, catering, and
           interpretation
        »» Draft terms of reference for moderator/facilitator
        »» Prepare all materials
        »» Organize consultation meetings
        »» Send out invitations
        »» Plan for monitoring and evaluation

      1+ MONTH before event:
        »» Prepare agenda
        »» Send resource materials to participants
        »» Contract moderator/facilitator
        »» Confirm agenda with participants and resource people
        »» Prepare survey
        »» Plan for documenting implementation


            DELIVERY PHASE

        »» Register participants
        »» Review housekeeping information
        »» Motivate and empower participants
        »» Document exchange
        »» If delivered virtually, ensure all sites participate equally, coordinate session management
           by checking on connections, Web streaming (if any), and interpretation (if any)


           FOLLOW-UP PHASE

        »» Conduct survey
        »» Document process, lessons learned and follow-up actions
        »» Edit videotapes (if available) based on objectives and follow-up actions
        »» Implement next steps
        »» Report on results
                                                                                                              125



ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE — SEQUENCING ACTIVITIES FOR YOUR MULTI-STAKEHOLDER
DIALOGUE/CONSULTATION


                                 Brainstorming meeting, face-to-face or through video-
                                 conference, with organizing team to agree on modality
  PLANNING
                                 Focus groups with key stakeholders to agree on scope,
                                 speakers, and participants

                                 Interview of some participants to gauge interest



                                 Expert panel to open session and report out

  DELIVERY                       Peer assists to transfer tacit knowledge from one group of
                                 peers to another

                                 Knowledge café to surface collective knowledge

                                 Anecdote circle to engage the group in sharing their
                                 experiences



                                 Survey to gather feedback and assess lessons learned

 FOLLOW-UP                       Action planning describing how participant(s) will apply the
                                 learning gained

                                 e-Discussions between practitioners to continue conversation



CASE EXAMPLE — DEVELOPING A PARTICIPATORY PROCESS THROUGH A SERIES OF CONSULTATIONS
Following protests against all the oil and gas operators on Sakhalin island, the Sakhalin Energy Investment
Company (SEIC) developed a plan to comply with policy requirements of potential lenders, and initiated a
consultative and participatory process to improve its relationship with indigenous people on the island. The
objectives were to (i) mitigate project impact on indigenous peoples, and (ii) provide a framework for the delivery
of socio-economic benefits to indigenous communities. The process included
  »» a first round of consultation events with community leaders, members of the indigenous communities, and
     other stakeholders involved in the oil and gas industry to agree on the plan’s objective;
  »» guidance and feedback to the company team preparing the plan from a Working Group of company staff
     and consultants, as well as representatives of the Sakhalin Indigenous Minorities Peoples Council;
  »» a second round of consultations and a report for stakeholders with a tentative outline of the project
     components; followed by
  »» a third round of consultations (which lasted three months) to assess the proposed mitigation measures and
     social program benefits that had been developed based on previous rounds of consultations.

Source: The World Bank Extractive Industries Sourcebook, Stakeholder Consultation, page 53
126
                     KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


                     TIPS FROM THE FIELD

                     Planning
                        »» Consider using dialogues or consultations when the challenge is weak stakeholder ownership and
                           the participants need to reach agreement on local, regional, or global issues.
                        »» Include a strong planning component, including assessing support for the dialogues among
                           key players.
                        »» Determine what would be necessary to move towards this collaborative process.
                        »» Make detailed background information available that can move stakeholders toward informed
                           decisions.
                        »» Invite people who will contribute to the dialogue or consultation and who will be affected by
                            the outcome.
                     Delivery
                        »» Have a facilitator skilled in collaborative processes.
                        »» Closely track and document any recommendations or agreements coming out of the process.
                     Consider Social Media
                        »» Social networking sites such as LinkedIn and Google+ can be used to identify experts and engage
                           with them.
                        »» Online conferencing tools such as Google+ Hangouts for one-to-many exchanges.
                        »» Twitter chats with a designated hash tag are good for curating content and topics.



CASE EXAMPLE —MULTI-STAKEHOLDER DIALOGUES HELP NATION BUILDING
In a society afflicted by 25 years of insurrection and civil strife, dialogues are proving an effective nation-building tool. In
South Sudan, dialogues teach citizens about interacting with the world’s newest government, and help appointed and
elected officials address their constituents’ needs.
   »» In the northwest city of Wau, youth engaged with six elected state and national legislators on issues that included
      improved education and jobs, among other concerns.
   »» In the capital city of Juba, physically disabled persons challenged elected representatives and appointed officials
      to pay greater attention to their needs and support greater participation of the physically disabled in all levels of
      government.
   »» In the northern city of Malakal, citizens petitioned their elected representatives to help provide clean water wells so
      they would not have to draw water from the Nile River.
 Many other dialogues (sometimes referred to as community issue forums or constituency dialogues) took place in
 numerous communities across the nation. They all shared these features:
   »» Rigorous preparations preceded the dialogues; trained facilitators engaged community leaders and built trust.
   »» Multiple focused small group discussions in convenient locations maximized opportunities for community
      participation in defining problems and identified people who were capable and willing to speak for the community.
   »» Ground rules were clearly established and reinforced at every opportunity.
   »» Organizers emphasized seeking solutions and defining common strategies rather than merely airing grievances or
      complaints.
   »» Moderators and other volunteers received training to carry out their roles in the dialogues.
The dialogues’ success depended on well-designed preparation along with a commitment from civil society, legislators,
and officials to follow up. In this way participating communities saw that even if there were no immediate results, their
concerns were heeded-- these dialogues are meaningful and not cosmetic exercises.
Source: Larry Ekin, Communications Consultant, National Democratic Institute
                                                                                                         127




The same instrument used in a different project or program phase can yield different outcomes. For
example, an expert visit can help raise awareness and build consensus at the project identification
stage; in the project implementation phase, it can help overcome bottlenecks and build skills
through coaching and hands-on support.




                                                                                          KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                                                                                                 INSTRUMENTS
128
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS




        INSTRUMENTS
                     LONG-TERM ENGAGEMENT
                                                                                            129




WHAT IS A COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE?

A group that interacts regularly on a common topic to learn from
one another.

BEST USED FOR

  »» enhancing connectivity and strengthening relationships among peers
  »» energizing professional networks
     ›› at global, regional, country, community, and institutional levels.
     ›› in multiple modes (face-to-face and virtual activities).
     ›› as formal or informal arrangements.
     ›› with a lead coordinator for management purposes.
  »» sharing experiences, lessons learned, and best practices.
  »» generating new ideas.
  »» capturing and sharing tacit knowledge.




                                                                             KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                                                                                    INSTRUMENTS
130
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


      HOW TO USE IT


            PLANNING PHASE

      4+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Prepare concept note, identify target members, establish community value
           proposition
        »» Determine human resource needs both within and outside your team
        »» Hire community manager

      2+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Choose collaboration platform, confirm payment issues, and clear any security
           concerns
        »» Prepare community launch plan/engagement plan - key activities and tasks to be
           performed and by whom, including a social media outreach strategy for recruiting
           members


      1+ MONTH before event:
        »» Arrange an online or offline event (soft launch) to begin engaging champion members
        »» Set up site analytics
        »» Test and troubleshoot platform with initial members

      2+ WEEKS before event:
        »» Create content for the community: blogs, photos, videos, etc.
        »» Ask identified community champions to invite new members
        »» Officially launch community


            DELIVERY PHASE

        »» Execute community engagement plan - welcome new members, send newsletter
           updates, survey members, organize and advertise meetings, webinars, conferences
        »» Grow community: set membership growth and engagement targets
        »» Measure community: use website analytics, track community membership and
           participation, create a list of benchmarks and indicators to track over time
        »» Report progress monthly and annually
        »» Check in with membership and partners regularly, make adjustments as needed


           FOLLOW-UP PHASE

        »» If decision is made to terminate or transition community, prepare a transition or
           termination plan
        »» Communicate the plan to community members regularly, and openly seek their input
           well in advance
        »» Document the process and lessons learned
                                                                                                            131



ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE — SEQUENCING ACTIVITIES FOR YOUR COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE


                             Action planning meeting to clarify target audience,
                             value proposition, engagement plan, benchmarking and
                             implementation goals of the community
 PLANNING
                             Focus groups of community members for feedback on
                             platform features, content, design, and ease-of-use



                             A series of peer assists with experts from the field to create
                             regular content and activity for the community
  DELIVERY
                             Interviews, surveys, e-discussions, anecdote circle, and
                             various storytelling activities help develop and grow the
                             community



                             Poster session as part of a conference to increase awareness
                             of the community
 FOLLOW-UP
                             Survey to assess what worked and what didn’t




CASE EXAMPLE — A COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE FOR CONTINUOUS KNOWLEDGE SHARING
At the conclusion of a November 2012 virtual global consultation round-table that brought together more
than 150 participants from multiple countries and sectors on the topic of Incubating Innovation for Off-Grid
Electrification, attendees expressed a clear need for a common platform where dialogue could be continued.
As a result, the Telecom-Energy Initiative’s Online Collaborative Platform was launched in December 2012. This
online community of practice brought together a coalition of key energy, telecom, financial and non-profit sector
stakeholders seeking to harness energy demand from the telecom sector infrastructure to spur energy supply
to the 1.2 billion people remaining without energy access throughout the developing world. It has provided a
virtual space where knowledge, ideas and opportunities can be shared and created through interactions among
a wide range of stakeholders representing over 60 countries and 300 organizations.
Source: The World Bank, Telecom-Energy Community of Practice,
http://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/stories/innovations-rural-electrification-building-stakeholder-coalitions
132
                   KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


                   TIPS FROM THE FIELD

                   Planning
                      »» Consider recruiting topic experts who can provide cutting-edge knowledge and
                         experience to community members as volunteers or additional staff for the community.
                      »» Learn the unwritten rules of your target audience: how they behave both on- and offline,
                         where they go to get information, what times of day they are more likely to be online,
                         and what their interests are.
                      »» Consider the value proposition when developing your community engagement plan:
                         what will participants get from this community they cannot get elsewhere?
                      »» Clarify expectations and include a detailed list of planned activities or events.


                   Delivery
                      »» Identify and encourage champion members (i.e., those who contribute actively to
                         the community).


                   Consider Social Media
                      »» Web 2.0 tools to facilitate collaboration and connections.
                      »» Social Networking tools such as Facebook to increase awareness and generate buzz
                         about the community.
                      »» Google Apps for seamless collaboration among community members through access to
                         YouTube, Google maps, and online conferencing with Google+ Hangout. Participants
                         can also share and edit documents with Google docs.
                      »» Twitter for increasing engagement within your community. Use it to broadcast events,
                         report out recent activities, share photos, and host online events such as Twitter chats.




A BOOK SPRINT CAN BRING OUT TACIT KNOWLEDGE IN A COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE
Governments around the world spend an estimated US$9.5 trillion every year through contracts. Yet contracting
information is often unavailable for public scrutiny. Adding to the problems stemming from lack of transparency,
money spent through these contracts is often poorly managed or misappropriated. Open contracting, norms
and practices for increased disclosure and participation in public contracting, can address these challenges. The
World Bank Institute brought together seventeen practitioners from the open contracting CoP, representing
countries ranging from Brazil to Afghanistan, in a unique facilitated process called a book sprint – a race to
collaboratively write and publish a ”how to” guide to open contracting in five days.
The richness of this process goes beyond the product itself to include the conversations that took place while
producing the book. The book sprint allows for the sharing and capturing of knowledge that often remains tacit
and rarely gets codified. It helped establish a common language and understanding of open contracting. Most
importantly, the community-building component created a sense of trust, ownership, and belonging.
“It’s not really the book that truly matters, but the spirit of the collaboration to produce it.” – Open Contracting
book sprint participant
Source: Norma Garza, Knowledge Management, WBIOG - Open Contracting Team
                                                                                       133




WHAT IS TWINNING?

The pairing of one institution with a similar but usually more mature
institution for a mutually beneficial partnership.

BEST USED FOR

  »» initiating new and/or improved actions
  »» enabling long-term cooperation
     ›› at the institutional level as one-way or two-way twinning.
     ›› to meet the needs of both institutions involved.
     ›› as a formal or informal arrangement.
  »» sustainable cooperation that continues after project completion.
  »» enhancing organizational capacity.
  »» integrating training and technical assistance.




                                                                        KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                                                                               INSTRUMENTS
134
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


      HOW TO USE IT


             PLANNING PHASE

      7+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Option 1 – you are approached by an organization for a twinning arrangement
        »» Option 2 – you identify the need for a twinning arrangement; i.e., you have identified
           your learning or skills gap

      Prepare a project plan (based on option picked)
        »» Option 1 - clarify expectations and agree on objectives
        »» Option 2
                  ›› prepare RFP for twinning arrangement
                  ›› collect proposals from knowledge providers
                  ›› select twinning partner

      5+ MONTHS before event:
        »» Knowledge provider and recipient organization jointly
           ›› prepare work plan
           ›› draw up twinning agreement/contract with detailed budget, project team, time frame
              and key milestones
        »» Develop a monitoring plan
        »» Hire an auditor to review contract

      1 MONTH before event:
        »» Organize a meeting to agree on launch


            DELIVERY PHASE
      12+ MONTHS
        »» Have experts from recipient institution implement the activities as agreed in contract
        »» Organize (virtual or face-to-face) monthly meetings to touch base, assess progress, and brief
           on new developments
        »» Monitor progress of twinning arrangement through quarterly reports


            FOLLOW-UP PHASE

        »» Conduct project review mission
        »» Conduct evaluation of twinning arrangement
        »» Prepare final report
        »» Consider creating a community of practice to continue partnership and skill sharing to
           maintain momentum
        »» Close out finances
                                                                                                          135



ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE — SEQUENCING ACTIVITIES FOR YOUR TWINNING ARRANGEMENT


                           Series of e-discussions between to two institutions

                           Action planning to lay out objectives and key capacity
 PLANNING
                           outcomes and settle on a project team



                           Focus groups to monitor project implementation and
                           brainstorm on possible solutions to challenges
  DELIVERY
                           Secondment arrangements to effectively share knowledge
                           and build capacity

                           A series of peer assists, organized by each of the secondees
                           from the partnership, allowed staff to share experience,
                           exchange best practices, and strengthen the coalition



                           Exit interviews of secondees

 FOLLOW-UP                 Survey to determine and evaluate the final results

                           Action planning session to implement lessons learned




CASE EXAMPLE — A TWINNING ARRANGEMENT CAN ENHANCE PRODUCTIVITY
In 2009, the World Bank asked the Center for Tropical Agricultural Research and Teaching (CATIE), which had
developed various silvopastoral techniques to rehabilitate landscapes degraded from livestock production, to
provide technical assistance to Tugi village in the Gutah Hills of the North West Region of Cameroon, where the
ecological conditions are similar to those in the highlands of Central America. Under a twinning arrangement,
CATIE advised and supported the Akwi Memorial Foundation (an NGO devoted to alleviating poverty in West
Cameroon) in implementing the Tugi Silvopastoral Project (TUSIP). With consistent support, TUSIP’s innovations
and approaches are helping to improve the productivity and environmental sustainability of small-scale crop and
livestock production in Tugi village.
Source: The World Bank,Trading Knowledge about Sustainable Agro-Pastoral Techniques,
http://wbi.worldbank.org/sske/result-story/2161
136
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE INSTRUMENTS


      TIPS FROM THE FIELD

      Planning
        »» Allocate enough time to develop the twinning project; make sure you identify the appropriate
           partner.
        »» Plan, plan, plan, and then plan some more, especially for formal twinning arrangements.
        »» Attain commitment and understanding at all levels of both organizations.
        »» Ensure financial and operational impacts are clear and accepted by all parties.


      Delivery
        »» For long-term sustainability, make sure that both your organization and your selected partners
           have the organizational maturity to handle the in-depth commitment that twinning entails.


      Consider Social Media
        »» Use tools such as WordPress and Tumblr to create blogs for documenting progress and lessons
           learned from the twinning.
                                                                                                   137




A combination (blend) of instruments is very effective, especially when there are entrenched
development issues or complex challenges, such as those requiring political buy-in or the
transfer of substantial technical know-how. You might start a knowledge exchange initiative,
for example, with a conference to raise awareness of new development options, then form a
community of practice to enhance networking and sustain learning, and follow up with study
tours to build trust and client ownership of new reforms.




                                                                                    KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
                                                                                           INSTRUMENTS
138
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE ACTIVITIES




        PRESENTATION ACTIVITIES              DISCUSSION ACTIVITIES




      Demonstration     Expert Panel     Anecdote Circle   Brainstorming




      Lightning Talks   Poster Session    Buzz Session     e-Discussion




         Report          Storytelling    Knowledge Café     Peer Assist
                                                                                             139




                                            ACTIVITIES
The activities are organized under four categories: presentation, discussion, experiential
and analytical. Each category emphasizes different types of communication and interaction
among participants.




            EXPERIENTIAL ACTIVITIES                        ANALYTICAL ACTIVITIES




        Action Planning       Book Sprint               After Action       Focus Group
                                                          Review




           Field Visit         Fishbowl                  Interview             Self-
                                                                            Assessment




            Role Play         Secondment                   Survey
                                                                          SWOT Analysis




                     Simulation
140
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE ACTIVITIES




               ACTIVITIES
                      PRESENTATION ACTIVITIES




                   Demonstration      Expert Panel




                    Lightning Talks   Poster Session




                       Report          Storytelling
                                                                                              141


                            DEMONSTRATION



WHAT IS A DEMONSTRATION?
An expert showing how to use a product or perform a procedure; also used to showcase a
new product or process in order to market and spread innovations.


A DEMONSTRATION ACTIVITY MAY BE               HOW TO USE IT
ORGANIZED                                      »» Ensure that the expert has good
  »» at the implementation stages of a            pedagogical skills and adapts the
     project.                                     demonstration for the needs of the
                                                  audience.
  »» for smaller groups (5 to 20 people).
                                               »» Make follow-up discussion, practice
USE IT TO                                         and/or performance support available
                                                  to help with practical application in the
  »» apply knowledge or master a process.
                                                  participant context.
  »» have a high level of participant
                                               »» It helps to have two people running a
     involvement.
                                                  demonstration activity—one to run the
  »» share practical experience or process        demonstration and the other to speak
     steps.                                       about what is being demonstrated.
  »» share innovations and good practice.      »» Encourage the expert(s)/presenter(s)
  »» enable knowledge transfer within one’s       to embrace questions and concerns,
     own context.                                 delve deeper to clarify, and involve the
                                                  rest of the participants in answering
                                                  questions.
                                               »» Make sure that each participant has
                                                  an opportunity to practice what was
                                                  demonstrated.
142


                             EXPERT PANEL*



      WHAT IS AN EXPERT PANEL?
      A moderated set of presentations on the same topic addressed from various angles by a
      group of people with specialized knowledge.


      AN EXPERT PANEL MAY BE ORGANIZED                          HOW TO USE IT
       »» virtually or face-to-face.                             »» Choose panelists for their knowledge,
       »» as a moderated activity.                                  communication skills, and effectiveness
                                                                    as speakers.
       »» at the delivery stage of a project.
                                                                 »» Provide panelists with background
      USE IT TO                                                     information about participants and the
                                                                    relevance of the topic area for them.
         »» provide multiple perspectives on
            a topic.                                             »» Hold a briefing (virtual or face-to-face)
                                                                    with panelists at least two weeks before
         »» raise awareness about a topic or an
                                                                    the event to familiarize the moderator
            issue.
                                                                    and all the panelists with the content of
         »» lend credibility to a topic by providing                the presentations.
            an expert perspective.
                                                                 »» Encourage participants to learn about
         »» enable knowledge sharing.                               the topic before the event; provide
                                                                    or suggest appropriate background
                                                                    documents. This communication can
                                                                    be done virtually.
                                                                 »» Good moderation is critical to the
                                                                    success of an expert panel.
                                                                 »» When planning the activity, consider
                                                                    what you will do if
                                                                    ›› you are running out of time.
                                                                    ›› there are too many participants, or
                                                                       not enough.
                                                                    ›› your desired panelists require
                                                                       compensation -- do you have an
                                                                       adequate budget?
                                                                    ›› you can’t get enough panelists to
                                                                       participate.
                                                                    ›› one or more panelists can’t
                                                                       participate at the last minute.
                                                                    ›› the equipment malfunctions.




       Keep in mind that an expert panel is not useful by itself when the learning
      *
       objective is to apply, analyze, or integrate knowledge, or to create information.
                                                                                                143


                            LIGHTNING TALKS



WHAT ARE LIGHTNING TALKS?
A series of short presentations on the same or diverse topics by different speakers lasting a
few minutes each as part of a single session.


LIGHTNING TALKS MAY OCCUR                       HOW TO USE IT
  »» virtually or face-to-face.                  »» Organize lightning talks like “speed
  »» as a moderated activity with each talk         dates.” The idea is that participants
     lasting five minutes.                          can experience many different ideas in
                                                    a short amount of time.
  »» with experienced practitioners.
                                                 »» Advance preparation is key to a
USE IT TO                                           successful outcome. Have presenters
                                                    work with a coach or facilitator to
  »» raise awareness about one or more
                                                    prepare for the talk.
     topics in a short amount of time.
                                                 »» Ask each presenter to do a dry run of
  »» report on project or group results and
                                                    their presentation to ensure that all
     good practices.
                                                    goes as expected.
  »» enhance individual or group capacity
                                                 »» Give presenters a checklist that
     to prepare succinct reports or
                                                    addresses what they are expected to
     presentations.
                                                    do during the session to stay on track,
  »» offer new perspectives.                        and what to expect after they are done.
                                                 »» Sequence the lightning talks so the
                                                    audience can make sense of the issues
                                                    being presented. Consider the overall
                                                    message of the talks.
144


                        POSTER SESSION



      WHAT IS A POSTER SESSION?
      A presentation in a poster format, usually combining text and graphics, that engages
      presenters and participants in a conversation around the content of the poster.


      A POSTER SESSION MAY BE                         HOW TO USE IT
      ORGANIZED FOR                                    »» Provide clear guidelines for poster
                                                          creation, display, and engagement,
        »» a specific time-frame—posters are
                                                          such as
           available only during certain times.
                                                          ›› the dimension of the poster.
        »» an open time-frame—posters remain
           available for perusal at any time during       ›› the type of poster (print, virtual).
           an event.                                      ›› when and how posters are
        »» face-to-face delivery                             showcased.
           ›› tend to be displayed in one location,    »» Include opportunities for presenter-
              usually in a large room or designated       participant interaction and provide
              space that may be part of an exhibit        clear instructions as to how such
              hall.                                       interactions take place.
           ›› may include a reception to emphasize     »» Organize a Best Poster award, if
              the informal tone of the poster             appropriate.
              session.                                 »» Include the e-version of the posters on
        »» virtual delivery                               your website as follow up.
           ›› synchronous.                             »» Increase visibility and follow up by
                                                          interviewing poster presenters.
           ›› asynchronous.
                                                       »» Include the presenter contact
           ›› both synchronous and asynchronous.
                                                          information on the poster itself for
      USE IT TO                                           those who want to have a follow-up
                                                          conversation.
        »» encourage continued reflection/
                                                       »» Create an informal and relaxed
           interaction on a topic.
                                                          atmosphere during the poster session.
        »» showcase results/innovations or                The whole idea is to get presenters
           increase visibility of a topic or theme.       and participants talking about their
        »» accommodate a large number of                  projects at their leisure.
           participants.                               »» Consider it as an alternative to a
        »» support network building and informal          presentation or sequencing it with
           knowledge sharing.                             a presentation, especially if you are
                                                          trying to get participants to become
                                                          aware of and increase the visibility of
                                                          the overall results.
                                                                                                 145


                                                       REPORT



WHAT IS A REPORT?
An oral or written presentation that summarizes and highlights topic- or theme-based key
points (concepts, data, processes, lessons learned, etc.).


A REPORT ACTIVITY MAY BE                         HOW TO USE IT
ORGANIZED                                         »» Prepare a reporting tip sheet for the
                                                     presenters. Consider sharing the
  »» virtually or face-to-face (oral).
                                                     following tips:
  »» as a moderated activity (oral).
                                                     ›› Develop one overarching theme or
  »» for large audiences (either oral or                key message and support that with
     written).                                          no more than two or three secondary
  »» to structure/standardize the core                  points.
     message (either oral or written).               ›› If you are doing an oral presentation,
  »» at any stage of a project.                         keep it to 20 minutes; shorter oral
                                                        presentations tend to be more
USE IT TO                                               effective.
  »» share results from a project/survey/            ›› If you use PowerPoint or other
     assessment or to provide an update.                software, highlight main points by
  »» raise awareness, especially on topics              simply showing a headline or a few
     where information is difficult to obtain.          key words. This technique will keep
                                                        the audience focused on what you
  »» stimulate new perspectives.
                                                        have to say and not what is on the
  »» capture and reuse tacit knowledge.                 screen.
  »» enable knowledge sharing.                    »» Use illustrations, examples, and stories
                                                     that contextualize the information for
                                                     the audience for both oral and written
                                                     reporting.
                                                  »» End a report activity by summarizing or
                                                     highlighting key messages.
146

                            STORYTELLING*



      WHAT IS STORYTELLING?
      A purposeful use of narrative that describes a practical outcome and is meant as a trigger
      for individuals, communities, or organizations to consider future action.


      STORYTELLING MAY INCLUDE                                HOW TO USE IT
        »» reference to original source, if story is             »» Use relevant visual hooks when you
           being re-told.                                           are sharing a story to capture the
        »» context to set the scene.                                audience’s attention.
        »» people involved.                                      »» Create a solid narrative, with
                                                                    beginning, middle, and end. Keep in
        »» challenge that triggered the
                                                                    mind that the beginning and the end
           intervention/action.
                                                                    are critical -- they are what tend to stay
        »» description of intervention/action.                      with the audience.
        »» results and lessons learned.                          »» Make sure the key message or
        »» images and objects.                                      inspiration for action comes through.
                                                                 »» Use true stories and keep the story
      USE IT TO                                                     simple so that you don’t overwhelm the
        »» share and capture tacit knowledge.                       audience.
        »» support deep understanding.
        »» draw and focus attention on a topic.
        »» enable knowledge sharing.




      * Storytelling is often sequenced with the anecdote circle activity when the goal of the exchange is to elicit
      multiple experiences based on a theme.
                                  147




ACTIVITIES
    DISCUSSION ACTIVITIES




Anecdote Circle   Brainstorming




 Buzz Session     e-Discussion




Knowledge Café     Peer Assist
148

                       ANECDOTE CIRCLE



      WHAT IS AN ANECDOTE CIRCLE?
      An exercise that involves the use of story themes and story-eliciting questioning to engage
      a group in sharing their experiences.


      ANECDOTE CIRCLE MAY BE                                 ›› conflict resolution.
      ORGANIZED                                           »» collect stories to evaluate complex
                                                             projects.
        »» around themes using anecdote-eliciting
           questions.                                     »» enable knowledge sharing.
        »» for settings with a group of 4 to 12          HOW TO USE IT
           participants
                                                          »» Consider recording what is being
           ›› often the participants are peers.
                                                             said during the anecdote circle. This
           ›› often the participants have worked on          way you can harvest stories from the
              the same project.                              transcript.
        »» with participants sitting in a circle or at    »» Make sure that you engage a facilitator
           a round table.                                    who is experienced in guiding and not
        »» with a facilitator experienced in                 leading. The group members should be
           ›› anecdote-eliciting questioning                 sharing with each other, not telling their
              techniques.                                    stories to the facilitator.
           ›› blending with the group.

      USE IT TO
        »» support process change such as
           ›› team and relationship building.




      ANECDOTE CIRCLES VS FOCUS GROUPS
      Anecdote circles differ from focus groups in the following ways:
        »» Thematic – eliciting experiences rather than opinions
        »» Exploratory – exploring themes rather than having a hypothesis in mind
        »» Neutral – the results emerge as experiences are shared rather than expecting to
           identify a correct answer.
                                                                                                 149


                               BRAINSTORMING



WHAT IS BRAINSTORMING?
The generation of ideas or solutions about a specific topic by tapping into the wisdom of
peers and encouraging them to think of novel ideas.


A BRAINSTORMING ACTIVITY MAY BE                 HOW TO USE IT
ORGANIZED                                        »» Since the key goal of brainstorming
                                                    is to generate as many ideas as
  »» as a facilitated activity that motivates
                                                    possible—original ideas or ideas
     participants to contribute ideas or
                                                    that build from each other—select a
     solutions.
                                                    brainstorming topic that is relevant to
  »» at the initial stages of a project or          participants.
     process.
                                                 »» Quantity is what counts during
  »» virtually or face-to-face.                     brainstorming, not quality. It is
                                                    important that participants be aware
USE IT TO                                           that “no idea is a bad idea.”
  »» generate new and creative ideas.            »» Organize the session well: Make
  »» generate lists/checklists.                     sure the brainstorm questions and
  »» facilitate problem solving, consensus          guidelines are clear and that all
     building, and teamwork.                        participants understand the question
                                                    and the process.
  »» motivate participants to invest in an
     idea or solution.                           »» Encourage solutions from all
                                                    participants; one or two people should
  »» enable knowledge sharing.
                                                    not dominate the conversation.
                                                 »» A successful brainstorm should result
                                                    in many bold and unique ideas that
                                                    can then be analyzed, prioritized, and
                                                    applied in relevant contexts.


Q-STORMING VS BRAINSTORMING
Q-storming is very similar to brainstorming. Rather than seeking new answers and solutions,
the goal of Q-storming practice is to generate as many new questions as possible around
a specific topic. By doing so, you come up with open questions that could help you think
through the challenge or problem that has to be resolved, or a difficult situation that has to
be navigated.
This method is particularly effective when the team is confronted by a problem for which the
solution has to be fully owned and implemented by the people involved in the Q-storming
exercise, and the solution has to come from within.
150


                         BUZZ SESSION



      WHAT IS A BUZZ SESSION?
      A very short discussion on a narrow topic that involves simultaneous small group work
      (usually in pairs) and stimulates contribution from each member of the participant group.


      A BUZZ SESSION MAY BE ORGANIZED                 HOW TO USE IT
        »» with a large number of participants         »» Carefully consider the outcomes you
           and as an activity within a workshop or        seek from a buzz session. Here are
           conference.                                    some examples of how to use a buzz
        »» with an experienced facilitator who            session effectively:
           is able to easily adjust the flow of the       ›› Follow a presentation with a buzz
           activities, if needed.                            session. Ask audience members to
                                                             talk for five to ten minutes to the
      USE IT TO                                              person next to them about how key
        »» tap into the knowledge and experience             points in the presentation relate to
           of each participant.                              their own experiences. This dialogue
        »» energize the group or as an icebreaker.           will bring out new perspectives and
                                                             may also reduce questions, or lead to
        »» identify needs/solicit quick feedback             more informed questions, from the
           on a narrow topic.                                audience.
        »» support generation of a large number           ›› Structure a buzz session so that
           of ideas.                                         two to three participants take
        »» generate group-level questions for                turns interviewing each other. The
           speakers.                                         facilitator(s) may instruct participants
        »» re-focus on core issues.                          to allow each to talk for three to five
                                                             minutes without interruption and then
                                                             have a five minute discussion as a
                                                             group.
                                                          ›› Use a buzz session as an icebreaker
                                                             at the start of a workshop with a brief
                                                             one to two minute discussion on a
                                                             narrow topic of common interest or
                                                             expectation.
                                                                                                151


                                     E-DISCUSSION



WHAT IS AN E-DISCUSSION?
A discussion that takes place online either synchronously or asynchronously.



AN E-DISCUSSION MAY BE ORGANIZED               HOW TO USE IT
 »» as an open informal discussion.             »» Consider using an asynchronous
 »» as a moderated discussion.                     e-discussion when you need
                                                   scheduling flexibility. Participants do
USE IT TO                                          not need to be available at a fixed
                                                   time to discuss a topic; they may
  »» engage members of a community of
                                                   engage at their convenience within
     practice.
                                                   the established parameters of the
  »» examine topics in depth and allow for         e-discussion.
     deeper reflection.
                                                »» Also consider the following questions
  »» support coaching/mentoring.                   as you plan an e-discussion:
  »» enable planning and collaboration             ›› Are the expected outputs of the
     at any stage of a project or program             e-discussion clear?
     -- especially among geographically
                                                   ›› Have you decided how to conduct
     dispersed teams.
                                                      the e-discussion session?
  »» plan agendas with several participants
                                                   ›› How involved should the moderator
     and sustain learning and engagement
                                                      be in the e-discussion?
     among workshop and conference
     participants.                                 ›› Is this going to be an open-ended,
                                                      free-flowing discussion? Or are
                                                      specific outcomes expected?
                                                   ›› How have you ensured that
                                                      all participants can access the
                                                      e-discussion?
                                                   ›› Will the selected tool accommodate
                                                      the number of people wanting to
                                                      participate?
                                                   ›› How will you capture the results of the
                                                      e-discussion session?
                                                »» Provide moderator and participants
                                                   with information on how to use the
                                                   e-discussion tool/environment.
                                                »» Provide clear instructions on how
                                                   participants can ask questions, provide
                                                   feedback, etc.
152


                         KNOWLEDGE CAFÉ



      WHAT IS A KNOWLEDGE CAFÉ?
      Open, creative, facilitator-led conversations to surface collective knowledge, share ideas,
      and encourage collaborative dialogue in a relaxed, café-type environment.


      A KNOWLEDGE CAFÉ ACTIVITY                       HOW TO USE IT
      MAY BE ORGANIZED                                 »» Establish the café etiquette and
                                                          environment to enable open dialogue
        »» virtually or face-to-face.
                                                          through conversations. Rules might
        »» as a part of large conferences,                include listening carefully, taking turns
           workshops, and knowledge fairs.                in the conversation, and contributing
                                                          your thinking.
      USE IT TO
                                                       »» Use good questions to drive the
        »» provide multiple perspectives on a             conversation. Keep the following in
           topic.                                         mind when writing the questions:
        »» surface and collect tacit knowledge            ›› Use open-ended questions (questions
           and experience from a large group of              that do not have a yes/no answer).
           participants.
                                                          ›› Use questions that encourage inquiry
        »» support collective learning and build             instead of advocacy.
           networks.
                                                          ›› Test the questions ahead of time with
        »» identify best practices.                          key individuals to ensure that they are
                                                             easy to understand.
                                                       »» Consider organizing your questions in
                                                          idea/issue clusters for easier linking of
                                                          conversation results to the core ideas/
                                                          issues.
                                                       »» An experienced facilitator is key to
                                                          the success of a knowledge café. Also
                                                          consider including scribes and note-
                                                          takers to harvest the knowledge being
                                                          shared.
                                                                                                 153


                                           PEER ASSIST



WHAT IS A PEER ASSIST?
A facilitated event in which peers with relevant experience share their knowledge and
experience, usually in the form of best practices and lessons learned, with a team that has
requested help on a specific problem, project, or activity.

PEER ASSISTS ARE ORGANIZED                       HOW TO USE IT
  »» as facilitated sessions.                     »» The host team should have clear
  »» for groups of no more than 15 or 20             outcomes and deliverables in mind.
     people, which include the Host Team          »» Timing is key -- it should allow for the
     (asking for input/assistance) and the           learning to feed into action.
     Resource Team (peers from outside the        »» Ensure that the resource team
     team sharing knowledge and insights).           members bring recent experience and
  »» either as a short session (90 minutes) or       practical knowledge to share on the
     long session spread over several days.          topic. You don’t have to bring in the
     The length depends upon                         most senior people.
     ›› the complexity of the challenge.          »» Select an experienced facilitator who
     ›› the geographic range participants are        can maintain a balance between telling
        coming from.                                 and listening and prioritize action ideas
                                                     and recommendations.
USE IT TO                                         »» Keep the following core process steps
  »» solve a specific business challenge             in mind:
     -- generally more useful for solving            ›› Ensure resource team participants
     adaptive challenges.                               clearly understand the context
  »» enable knowledge transfer among                    (including past efforts) and
     peers.                                             challenges.
  »» support collective learning, cross-             ›› The resource team should ask
     linkages, and networking.                          questions and have a dialogue
                                                        with the host team to develop a
  »» stimulate new perspectives and new
                                                        good understanding of the issues
     lines of inquiry.
                                                        (background materials can be sent
  »» increase willingness to learn from one             ahead of time to resource team).
     another—establish an open culture of
                                                     ›› After the resource team has
     learning in an organization.
                                                        discussed the challenge and possible
                                                        solutions, the host team needs to
                                                        take the recommendations from the
                                                        resource team without interrupting or
                                                        defending past efforts and decisions.
                                                     ›› Make sure to have a formal conclusion
                                                        and feedback session at the end
                                                        of the peer assist to summarize the
                                                        outcomes. Generally someone from
                                                        the host team will do this.
154
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE ACTIVITIES




               ACTIVITIES
                      EXPERIENTIAL ACTIVITIES




                   Action Planning     Book Sprint




                      Field Visit       Fishbowl




                      Role Play       Secondment




                               Simulation
                                                                                                 155


                         ACTION PLANNING



WHAT IS ACTION PLANNING?
A strategic exercise that results in a personal or group road map or timetable describing the
specific steps that need to be taken to achieve a single or multiple objectives.


ACTION PLANNING MAY BE                          HOW TO USE IT
ORGANIZED                                        »» The facilitator of the action planning
                                                    activity should provide clear guidelines
  »» as a facilitated activity that guides
                                                    to participants about how to create
     participants through action planning.
                                                    an action plan; most importantly, the
  »» at the national, regional, community,          facilitator should guide the participants
     institutional, and/or individual levels.       in writing a realistic plan.
USE IT TO                                        »» For an effective action planning activity,
                                                    participants should consider using the
  »» apply and/or localize knowledge.               following steps:
  »» create a tangible output and road map          ›› Define what needs to be
     for follow-up action.                             accomplished.
  »» encourage ownership of follow-up               ›› Assign roles and responsibilities.
     actions.                                          Also identify key stakeholders, as
  »» enable knowledge transfer.                        successful implementation depends
                                                       on buy in from relevant stakeholders.
                                                    ›› Prepare a list of activities, decide
                                                       what is feasible (consider cost and
                                                       resources), and prioritize.
                                                    ›› Break activities into discrete,
                                                       measurable steps. It helps to write the
                                                       projected actions as separate tasks
                                                       that are both realistic and attainable.
                                                       Make sure to identify the individual
                                                       and/or organization responsible for
                                                       each task.
                                                    ›› Create a timeline with major
                                                       milestones.
156


                         BOOK SPRINT



      WHAT IS A BOOK SPRINT?
      A facilitated process that brings together a group of people to collaboratively produce a
      book in three to five days.


      USE IT TO                                      HOW TO USE IT
        »» capture tacit knowledge.                    »» Identify and bring practitioners
        »» codify knowledge, practitioners’               or key stakeholders together to
           experiences, and lessons learned.              collaboratively write a book.
        »» exchange knowledge and results.             »» The facilitator will guide participants
                                                          through the different steps of
        »» create a tangible product – produce a
                                                          collectively producing a book:
           book.
                                                          concept mapping, structuring, writing,
        »» build, further develop, or engage a            composing, and publishing the book.
           community of practitioners or team.
                                                     For an effective book sprint, consider using
        »» encourage ownership of follow-up          the following sequence:
           actions.
                                                       »» Define what you hope to accomplish
        »» enable knowledge transfer.                     and write a short concept note.
                                                       »» Identify who will coordinate the book
                                                          sprint and assign team member roles
                                                          and responsibilities.
                                                       »» Identify resources.
                                                       »» Prepare TOR and identify facilitator.
                                                       »» Work with facilitator on book sprint
                                                          planning.
                                                       »» Finalize budget.
                                                       »» Identify participants and invite them.
                                                       »» Identify venue.
                                                       »» Finalize logistics.
                                                       »» Begin planning follow-up to the book
                                                          sprint.
                                                       »» Participate in book sprint.
                                                       »» Immediately after sprint, publish book
                                                          in e-book format, possibly hard copy
                                                          version, and set up print-on-demand
                                                          service.
                                                       »» Disseminate book online, via social
                                                          media, and in face-to-face events;
                                                          invite people to provide input.
                                                       »» Begin follow-up and use set up process
                                                          to incorporate feedback into later book
                                                          versions.
                                                                                                   157


                                                    FIELD VISIT



WHAT IS A FIELD VISIT?
Physically going to a location that enables participants to experience project realities
directly and meet with implementation teams and beneficiaries.


A FIELD VISIT MAY BE ORGANIZED TO                   HOW TO USE IT
  »» last for one or several days.                   »» Assign a field visit lead from both the
  »» include a team consisting of                       receiver and provider side to finalize
                                                        the logistics for the visit.
     ›› a team lead, who works closely with
        organizers on the field visit program;       »» Since many field visits include a
        is the point of contact during the visit.       team of visitors, it is important to
                                                        make sure that all team members are
     ›› visitors, who contribute to field visit
                                                        prepared. Depending on the purpose
        conversations and report based on
                                                        and formality of the visit, it may be
        their expertise.
                                                        important to prepare a visitors guide
     ›› observers, who participate in field             that outlines roles and responsibilities
        visit but do not have any reporting             and includes all relevant background
        responsibilities.                               information and documentation.
USE IT TO                                            »» Schedule a pre-brief for the field visit
                                                        team to review documents, clarify
  »» gain new knowledge and/or learn                    any questions, and also agree on the
     directly from a project or program.                desired outcomes from the visit.
  »» establish direct contact with                   »» Consider providing a reporting
     beneficiaries, community members,                  template for participants to record
     and/or key stakeholders.                           their reflections.
  »» identify good practices.                        »» Consider having a daily debrief for the
  »» build networks and partnerships.                   field visit team to share and capture
  »» support decision-making.                           key takeaways and reflections.
                                                     »» Ensure that the field visit report
                                                        (detailing the outcomes and next
                                                        steps) is prepared and shared with
                                                        relevant stakeholders in an interactive
                                                        and engaging format/forum.
158



                         FISHBOWL


      WHAT IS A FISHBOWL?
      A small group conversation or a dialogue process held in a setting which includes a larger
      group of observers/listeners.
      A fishbowl is an experiential exercise that enables active participation through discussion by
      those inside the “fishbowl” and active observation by those outside of the “fishbowl.” Think
      of the fishbowl as a center stage with observers sitting around it. A typical fishbowl setup
      has an inner circle of chairs for about five to eight people with more chairs for observers set
      around the inner circle.

      A FISHBOWL MAY BE ORGANIZED AS                  HOW TO USE IT
      AN OPEN OR CLOSED SESSION.                       »» Fishbowl requires an experienced
                                                          coach who, in addition to good
        »» Open fishbowls allow anyone in the
                                                          coaching skills, is knowledgeable about
           audience to join the fishbowl during
                                                          the subject matter.
           the discussion.
                                                       »» Identify and work with the coach to
        »» Closed fishbowls engage the
                                                          decide on the structure of the activity.
           participants in the fishbowl as intact
           groups, joining and leaving the                ›› Is it going to be an open or closed
           fishbowl as one.                                  fishbowl?
                                                          ›› How much time will you allow for the
      USE IT TO                                              interaction within the fishbowl?
        »» increase understanding of difficult or         ›› How many fishbowl rounds are there
           controversial topics.                             going to be?
        »» support multiple perspectives and              ›› Do you need a facilitator in addition
           debate.                                           to the coach to ensure a smooth
        »» support problem-solving, especially               transition as members of the audience
           for complex problems with no single-              enter and leave the fishbowl?
           answer solutions.                              ›› Can the selected venue be set up
        »» encourage active listening and                    for a fishbowl conversation that
           reflection.                                       also offers good visibility for those
                                                             observing?
        »» enable knowledge transfer.
                                                       »» Based on your expected results,
                                                          prepare the observers’ checklist. What
                                                          should observers pay attention to?
                                                          ›› content, and/or
                                                          ›› process
                                                       »» At the end of each fishbowl, be sure to
                                                          provide a summary of the key points,
                                                          using the observer’s checklist as a
                                                          guide.
                                                                                                   159

                                                 ROLE PLAY



WHAT IS A ROLE PLAY?
An interactive exercise that allows participants to experience a situation from another’s
point of view, apply or develop skills to handle a conflict or a problem, and analyze the
experience with the help of observers.

A ROLE PLAY ACTIVITY MAY BE                           ›› Determine which roles are needed
ORGANIZED                                                for the scenario and establish the
                                                         characteristics of each role.
  »» as a combination of virtual and face-to-
                                                      ›› Cast the roles, either by soliciting
     face interactions.
                                                         volunteers or suggesting individuals
  »» at any stage of a project.                          to play particular roles.
  »» with decision-makers and practitioners.          ›› Provide participants with a synopsis
                                                         of the role they are to play.
USE IT TO
                                                      ›› Advise remaining participants what
  »» encourage different or new behavior.                they should look for and note as
  »» encourage exploration and discovery.                observers.
  »» develop appreciation for another’s               ›› Facilitate the discussion and analysis.
     point of view.                                »» To be effective, role plays should be
  »» strengthen consensus among multiple              unscripted and allow spontaneous
     stakeholders.                                    action and conversations among the
  »» develop skills to handle a conflict or           participants. In the discussion and
     make difficult decisions.                        analysis phase
                                                      ›› ask the role players to comment first
HOW TO USE IT                                            on the enactment to set the tone of
  »» Provide guidance for those                          the discussion.
     participating in the role play.                  ›› ask observers to
     Participants need a set time limit and              ‹‹ discuss what took place during the
     clear objectives.                                      role play.
  »» Do not underestimate the importance                 ‹‹ offer their own related experience
     of the facilitator in a role play.                     and knowledge, not just their
  »» Use the following checklist to prepare                 opinions.
     and conduct a role play.                            ‹‹ discuss how the role play situation
     ›› Identify an overall objective for the               or problem relates to their work.
        role play.                                       ‹‹ suggest how the situation could
     ›› Define the problem and establish a                  have been addressed differently or
        real-life scenario that is relevant to              more quickly.
        participants.
160


                        SECONDMENT



      WHAT IS A SECONDMENT?
      The temporary assignment of a person to another department or organization.



      A SECONDMENT ACTIVITY MAY BE                 HOW TO USE IT
      ORGANIZED                                     »» Make sure to have a formal agreement
                                                       and terms of reference for a
        »» across departments within a single
                                                       secondment. Consider including the
           organization.
                                                       following in that agreement:
        »» across organizations – from home
                                                       ›› exact duration, with start and end
           organization to host organization.
                                                          dates
        »» with a formal agreement
                                                       ›› payment responsibilities
           (Memorandum of Understanding).
                                                       ›› duties to be performed
        »» for a specific duration.
                                                       ›› performance supervision and
      USE IT TO                                           evaluation responsibilities, including
                                                          leave
        »» develop new proficiencies or enhance
           skills and expertise.                       ›› notice period for changes to
                                                          the agreement, especially if the
        »» enable knowledge transfer.
                                                          agreement allows for extension
        »» support transparency and openness.
                                                       ›› contacts for home and host
        »» encourage different or new behavior.           organizations and departments
        »» support deep understanding of a             ›› approval signatures
           subject area.
                                                    »» Through a secondment, participants
                                                       are able to contribute as well as gain
                                                       new knowledge and skills.
                                                    »» At the end of the secondment, the
                                                       secondee takes new skills back to the
                                                       home organization/department along
                                                       with in-depth understanding of other
                                                       contexts.
                                                                                                   161


                                              SIMULATION



WHAT IS A SIMULATION?
A realistic, structured situation designed to engage participants in various interactions
within a particular setting.


A SIMULATION ACTIVITY MAY BE                      HOW TO USE IT
ORGANIZED                                          »» Developing a simulation is time and
                                                      resource-intensive. It requires detailed
  »» virtually and/or face-to-face.
                                                      planning and expertise.
  »» to last for a few hours or days,
                                                   »» In the planning phase, you need to
     depending on its complexity.
                                                      ›› identify the purpose of simulation:
  »» with the involvement of an experienced
                                                         education, research, training, decision
     facilitator and/or team of facilitators
                                                         making, planning, socialization,
     and resource people.
                                                         communication or other.
  »» for decision-makers and practitioners.
                                                      ›› decide on the nature of the
  »» at any stage of a project.                          interaction among players and
                                                         between players and the game.
USE IT TO
                                                      ›› decide on the media in which the
  »» practice new skills in a realistic, “real-          simulation will be represented and
     world” environment.                                 played. Examples include cardboard,
  »» develop proficiency in handling a                   paper, or plastic playing pieces in
     complex role or specific equipment.                 board games; metal figures and
  »» enable knowledge transfer.                          model buildings in tabletop games;
  »» analyze a given situation in depth.                 and virtual worlds and figures in a
                                                         computer game. For digital games,
  »» support deep understanding of a                     media technology includes all kinds of
     subject area.                                       digital technologies, such as software
                                                         programming, video technology,
                                                         digital animation, and network
                                                         languages.
                                                   »» See if there is an existing simulation
                                                      and/or game available that you can
                                                      use before creating a simulation from
                                                      scratch.
                                                   »» Do a full run-through of the simulation
                                                      and/or game before the learning
                                                      event. Debrief and encourage the
                                                      pilot-testing group to evaluate their
                                                      experience.
                                                   »» Capture the pilot group’s feedback
                                                      to improve the simulation and/or
                                                      game and better align it with learning
                                                      objectives before the launch.
162
      KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE ACTIVITIES




               ACTIVITIES
                       ANALYTICAL ACTIVITIES




                     After-action      Focus Group
                    Review (AAR)




                      Interview           Self-
                                       Assessment




                       Survey         SWOT Analysis
                                                                                               163


              AFTER-ACTION REVIEW



WHAT IS AN AFTER-ACTION REVIEW (AAR)?
A structured review process for project teams to analyze what happened, why it happened,
and what can be done better or differently in the future.


DURING AN AAR, THE PARTICIPANTS                 HOW TO USE IT
ANSWER THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS                   »» Keep in mind the following if you are
                                                    the team leader and are facilitating
  »» What were the anticipated results?
                                                    an AAR:
  »» What were the actual results?
                                                    ›› Remain unbiased.
  »» What produced the actual results?
                                                    ›› Do not permit personal attacks
  »» What will the team sustain or enhance?            among team members.
  »» What are some future opportunities to          ›› Engage all team members in
     apply what was learned?                           providing feedback and solutions.
AAR MAY BE ORGANIZED                             »» Within a knowledge exchange
                                                    initiative, AARs can be conducted at
  »» as a formal or informal review process.        various times: after an event, activity,
  »» with an external facilitator or with the       task, etc.
     team lead as facilitator.                   »» Create and maintain an open and
                                                    trusting environment during an AAR so
USE IT TO                                           that participants may speak freely. This
  »» capture best practices and identify            is important to achieve best results.
     lessons to be learned from
     implementation experience.
  »» capture multiple perspectives of what
     happened and why.
  »» encourage feedback for improved
     performance.
  »» enable knowledge transfer.
164


                           FOCUS GROUP



      WHAT IS A FOCUS GROUP?
      A structured discussion protocol that brings together a group of people, typically unfamiliar
      with each other but with a common interest, to give their opinions on a particular topic or area.


      A FOCUS GROUP IS ORGANIZED                                ›› be objective.
        »» generally for groups of six to eight.                ›› listen well.
        »» with a facilitator experienced in focus-             ›› draw people into conversations in a
           group processes.                                        group environment.
        »» as a facilitated interview-based                     ›› foster an atmosphere that enables
           interaction that also allows for group                  information sharing.
           discussion.                                       »» Prepare an introduction script that
        »» to be brief; however, it should last at least        ›› explains the purpose.
           one hour.
                                                                ›› explains how the focus group will be
        »» to record the discussion and its                        conducted.
           outcomes.
                                                                ›› describes the facilitator’s role.
      USE IT TO                                              »» Make sure you explain to participants
        »» test assumptions for improved decision-              how you will capture their opinions.
           making.                                           »» Consider using consent forms,
        »» test target audience response/reaction               especially if the focus group is to be
           to products/services/campaigns before                audio or video recorded.
           they are launched.                                »» Select a room that is conducive to
        »» support development of a strategic                   discussion.
           focus.                                            »» Prepare minutes or a summary document
        »» encourage participants to build on                   in a timely fashion (within three to five
           each other’s perspectives.                           days after the focus group session is
                                                                completed); review carefully before making
      HOW TO USE IT                                             decisions about next steps.
        »» Find an experienced facilitator who can


      FOCUS GROUP VS QUESTIONNAIRE                         A key difference between focus groups
      Focus groups can capture more qualitative            and interviews is that focus groups include
      information than a questionnaire because             multiple participants, which allows a
      discussion is organized around an interview          discussion with several perspectives about
      approach. Questionnaires, however, are               a project or a topic. Unlike interviews, focus
      better for reaching a much larger audience;          groups allow participants to build upon one
      you don’t have to schedule face time (virtual        another’s responses and come up with ideas
      or face-to-face).                                    they may not have thought of on their own.


      FOCUS GROUP VS INTERVIEW
                                                                                                     165


                                                 INTERVIEW



WHAT IS AN INTERVIEW?
A question-and-answer engagement with an individual about a specific topic, usually
following a pre-determined set of questions.


AN INTERVIEW ACTIVITY MAY BE                     HOW TO USE IT
ORGANIZED                                         »» Before conducting the interview,
                                                     prepare your questions and a clear
  »» with well-known experts and
                                                     protocol. Share these with the
     practitioners.
                                                     interviewee ahead of time.
  »» following a formal, semi-formal, or
                                                  »» Be ready to dig deeper into the
     informal protocol.
                                                     topic with follow up and clarification
  »» in real-time, virtually, or face-to-face.       questions.
  »» to be captured and shared.                   »» Make sure you capture the interview
                                                     in print, or as an audio or video
USE IT TO                                            recording.
  »» raise awareness about a topic, issue, or     »» Decide how you plan to promote and
     cause.                                          share the interview.
  »» capture tacit knowledge.                        ›› Depending on your audience, you
  »» lend credibility to a topic by providing           may select one or more ways to
     an expert perspective.                             disseminate the interview: print,
  »» share practical experience.                        radio/podcast, and/or video/TV.
  »» enable knowledge sharing.                       ›› If you plan to broadcast the interview,
                                                        consider if it is going to be live or pre-
  »» replace a presentation.
                                                        recorded and edited.




CELEBRITY INTERVIEW
A celebrity interview allows high-profile        Celebrity interviews can be conducted in a
individuals to                                   structured or informal way. It is important for
                                                 the interviewer to establish rapport with the
  »» express their perspectives on a topic or    celebrity being interviewed.
     theme.
  »» contribute to the mass appeal of a
     development initiative.
  »» give visibility to social causes.
166



                         SELF-ASSESSMENT


      WHAT IS A SELF-ASSESSMENT?
      An evaluation of how an individual rates him/herself on a specific set of competencies,
      behaviors, or attitudes.


      A SELF-ASSESSMENT MAY BE                       HOW TO USE IT
      ORGANIZED                                       »» Prepare a self-assessment plan that
                                                         includes
        »» using online or paper surveys.
                                                         ›› the goal of self-assessment.
        »» as an in-person interview.
                                                         ›› when to begin the assessment.
        »» at the beginning or end of a project.
                                                         ›› how often to assess.
      USE IT TO                                          ›› who will complete the assessment.
        »» learn what participants need from the      »» Create self-assessment instrument.
           knowledge exchange.                        »» Compare results of self-assessments to
        »» gauge changes in participant                  at least one of the following:
           competencies, behaviors, or attitudes         ›› actual performance data
           after the exchange.
                                                         ›› manager assessments
                                                         ›› industry standards
                                                      »» Draw lessons learned.
                                                                                                   167



                                                     SURVEY


WHAT IS A SURVEY?
The gathering of data or opinions from participants using a structured set of questions.



A SURVEY ACTIVITY MAY BE ORGANIZED                     ›› Check that the questions are not
  »» virtually and/or face-to-face.                       general, ambiguous, or leading.
  »» in real-time with immediate feedback.             ›› Follow good practice in designing the
                                                          response options.
  »» over a set period of time.
                                                    »» Use close-ended questions when
  »» at any stage of a project.
                                                       appropriate and if you plan to aggregate
USE IT TO                                              responses. Developing the right
                                                       questions is more time-consuming
  »» monitor progress.                                 up front, but makes analysis of results
  »» evaluate results.                                 simpler.
  »» capture participants’ perspectives and         »» Use open-ended questions when
     opinions or surface areas of consensus.           you require a narrative response, and
  »» conduct a needs assessment or prioritize          limit the number of response options.
     areas of action.                                  Carefully consider your capacity to
                                                       process open-ended responses and how
  »» enable knowledge sharing.
                                                       you will use them; narrative responses
HOW TO USE IT                                          require more intensive data analysis for
                                                       interpreting the results.
  »» Use surveys before, during, or after a
                                                    »» Use balanced rating scales and label
     knowledge exchange to make learning
                                                       each option on the scale to increase the
     more relevant, interactive, and useful for
                                                       likelihood that respondents understand
     the participants.
                                                       the scale.
  »» Surveys are effective polling tools to
                                                       ›› Provide space for additional
     prompt discussions, surface areas for
                                                          explanation or comments at the end of
     consensus or stakeholder ownership, and
                                                          your survey.
     prioritize important next steps or action
     items and outputs from knowledge               »» Pretest your survey before distribution—
     exchanges.                                        ideally, with individuals similar to your
                                                       respondents.
  »» Make sure you are asking the right
     questions. Once you determine the right
     questions for your context, check that
     they are written clearly and concisely.
     Keep the following in mind:
     ›› Include simple instructions.
     ›› Use brief, tightly focused questions that
        cover one subject.
168


                             SWOT ANALYSIS*



      WHAT IS A SWOT ANALYSIS?
      A structured examination to identify a program or organization’s internal strengths
      and weaknesses as well as any external/internal opportunities and threats (Strengths,
      Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threat Analysis).


      A SWOT ANALYSIS MAY BE                                         ›› Opportunities
         »» conducted by a facilitator.                                 ‹‹ What opportunities are open to
                                                                           you?
         »» done individually by participants or in
            groups.                                                     ‹‹ What trends could you take
                                                                           advantage of?
         »» face-to-face or virtual.
                                                                        ‹‹ How can you turn your strengths
      USE IT TO                                                            into opportunities?
         »» manage and eliminate weaknesses.                         ›› Threats
         »» help increase awareness and as a                            ‹‹ What threats could harm you?
            prelude to strategy formation.                              ‹‹ What is your competition doing?
         »» stimulate new ideas and uncover                             ‹‹ What threats do your weaknesses
            opportunities.                                                 expose you to?
         »» enable knowledge transfer.                            »» Ask participants to identify the relative
                                                                     importance of strengths, weaknesses,
      HOW TO USE IT                                                  opportunities and threats in relation to
         »» Create a worksheet to help participants                  the knowledge exchange context.
            document their answers to these key                   »» Determine how you will analyze the
            questions:                                               answers and debrief with participants.
            ›› Strengths                                             ›› Consider creating a SWOT chart that
               ‹‹ What do you do well?                                  shows the results visually.
               ‹‹ What unique resources can you                      ›› Consider how you will involve the
                  draw on?                                              participants in consensus building.
               ‹‹ What do others see as your                         ›› Consider using the final SWOT
                  strengths?                                            analysis matrix to identify additional
                                                                        knowledge exchange needs or build
            ›› Weaknesses
                                                                        a road map of next steps.
               ‹‹ What could you improve?
               ‹‹ Where do you have fewer resources
                  than others?
               ‹‹ What are others likely to see as
                  weaknesses?




      * A SWOT analysis is sometimes referred to as an internal-external analysis.
THE ART OF
KNOWLEDGE
EXCHANGE
A Results-Focused Planning Guide
for Development Practitioners in
the Water Sector
