National Survey and Segmentation of Smallholder
             Households in Tanzania

Understanding Their Demand for Financial, Agricultural,
                and Digital Solutions




         Jamie Anderson, Collins Marita, and David Musiime




                            May 2016
Table of Contents
    A. Introduction and Key Findings ............................................................................................. 1

           •    Introduction.................................................................................................................. 1

           •    Key Findings.................................................................................................................. 2

    B. About the Project................................................................................................................. 7

    C. Findings .............................................................................................................................. 11

           1. Smallholder Household Dynamics in Tanzania: Who They Are ................................. 11

           2. Smallholder Household Dynamics in Tanzania: Income and Expenses ..................... 24

           3. Agricultural Risks and Mitigation among Smallholder Households in Tanzania........ 35

           4. Mobile Phone Tools.................................................................................................... 46

           5. Financial Inclusion among Smallholder Households in Tanzania .............................. 51

           6. Tools and Financial Inclusion: Segmentation ............................................................. 61

           7. Desires and Aspirations .............................................................................................. 99

           8. Concluding Observations .........................................................................................107

Annex 1: Methodology and Design .............................................................................................109

Annex 2: Random Forest Algorithm ............................................................................................114




Acknowledgments
The authors sincerely thank Colleen Learch, Charles Wanga, Alexander Molar, Denise O’Reilly, Mamadou
Thiam, and Mary Ann Fitzgerald (InterMedia) and Scott Gardner for their valuable contributions and feedback
during the preparation of this paper.
A. Introduction and Key Findings


Introduction
Tanzania is a democratic republic of 44 million people with an average annual gross domestic product (GDP)
growth rate of 6 percent to 7 percent over the past decade. Agricultural development is key to attaining the
United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals by 2030 and is the mainstay of the economy, contributing
over 27 percent of GDP and employing 78 percent of the labor force. 1 Tanzania is largely self-sufficient in its
main staple crop, maize, though it still faces shortfalls in some years due to weather variability.

Smallholder farmers in Tanzania face a range of challenges, including obtaining and paying for quality seeds,
fertilizer, and pesticide, and transporting goods to market along run down road networks. Compounding this is
a lack of post-harvest storage facilities for crops and, if available, their prohibitive cost. Both the public and
private sector in Tanzania have made significant investments in the country’s financial infrastructure in recent
years, but the provision of credit, insurance, and payments facilities for smallholders is still lacking.

Mobile money services are a powerful tool to bring the unbanked and those using only informal financial
services into the formal financial sector. They transform a mobile phone from a communications tool into a
channel for low-cost financial services such as payments, transfers, insurance, credit, and savings. Mobile
money is established and maturing in Tanzania overall, serving new business areas and enabling a wider range
of digital payments, including among some smallholder households.

In close collaboration with the Financial Sector Deepening Trust–Tanzania (FSDT), CGAP conducted a nationally
representative survey of smallholder households between August and September 2015. 2 This study sought to
develop a comprehensive map of the many activities, interests, aspirations, barriers, and pressures facing
smallholder families. The questionnaire also explored nonagricultural household activities, financial practices
and interests, and challenges and aspirations of these households.

This report shares the findings, observations, and insights from the national survey of smallholder households
in Tanzania. It begins with an overview of the research approach, core program objectives, research questions,
preliminary phases of development, and topics included in the questionnaire. It then profiles smallholder
farmers in Tanzania, including their household demographics, farmographics, decision-making processes, self-
identification and characterization of their identity, and motivations to do their work.

This comprehensive exploration of the lives of smallholder households sought to answer the following three
questions:




1
  USAID, Economic Growth and Trade (https://www.usaid.gov/tanzania/economic-growth-and-trade)
2
  A total of 3,503 households were selected for the survey in Tanzania, of which 3,020 were found to be occupied during
data collection. Of these, 2,993 were successfully interviewed, yielding a household response rate of 99.1 percent. In the
interviewed households 5,935 eligible household members were identified for the multiple respondent questionnaire.
Completed interviews were conducted with 5,034 of them thus yielding a response rate of 84.8 percent for the Multiple
Respondent questionnaire. Among the 2,993 eligible household members selected for the Single Respondent
questionnaire, 2,795 were successfully interviewed, corresponding to a response rate of 93.4 percent.



                                                                                    Introduction and Key Findings       1
     •    What does the community of practice need to know or do to support smallholder households build
          more resilient and productive livelihoods?
     •    How can financial mechanisms respond to the relevant needs and desires of smallholder households?
     •    What types of market strategies and approaches can cultivate uptake and use of financial
          mechanisms?

The report examines how smallholder families manage their income and expenses and the issues they face
that often lead to financial instability. It then describes financial inclusion in the smallholder sector, exploring
household tools that are essential for financial inclusion, including mobile phones and national identification
documents, as well as adoption of financial products, awareness, barriers, and interests. The sections that
follow outline the five distinct segments of the smallholder population in Tanzania, mapping out groups of
smallholder farmers that matter for fostering greater product adoption, and delving into their demand for
various financial mechanisms. A full explanation of the research methodology and the user guide that
accompanies the data set are included in Annex 1.

This report has three main goals:

    1. Build the evidence base for those working in agricultural finance so that assumptions and/or isolated
       observations can be paired with known, reliable representative data about the population.
    2. Connect financial service providers, mobile network operators, policy makers, funders and other
       stakeholders with the unique realities of smallholder farmers in Tanzania that could otherwise be
       overlooked, oversimplified, or erroneously generalized from other smallholder farmer markets.
    3. Catalyze conversations about “what’s next” for smallholder- centered strategies, products, and
       approaches that facilitate agricultural and household finance.


Key characteristics of smallholder households In Tanzania
Smallholder farmers in Tanzania have a deeply committed, reciprocal relationship with their land and farm.
Farmers prioritize, invest in, and cultivate their farming activities year in and year out. In return, agriculture
provides their household with sustenance, income, even investments and growth opportunities. Agriculture is
part of the identity of smallholder households, a point of pride, and a legacy for future generations. Many see
a future in farming, and they look for opportunities to be more successful in their agricultural endeavors.

Smallholders know that working in agriculture is intensive, risky, uncertain, and challenging. Mitigating risk is
top-of-mind for these farmers because they know doing so is essential to sustaining their livelihood, even if it
comes at a cost. Because of these harsh realities, farmers may consider diversifying or opting for more steady
income streams, if they ever present themselves, but a transition away from agricultural activities is more
likely to be driven by need, not a dislike for farming. In short, most smallholder farmers enjoy and find great
satisfaction in farming. However, new or potential farmers are more likely to diversify their skills and seek a
livelihood that does not involve raising crops or livestock. Smallholders in Tanzania tend to be a more tenured,
seasoned group that is devoted to farming. A few farmers are relatively young, suggesting that some attrition
into a life outside of farming has already happened.

Smallholder households in Tanzania have six fundamental characteristics that can help the community of
practice foster greater productivity and resiliency:

    •    Common dependence on agriculture. Agriculture provides the main income stream into the
         household, and supports nearly all of the household activities. Most families consume what they grow,
         trade goods for other necessities, and sell their crops or livestock for income. Still, despite the various

2   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
    uses of their agricultural production, smallholder households often fall short of their monthly income
    needs. Most households live at or below the poverty line, and many live in extreme poverty. They work
    hard, have big aspirations, and take pride in their accomplishments.

•   Crop uniformity. Smallholders in Tanzania tend to grow a limited number of crops, and maize is almost
    always one of them. This lack of diversity can be a significant risk because families end up depending
    on a single crop that is likely to be abundant in the marketplace and is priced low.

•   Seasoned, tenured population. Tanzania’s smallholder households are led by farmers who have
    worked in agriculture most of their lives. They tend to be older (40 and above). The proportion of
    younger smallholders (under 30) is much smaller, and there are relatively few newcomers in the
    agricultural sector.

•   Risky practices run counter to desires. Smallholder households in Tanzania struggle to access funds to
    manage emergencies and do not have insurance or any other ways to mitigate risk. Their aspirations,
    however, reflect a financially astute, responsible, and prosperous mindset. Smallholder families in
    Tanzania want to save, and do so whenever possible. They want to insure their activities and have
    more options for mitigating risk. Their appetite for financial security is high, despite the lack of access
    to formal financial services and challenging circumstances.

•   Limited channels for new, relevant information. Smallholders in Tanzania are an insulated group and
    largely depend on each other for agricultural and financial information. They do not turn to other
    people or groups that could offer more contemporary insights into agriculture or finance, mostly
    because they do not currently have access to these knowledgeable resources who are outside their
    social groups. Only a few smallholders are involved with any agricultural organizations; 10 percent are
    a member of a planting, weeding, and harvesting group and 1 percent are part of a producers’ group.
    In addition, apart from mobile money, very few have connections with financial institutions that could
    offer knowledge and advice. Only 10 percent of smallholders in Tanzania, for example, personally have
    a bank account registered in their own name. For smallholders to access knowledgeable resources,
    they need to be able to tap into networking channels that are new to them, and these channels need
    to be able to provide accurate information to farmers in a format/language that is not intimidating and
    that they can easily understand.

•   Smallholder farmers are not a monolithic group. Smallholder households in Tanzania are diverse. Five
    main personas, or segments, that vary based on a collection of demographic and psychographic factors
    can be identified within this population—farming for sustenance, battling the elements, diversified and
    pragmatic, options for growth, and strategic agricultural entrepreneurship. Some of these segments
    struggle more than others, have fewer resources, are more vulnerable, and depend more heavily on
    what their land will yield, without much to preserve or increase that yield. For example, of the five
    segments of smallholder households in Tanzania, the diversified and pragmatic segment has
    persevered through very difficult times, but its experiences have eroded positive sentiments toward
    farming and farmers in this segment would find a life outside of agriculture appealing. Other segments
    of smallholder households in Tanzania have had great success in agriculture and intend to expand their
    agricultural activities. They could lead smallholder farmers into a more digital, diversified world of
    modern farming in Tanzania.




                                                                            Introduction and Key Findings     3
Smallholder households in Tanzania and financial mechanisms
Smallholder farmers in Tanzania are exposed to, aware of, and interested in financial tools, both in general and
as they relate to their agricultural activities. The large majority can envision a mobile phone as a banking tool,
as well as an agricultural tool. They want access to credit, savings, and loan products that currently are out of
reach. They exhibit positive financial practices, in that they save for what they can and anticipate expenditures
before they occur.

There are also positive signs of digital readiness within the population of smallholder households in Tanzania.
Many have an acceptable form of identification for opening an account, have their own or a household mobile
phone, and use SMS text or advanced functions of mobile phones. Nearly half (49 percent) are financially
included, primarily through mobile money. No other formal channel contributes as much to access to financial
inclusion as does mobile money among smallholder families in Tanzania.

There are also signs of a digital ecosystem taking hold within the population. Half of smallholder farmers have
mobile money accounts and, within that group, some are using those accounts for more than basic purposes.
Data from the survey shows that some smallholders are using mobile money accounts for savings, money
transfer between accounts, merchant payments, and payments for services. There are signs of active use, and
a keen desire to do more with a mobile money account.

The digital financial services that smallholder farmers in Tanzania want most are those that enable them to live
the life they aspire to have—helping them afford agricultural or household essentials, mitigate risk, and plan
for the future. They want to purchase inputs on credit or have a savings plan to attain them. They want to have
access to resources that help them improve their agricultural practices. They want a payment plan for school
fees and to save for medical expenses, a financial shock that can devastate their household.

Financial inclusion has yet to reach the most vulnerable smallholders in a meaningful way. There remain
segments of smallholder households in Tanzania that struggle day-to-day, rely on their agricultural output for
sustenance, lack financial service tools, even informal ones, and stand to gain a great deal from access to even
basic financial mechanisms.


Recommendations for building strategies and approaches
Five areas emerge from this study that need to be addressed to cultivate the uptake and expansion of relevant
financial mechanisms among smallholder households in Tanzania.

    •   Continue to invest in building a digital ecosystem for farmers. Efforts to expand digital financial
        services to all Tanzanians have included smallholder farmers, albeit at a lower rate than the general
        population. Half of smallholders in Tanzania are financially included, mostly through mobile money,
        and some are using their digital accounts for more than just basic transfers. A good foundation is now
        in place to expand and deepen the use of mobile money among smallholder farmers. The hard work of
        introducing the concept of digital financial services and getting consumers started has already begun
        for portions of the population. Stakeholders have the opportunity to continue this momentum,
        especially to retain and educate the relatively few young smallholders in Tanzania. This is particularly
        important because mobile money is the most likely avenue to financial inclusion for most smallholders
        in Tanzania.

    •   Empathize with life desires and circumstances. Most smallholder farmers do not want to leave
        agriculture and instead want to expand and improve their agricultural practices. They want to move
        away from risky financial practices and behaviors and find ways to build greater economic stability, but

4   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
        many smallholders feel excluded from mechanisms that can help them do just that. They feel they do
        not have the right type of identification, a mobile phone, or enough money to open an account, and
        sometimes smallholder farmers just are not aware that these mechanisms are relevant to them. To
        drive product use, service providers can appeal to the pride that smallholders take in their agricultural
        activities and the vision they have for their future, emphasizing the relevance of their products to their
        challenges and aspirations.

    •   Build on the inherent appeal of and desire for financial mechanisms. Smallholder households are
        keenly aware of the importance of positive financial practices, such as saving, investing, staying on
        budget, and planning. They try, within their means and resources, to plan or save for the essentials in
        life and agriculture, even if circumstances limit their ability to save for unexpected events or
        emergencies. Financial service providers do not have to convince smallholder farmers in Tanzania that
        they should plan, save, or invest in their future. They do have to provide a realistic means for doing so.

    •   Bundle products to meet both immediate and long-term needs. This research tested potential dual-
        mode products that combined both short- and long-term benefits to farmers. Loans that include
        insurance, loans that include banking or savings accounts, mobile money accounts that include savings,
        and other bundled products can go a long way in appealing to the immediate needs and establishing a
        desirable long-term practice among smallholder households in Tanzania. Furthermore, smallholders do
        not want their hard labor squandered due to bad weather or pests; they want access to insurance and
        convenient, reliable information to mitigate those risks.

    •   Target messaging and initiatives based on where smallholders are on their financial inclusion
        journey. The household economics, outlook on life, and life experiences, including education, of
        smallholders affect their uptake of financial mechanisms. About half of smallholder households in
        Tanzania are already financially included and many are ready for more advanced financial services
        versus those at the beginning of this journey.

Smallholder family households’ circumstances and the surrounding ecosystem in Tanzania may mean they
struggle day in and day out, live below the poverty line, and are vulnerable to the harsh realities of farming.
Their mindset, however, suggests commitment, diligence, and a desire for a prosperous future.




                                                                               Introduction and Key Findings      5
6   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
B. About the Project

Working to build the evidence base on smallholder farming households, CGAP sought to explore in more detail
the financial and agricultural lives of smallholder households in Tanzania. This research project began with a
comprehensive attitudinal and behavioral research program in January 2015. It consisted of a survey with an
accompanying household listing and a segmentation. The research sought to answer three key questions.



           What do we need to know or                                                                   What type of market
                                                       How can financial mechanisms
           do to help smallholder farmer                                                           strategies and approaches can
                                                       respond to the relevant needs
           households build resilient and                                                            cultivate uptake and use of
                                                        and desires of smallholders?
              productive livelihoods?                                                                  financial mechanisms?




Existing Research and Stakeholder Discussions. Building on other household surveys in sub-Saharan Africa
(e.g., agricultural censuses, Living Standards Measurement Study, FinScope, AgFiMS), as well as the 2013 CGAP
global segmentation, 3 the methodology and survey instrument were designed to answer several questions
about smallholder households in Tanzania: 4

     •    Understanding and segmenting smallholder households. What are the key characteristics of the
          smallholder sector at the national level (e.g., demographics, poverty status, hectares, crops and
          livestock, level of intensification, market relationships)? What segments of smallholder households
          emerge?

     •    Attitudes and perceptions of smallholder households. How do smallholder households perceive their
          agricultural activities (e.g., a subsistence activity, business), and do household members, especially
          youth, see a future in farming? On the financial side, what is the level of comfort with digital financial
          services and other channels and service providers?

     •    Opportunities to improve financial inclusion for each segment of smallholder households. What
          financial mechanisms does each segment of smallholder households demand, through the lens of
          customer needs (crop storage, transfer, build, secure, etc.) as well as products (e.g., credit, deposit,
          insurance)? What informal and formal suite of financial mechanisms does each segment currently use
          and where are opportunities to add value with new services and/or delivery channels?

The first months of the project included a series of deep-dives into the existing research in the smallholder
space to determine what questions had already been asked, identify their findings, and determine how to
drive our objectives to complement and expand on them. Several sources were consulted in the process,
including IFC, Dalberg, Finmark Trust, AgFiMS, FinScope, FAO, GIZ, IFAD, and the World Bank. The secondary
research inspired a series of questions that informed discussions with stakeholders.




3 See Christen, Robert Peck, and Jamie Anderson. 2013. “Segmentation of Smallholder Households: Meeting the Range of Financial Needs in Agricultural
Families.” Focus Note 85. Washington, D.C.: CGAP, April.
4
  CGAP retained the services of InterMedia to manage the survey in partnership with Ipsos Tanzania. Additional national surveys and segmentations of
the smallholder sector, led by CGAP, are also underway in Côte d’Ivoire and Bangladesh. A national survey and segmentation of smallholders was
released in Mozambique in March 2016 and in Uganda in April 2016.

                                                                                                                       About the Project           7
FSDT plays a central role in advancing financial inclusion in Tanzania, and CGAP and FSDT collaborated closely
in this research with smallholder households. This coordination was important to inform the research, and its
results will contribute to FSDT’s market research and developing strategy. Several additional stakeholders and
organizations also contributed valuable insights and considerations into the design of the research project as
key informants, and took part in an informal technical working group to review and guide the research. Some
of these key organizations included the Agricultural Council of Tanzania, Bank of Tanzania, the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation, CARE, International Fund for Agricultural Development, One Acre Fund, and Vodacom.
World Bank Group colleagues and the Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS) team also provided
valuable insights and expertise.

The extensive secondary research and discussions with stakeholders identified a gap in information about the
actual needs, desires, and perceptions of smallholder households. There seemed to be significant amounts of
data and insight into the habits of smallholder households in Tanzania that examined either their agricultural
activities or tracked their financial lives, but nothing to date had taken a more comprehensive view of the
smallholder household at the national level. This research project also sought to connect the agricultural data
to the financial data to dissect the interactions and intersections between the two.

Identifying Target Group of Smallholder Households. Discussions with stakeholders in sub-Saharan Africa and
extensive desk research concluded there is no clear agreement on the characteristics that define a
smallholder, due in part to the heterogeneity of this client group. 5 As a result of both of these lines of
investigation, a matrix was developed of each of the key criteria that could be used to distinguish smallholder
households from other households (see Table 1).

                          Table 1. Key criteria in defining smallholder households
    Key Criteria                     Considerations
    Market orientation               Subsistence vs. market-oriented vs. hybrid
    Landholding size                 Threshold
    Labor input                      Family vs. hired
    Income                           Shared income from farming, multiple sources
    Farming system                   Technology, irrigation
    Farm management responsibility Owner, influence over how to farm
    Capacity                         Storage, management, administration
    Legal aspects                    Formal vs. informal
    Level of organization            Member of group—producer, supply chain, service provider

The desk research also found a range of definitions of a smallholder household across countries, reflecting the
variations in their agricultural sectors. Some governments define smallholders solely by their landholding size.
The range differed greatly across Asian and African countries, from a maximum of 2.5 hectares in India up to a
maximum 46 hectares in Malaysia. Research shows that smallholder farmers in Tanzania dominate the
agricultural sector, with average farm sizes being between 0.9 and 3.0 hectares; they cultivate 5.1 million
hectares annually, of which 85 percent is food crops. 6 Smallholder farmers contribute to over 75 percent of
total agricultural outputs in Tanzania, producing mainly for home consumption, and using traditional
technologies. (Figure 1). 7



5 Defining Smallholders: Suggestions for a RSB Smallholder Definitions; Roundtable on Sustainable Biomaterials; October 2013.
6 Rugumamu. “Empowering Smallholder Rice Farmers in Tanzania to Increase Productivity for Promoting Food Security in Eastern and Southern Africa.”
Agriculture & Food Security, 2014 (3):7.
7 Salami, Adeleke, Abdul B. Kamara, and Zuzana Brixiova. 2010. “Smallholder Agriculture in East Africa: Trends, Constraints and Opportunities.” Working

Papers Series N° 105 African Development Bank, Tunis, Tunisia.

8     Smallholder Households in Tanzania
A high watermark was developed to identify smallholder households in a way that was as inclusive as possible,
without diluting or distorting the population representation. The identification measure used two key
criteria—landholding size and livestock count—as the starting point for identifying the target group for sample
selection. A series of self-identifying perception questions was also asked to ensure that each smallholder
household selected for the study viewed agriculture as a meaningful part of the household’s livelihood,
income, and/or consumption.

Before the survey, a household listing exercise was conducted to identify potential households to include in
the survey sample. The listing exercise targeted smallholder households with the following criteria outlined in
Figure 1.
                             Figure 1. Listing criteria to identify relevant smallholder households
                      Household with up to 5 hectares
                                     OR                                    Agriculture provides a meaningful
                        Farmers who have less than                           contribution to the household
                                                              AND
                            50 heads of cattle or                         livelihood, income, or consumption
                          100 goats/sheep/pigs or                                   (self-identified)
                               1,000 chickens



Listing Operation and Methodology. Working closely with the Tanzania Bureau of Statistics, InterMedia
conducted a household listing operation in randomly selected enumeration areas (EAs) between 7 December
2015 and 20 January 2016 to construct a reliable sampling frame. The listing operation was implemented by
Ipsos Tanzania, InterMedia’s local field partner.

Then, using a stratified, multi-stage sample, 8 each region was classified into urban and rural areas based on the
2012 population census, and the sample was selected independently in each urban and rural stratum. The 212
EAs were randomly selected as primary sampling units with probability proportional to the number of
households in the EAs. The Tanzania smallholder survey was the third survey in the series following the surveys
in Mozambique and Uganda. Fieldwork in those two countries has experienced a lot of failed call backs where
identified eligible households and household members could not be interviewed during the time allocated to
fieldwork in each country. As a result, the final sample size fell slightly short of the target in Mozambique and
Uganda. For this reason, in Tanzania the number of households selected in each EA was increased from 15 to 17
following the household listing operation in all sample EAs. A total of 3,503 households was selected for the
survey, of which 3,020 were found to be occupied during data collection. Of these, 2,993 were successfully
interviewed.

Questionnaire Design. The questionnaire design process began by using the secondary research and
stakeholder discussions as core inputs into the measurements to shape the survey instrument. This process
also involved defining the end goal of the research by doing the following:

     •    Drawing from existing survey instruments
     •    Considering the objectives and needs of the project
     •    Accounting for stakeholder interests and feedback
     •    Learning from the ongoing financial diaries in-country 9
     •    Building from a series of focus groups conducted early on in the study


8
 The methodology and design are detailed in Annex 1.
9 CGAP conducted financial diaries with smallholder households in Mbeya, Tanzania, which were implemented by Bankable Frontier Associates. This
research was ongoing during the development and design of this national survey and segmentation of smallholder farming households in Tanzania.

                                                                                                                      About the Project           9
These foundations led to a framework for the survey instrument for sharing across stakeholders, and to ensure
the research captured all of the necessary elements of a smallholder household. The framework was built
around the sections outlined in Table 2.

                                         Table 2. Framework for the smallholder questionnaire
                                                    Household                  Agricultural
     Section           Demographics                 economics                   practices                Mobile phones               Financial services
                                                                                                          Use (own or
                        Relationship                   Income                Land ownership                                          Formal institutions
                                                                                                           borrow)
                                                                                                                                       Less than formal
                       Marital status                    Jobs                  Crops grown              Types of phones
                                                                                                                                         institutions
                                                   Government                                                                         Informal financial
                             Age                                                 Livestock                      Barriers
                                                    payments                                                                          service providers
                    School attendance                Saving                    Value chain                       Habits                  Importance
     Examples
                                                                                 Market
     of topics             Income                     Investing                                                 Products                 Borrowing
                                                                               relationship
     covered
                                                    Emergency
                     Decision-making                                               Water                                                  Products
                                                     planning
                    Financial situation           Risk mitigation                  Labor
                      Progress out of
                                                                                   Inputs
                    Poverty Index (PPI)
                                                                                  Storage
                                                                                  Coping

Organization of the Survey. The questionnaire was divided into three parts, as indicated in Table 3, to capture
the complexity of smallholder households. Certain questions were asked of all relevant individuals in the
household, not just one household member. 10 It was designed in this way to capture the complete portrait of
the smallholder household, as some members of a household may work on other agricultural activities
independently, without the full comprehension of their involvement and responsibilities by members of the
household.

The questionnaire was translated into Kiswahili and then pretested and validated to ensure the integrity of the
questions and that they were in line with social and cultural customs.

Data collection took place from 6 February to 8 March 2016, using computer-assisted data collection tools that
regularly yielded data for analysis and quality control to provide timely feedback to field staff. The Tanzania
smallholder household survey was implemented by Ipsos Tanzania, InterMedia’s local field partner.

                                               Table 3. Design of smallholder questionnaires
                                   Household survey                        Multiple-respondent survey                   Single-respondent survey
                                    questionnaire                                  questionnaire                              questionnaire
     Target                 Head of the household, spouse,            All household members over 15                    One randomly selected
     respondent(s)          or a knowledgeable adult                  years old who contributed to the                 adult in the household
                                                                      household income or participated
                                                                      in its agricultural activities
     Topics covered         • Basic information on all                 • Demographics                                      •   Agricultural activities
                              household members                        • Agricultural activities                           •   Household economics
                            • Information about                        • Household economics                               •   Mobile phones
                              household assets and                                                                         •   Formal and informal
                              dwelling characteristics                                                                         financial tools

10   The three questionnaires can be found in the user guide that accompanies the data set for this research.

10        Smallholder Households in Tanzania
C. Findings11

1.         Smallholder Household Dynamics in Tanzania: Who They Are

Smallholder farmer households span the country, are mostly led by men, and reflect an aging
population
The 2012 Tanzanian census divided the country into 30 regions; each region was then assigned to one of the
following five zones for purposes of this nationally representative survey:
     • Border zone: Ruvuma, Iringa, Mbeya, Rukwa, and Kigoma
     • Coastal zone: Tanga, Pwani, Dar es Salaam, Lindi, and Mtwara
     • Inland zone: Dodoma, Arusha, Kilimanjaro, Morogoro, Singida, Tabora, Manyara, Njombe, and Katavi
     • Lake zone: Shinyanga, Kagera, Mwanza, Mara, Simiyu, and Geita
     • Zanzibar zone: all regions within Zanzibar

Smallholder households span Tanzania’s five zones, with a near equal distribution across Lake, Inland, Coastal,
and Border regions. Just 2 percent of smallholder households are located in Zanzibar, reflecting its more
contained size (Figure 2).

A man is close to three times as likely to be the head of a smallholder farming household in Tanzania as is a
woman (74 percent men vs. 26 percent women) (Figure 3). While smallholder households are male-
dominated, women play an important, if not critical, decision-making role in its agricultural activities.

The Tanzanian smallholder population reflects a more mature, older generation, where heads of households
are more likely to be aged 50 or older (41 percent) than they are to be under 40 (36 percent). In fact, close to
two-thirds of the population are over the age of 40 (64 percent).

With just over one-tenth of smallholders in Tanzania under the age of 30 (Figure 4), there is a relatively small
presence of the “next generation” of farming within the existing population.




11Graphs and tables in the main body of the report include references to the unweighted base size and, therefore, at times, will not look proportional to
graphs that show subsets of other graphs. Due to rounding, not all percentages in charts total 100.

                                                                                                                                      Findings        11
           Figure 2. Regional Zone                         Figure 3. Gender of head of household           Figure 4. Age of head of household
        Sample: Smallholder households,                       Sample: Smallholder households,               Sample: Smallholder households,
                   n=2,993                                               n=2,993                                        n=2,993

                         Zanzibar
                           1%
                                    Border                    Female                                    15-29                  13%
         Lake                        24%
         28%
                                                               26%
                                                                                                        30-39                                 25%


                                                                                                        40-49                             23%
                                     Coastal
                                      22%
                                                                                      Male
                Inland                                                                74%               50-59                       17%
                 25%


                                                                                                          60+                             22%




Smallholder heads of households typically have at least a primary education, and most completed primary
school (Figure 5). Twenty-three percent have never attended school. Education beyond primary school is rare
among smallholder heads of households in Tanzania. Only 9 percent advanced through secondary school, and
2 percent received a higher education. There is a sharp gender difference in education levels (Figure 6); almost
twice as many women than men have never attended school.

            Figure 5. Highest education attended by head of                       Figure 6. Highest education attended by gender of head of
                               household                                                                  household
                Sample: Smallholder households, n=2,993                                    Sample: Smallholder households, n=2,993
                                    64%
                                                                                             19%
                                                                                             1%                              35%
                                                                                                                              1%

      23%                                                                                    80%
                                                                                                                             64%
                                                  9%
                         1%                                   2%

                                                                                             Male                          Female
      Never Pre-primary Primary                Secondary    Higher
     attended                                              education           Primary or higher     Pre-primary      Never attended school
      school


Three-quarters of smallholder household heads in Tanzania are married or cohabiting, and about one-fifth are
divorced, separated, or widowed (Figure 7). The gender of the head of household differs by marital status;
men lead married homes, while women lead divorced homes, and are nearly as likely to lead single homes
(Figure 8).




12    Smallholder Households in Tanzania
              Figure 7. Marital status of head of household                    Figure 8. Marital status by gender of head of household
                Sample: Smallholder households, n=2,993                                Sample: Smallholder households, n=2,993


                                     Single /                                                            11%
                          Divorced / never                                        46%
                         Separated / married
                          Widowed      4%
                                                                                                                                76%
                             21%                                                                         89%
                                                                                  54%
                                                                                                                                24%
                                       Married /                            Single / never           Married /               Divorced /
                                       Cohabiting
                                         76%                                   married               Cohabiting             Separated /
                                                                                                                             Widowed
                                                                               Male head of household          Female head of household




The household size and composition varies across smallholder households in Tanzania. There are very small
households of just one person (6 percent), as well as those with eight or more people (14 percent) (Figure 9). 12
While the median household size is five, and the mode 13 is four, the presence of smallholder households with
double that number may point to the general fluidity of circumstances and family life and the importance of
risk mitigation. This fluidity could be positive (e.g., a new breadwinner arrives to contribute to the household),
and also could present challenges (e.g., the very young and very old who need special care and are not in a
position to contribute financially to the household).

A large household size is also significant because a majority of households fall below the poverty line 14 (Figure
10). Smallholder farming households live without much of a cushion to absorb additional expenses.

         Figure 9. Number of people in                          Figure 10. Poverty status of                 Figure 11. Extreme poverty status of
                   household                                            household                                         household
        Sample: Smallholder households,                       Sample: Smallholder households,                  Sample: Smallholder households,
                    n=2,993                                               n=2,993                                           n=2,993

            One               6%                                  Above                                      Above poverty
            Two                                                 poverty line                                line: >$2.50/day
                                     11%
                                                                   15%                                             15%
          Three                         14%
           Four                            17%
            Five                           17%                                                               Poor: $1.25-
                                                                                                              $2.50/day
             Six                        14%                                                                                        Extreme poor:
                                                                                                                 30%
          Seven                 8%                                                                                                <$1.25/day 55%
  Eight or more                                                       Below poverty line
                                         14%
                                                                            85%


Roughly two-fifths of all smallholder households typically do not have enough money for food, and another
two-fifths have money only for food and clothes (Figure 12). This is mainly because smallholder households
farm for subsistence, and the little money earned from selling what they grow goes to buying the food that is
not available or things to cook the food with, further relegating other basic needs and luxuries.


12 For the purposes of this survey, “household” was defined as a group of related or unrelated persons who live together in the same dwelling unit, eat

together from the same pot, and share most household expenses. Visiting relatives and domestic workers are not considered members of a household
and are, therefore, not be included in this study. The listing manual in the user guide seems to contradict this: “Note, however, that domestic servants
and other workers living and eating in the same household should be included as household members.”
13 Mode depicts the most common household size.
14 From Progress out of Poverty Index 2013, Grameen Foundation (http://www.progressoutofpoverty.org/).




                                                                                                                                       Findings       13
                                          Figure 12: Household's current financial situation (self-assessed)
                                                      Sample: Smallholder households, n=2,993
                                                         45%
                         38%


                                                                                        14%
                                                                                                                        1%

               Not enough money for           Enough money for food         Enough money for food              Afford to buy certain
                       food                      and clothes only          and clothes and can save a            expensive goods
                                                                           bit, but not enough to buy
                                                                                 expensive goods


Smallholder farmers’ outlook on life and their agricultural work is in stark contrast to their household
circumstances. Despite limited means and economic vulnerability, most report they have aspirations for a
better life (94 percent) and are looking for opportunities to improve their current situation (88 percent) (Figure
13). This suggests a proactive rather than a reactive approach to their lives. Fewer farming households in
Tanzania take a more passive approach, believing it is not wise to plan too far ahead because their luck might
factor more heavily into future outcomes than their own planning (74 percent).

There is also an absence of impulsivity within smallholder farmers in Tanzania. Only three in 10 (31 percent)
self-identify with the statement “I am impulsive,” and 15 percent feel they say things without thinking them
through. Instead, we see a more deliberate, thoughtful population that carefully considers their lives, actions,
and livelihoods.
                                        Figure 13. Do you agree or disagree with the following statements?
                                                       Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


                     I always work hard to be the best at what I can do                                    98%                                 2%
                            I do things after giving them much thought                                     96%                                 4%
                                                 I have my aspirations                                    94%                                 6%
             I always look for opportunities for improving my situation                                 88%                                  12%
 It is not always wise for me to plan too far ahead because many things…                          74%                                  26%
                                                        I am impulsive            31%                                   68%
                               I say things before I think them through     15%                                   85%


                                                                  Agree      Disagree




Farm as income, a source for subsistence and trade
Smallholder farmers in Tanzania typically individually own their plots of land, either through a lease or
certificate, or under customary law. Half (49 percent) own by lease or certificate. The size of this group makes
them good candidates for financial services, especially loans, because they have documentation of assets to
borrow against. Roughly two-fifths of these farms fall under customary law (Table 4), which means there is
usually no official documentation of ownership. State- and communally owned farms are in the minority, and
are mostly concentrated in the Dar es Salaam region.


14    Smallholder Households in Tanzania
                                                 Table 4. What is the form of ownership of your land?

                                    Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in agricultural activities, n=4,742
                                                          Total      Mbeya          Dar        Morogoro        Kagera          Mwanza
              Individual ownership with
                                                          49%          34%          57%           39%              45%             54%
              lease or certificate
              Individual ownership under
                                                          44%          61%          25%           54%              51%             38%
              customary law
              Communal (resources are
                                                           2%           4%           2%            0%              0%              0%
              shared)
              State ownership                              2%           1%           7%            4%              0%              0%

              Other                                        3%           0%           9%            3%              2%              3%

              Don’t know                                   0%           0%           0%            0%              1%              5%


Land tends to be in small plots. 15 Roughly half of smallholder households in Tanzania own less than one
hectare of land, and the same applies to those who rent (Figure 14). The mean size of owned land (80 percent)
is 2.06 hectares and that of rented land (68 percent) is 1.69 hectares.

                                         Figure 14. How many hectares (ha) of agricultural land do you own?
                                                Sample: Smallholder households reported land n=4,742


            above 4 ha                     8%
                                                   12%

              3 to 4 ha           3%
                                   4%

              2 to 3 ha                              13%
                                                      14%

              1 to 2 ha                                                  24%
                                                                        23%

              0 to 1 ha                                                                                                      51%
                                                                                                                      47%


                                                         Rented (3,466)         Owned (n=4,110)


Smallholder families in Tanzania primarily grow food and staple crops (as opposed to cash crops), and there is
a collection of commonly grown crops. Sixty-three percent of smallholders grow only staple crops, while only 1
percent grow only cash crops. Thirty-seven percent of smallholders grow both types. Maize is the most
commonly grown staple crop, followed distantly by beans, cassava, sweet potatoes, and rice (Figure 15). Only
small percentages grow cash crops, which tend to be sunflower, sim sim (i.e., sesame), coffee, cotton, cashew
nut, and sugar cane (Figure 16).




15 Land size is a difficult to measure accurately. Many recent examinations of land measurement say that using farmer estimates of land size usually lead

to errors. Carletto, Gourlay, Winters. “From Guesstimates to GPSstimates,” World Bank, July 2013 (http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2013/07/30/000158349_20130730084245/Rendered/PDF/WPS6550.pdf). The goal
in this body of work is to rely specifically on what farmers perceive to be their own land size to better understand their way of thinking and processing
agricultural and household decision-making.

                                                                                                                                      Findings        15
             Figure 15. Which of the following crops do you grow?           Figure 16. Which of the following crops do you
                             Food and Staple Crops                                        grow? Cash Crops
                Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in              Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in
                         agricultural activities, n=4,742                           agricultural activities, n=4,742
                Maize                                               90%    Sunflower                   16%
                Beans                         44%
              Cassava                       37%                              Sim sim              9%
     Sweet potatoes                    28%
                 Rice                  29%                                    Coffee           5%
         Groundnuts                   26%                                     Cotton         4%
             Bananas           14%
            Sorghum           11%                                         Sugar cane        3%
          Pigeon pea         10%
           Amaranth         8%                                            Cashew nut         4%
           Tomatoes          9%                                              Coconut        2%
                Millet     4%
      Irish potatoes       4%                                                Palm oil      1%
              Orange      3%
               Onions     3%                                                 Tobacco       1%
             Cabbage      3%                                              Pyretherum      0%
             Cowpea       2%



Most households use their crops in multiple ways, including consumption. Consuming crops rates the highest
of the three main uses (consuming, selling, or trading), among food or staple crops and even among some cash
crops (Figures 17 and 18). The worrying trend is the dependency on a single crop either for consumption or for
sale. It shows that, in the event of any shock, families will be deeply affected (Figures 19, 20, and 21).

Households also engage in some combination of selling, consuming, or trading their crops, with selling and
consuming the most common combination:

      •     62 percent of smallholders grow crops to sell and consume
      •     17 percent grow crops to sell, trade, and consume
      •     1 percent grow crops to trade and consume
      •     0.2 percent of smallholders grow crops to trade and sell




16        Smallholder Households in Tanzania
         Figure 17. Food crop by percentage of consumption, sale, or                        Figure 18. Cash-crop type by percentage of
                                      trade                                                         consumption, sale, or trade
          Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in agricultural                     Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in
                               activities n-4,742                                                       agricultural activities
                          Multiple responses allowed                                                Multiple responses allowed
                      (% of people who grow each crop)                                           (% of people who grow each crop)

       Maize…                            38%                              93%   Pyretherum      0%
                         10%                                                                                                            100%
                                                                                  (n=20)              17%
     Cassava…                     28%                                 87%
                   3%                                                               Cotton       4%
                                                                      87%                                                            97%
       Beans…                             42%                                      (n=248)       5%
                     6%
       Sweet…                                                      81%             Tobacco      3%
                   2%       17%                                                                                                    93%
                                                                                    (n=62)      1%
  Paddy Rice…                                      57%             80%
                            15%                                                     Coffee        12%
                                                                                                                                  92%
      Banana…                           35%                        79%             (n=247)      3%
                   3%
                                                          69%                   Cashew nut             23%
Irish poratoes…                          38%                                                                                   81%
                         10%                                                      (n=198)            12%
 Ground nuts…                            40%                 70%
                       7%                                                          Sim sim                  33%
                                                                                                                               81%
                                                          69%                      (n=427)        8%
 Pigeon peas…                                     55%
                       7%
                                                         66%                     Sunflower                         58%
    Sorghum…                      26%                                                                                 70%
                       7%                                                         (n=747)         8%
   Amaranth…                                     50%         70%
                       7%                                                          Coconut                           63%
                                                                                                            36%
                                                            72%                    (n=111)      2%
      Onions…                                             69%
                    4%
                                                             68%                 Sugarcane                        51%
    Cabbage…                                                                                              30%
                       7%                                 69%                     (n=173)       2%
    Cowpeas…                      28%                  61%
                                                                                   Palm oil                          62%
                      7%                                                                                  30%
                                                                                    (n=42)      3%
       Millet…                                 47% 58%
                          11%
   Tomatoes…                                            66%
                                                       63%
                     5%
      Orange…
                  1%                      42%50%


                            Consume       Sell     Trade                                                Consume         Sell       Trade




  Figure 19. Number of crops grown for
               consumption                             Figure 20. Number of crops grown               Figure 21. Number of crops grown
  Sample: Smallholder farmers who grow                             for selling                                    for trading
              crops, n=4,726                            Sample: Smallholder farmers who                Sample: Smallholder farmers who
                                                              grow crops, n=4,726                            grow crops, n=4,726
                                                                                                                   1 crop       More
                        More than 1                                                                                 11%        than 1
                           78%                                                                                                   8%
                                                                                  More
                                                        1 crop                   than 1
                                                         32%                      49%



                                                                                                                  Do not
        1 crop                                                       Do not                                       trade
         21% Do not consume                                         sell what                                      what
               what they grow                                         they                                         they
                     1%                                               grow                                         grow
                                                                      19%                                          81%




                                                                                                                                 Findings      17
CGAP’s National Survey of Smallholder Households in Mozambique 16 also explored crop choice and use. In
Mozambique, there tends to be just a few select crops that are of utmost importance to smallholder farmers.
Most smallholder households in Mozambique grow maize (88 percent); the next most common crop grown is a
distant second, cassava (55 percent), followed by beans (47 percent). Maize growers consider it their most
important crop (66 percent); no other crop comes close to the importance of maize. Only 10 percent of
cassava growers consider it their most important crop, coming in second to maize.

Tanzania shows a different dynamic, with much less crop diversity. In Tanzania, maize stands out as the most
important crop for smallholders (Figure 22). The over-dependency on maize is also seen in terms of
consumption and as a source of revenue (Table 5). Many smallholder farmers grow maize because it is easier
to store, convert to food, and sell than other crops.


            Figure 22: Which of the following crops that you grow          Table 5. Which of the following crops that you grow do you consume
                is the most important to you and your family?                          the most / get the most money from selling?
                  Sample: Smallholder farmers participating in                        Sample: Smallholder farmers who grow crops
               agriculture who grow at least one crop, n=4,726             (% of smallholder farmers participating in agriculture who grow and
                                                                                              consume/sell at least one crop)
                                                                                                 Consumption (n=4,702)*         Selling (n=3,803)
                Maize                                         62%         Maize                            65%                         19%
                                                                          Cassava                          10%                          5%
                                                                          Paddy                             8%                         14%
                Paddy            10%                                      Beans                             4%                          9%
                                                                          Banana                            4%                          2%
                                                                          Sweet potatoes                    1%                          1%
              Cassava            9%                                       Sunflower                         1%                          8%
                                                                          Sorghum                           1%                          0%
                                                                          Amaranth                          1%                          1%
                Beans       4%                                            Groundnuts                        1%                          4%
                                                                          Sim sim                           0%                          5%
                                                                          Coffee                           N/A                          4%
               Banana       3%                                            Cotton                            0%                          4%
                                                                          Pigeon peas                       0%                          4%
                                                                          *Responses ranked by consumption and later by sales



Half of smallholder farmers in Tanzania raise livestock of any kind (Figure 23), and those who raise livestock do
so for both consumption and for sale. Chicken (broilers) are the most common form of livestock, followed by
indigenous goats, indigenous cattle, and chicken (layers) (Table 6). The majority of those who rear chicken
(broilers) also do so for consumption (Figure 24). In some cases, households are five to seven times more likely
to rear an animal for income than for consumption. They are close to three times more likely to rear
indigenous cattle and chicken for income than consumption.




16   http://www.cgap.org/publications/national-survey-segmentation-smallholder-households-mozambique

18       Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Figure 23. Do you have any livestock,
herds, other farm animals, or poultry?
  Sample: Smallholder farmers who                                                        Table 6. Which of the following do you rear?
 participate in agricultural activities,                                       Sample: Smallholder farmers who have any livestock, herds, other
                n=4,742                                                                        farm animals or poultry, n=2,585
                                                                                                  Multiple responses allowed
                                                                              Chickens—broilers                                48%
                                                                              Indigenous goats                                 39%
                                                                              Indigenous cattle                                32%
                                                                              Chickens—layers                                  24%
                                                                              Pigs                                             13%
                                                                              Sheep                                            11%
  No                                                                          Cattle—dairy                                      8%
 48%                                                                          Goats—meat                                        5%
                                  Yes                                         Cattle—beef                                       1%
                                  52%                                         Bees (number of hives or boxes)                   1%
                                                                              Goats—dairy                                       1%
                                                                              Fish (number of ponds)                            0%




                               Figure 24. Which of the following do you rear and get income/consume?
                            Sample: Smallholder farmers who have any livestock, herds, other farm animals or
                                                            poultry, n=2,585
                                                      Multiple responses allowed


                                   Indigenous cattle                         20%
                                                                                                                   70%
                                                    Pigs         5%
                                                                                                             63%
                                           Cattle – dairy        6%
                                                                                                             63%
                                   Indigenous goats                         19%
                                                                                                       56%
                                 Chickens – broilers                                           42%
                                                                                                      54%
                                   Chickens – layers                         20%
                                                                                                     51%
                  Bees (number of hives or boxes)           1%
                                                                                                     51%
                            Fish (number of ponds)          0%
                                                                                               44%
                                                  Sheep      4%
                                                                                         36%
                                           Goats – meat     2%
                                                                                         35%
                                           Goats – dairy    1%
                                                                                   28%
                                           Cattle – beef    1%
                                                                      11%

                                                  Rear to consume           Rear to get income




                                                                                                                               Findings      19
Women have a significant role in decision making
Men head nearly three-quarters of smallholder households in Tanzania (Figure 4), yet agricultural decision-
making more frequently occurs between a husband and a wife than by the husband alone. In every agricultural
decision-making category, decisions are made jointly more frequently than they are made independently, by
either gender (Figure 25). The most frequently made joint decisions concern harvesting, planting, and crop
sale.

There are fewer cases of joint decision-making around purchasing inputs and livestock, even though it is still a
male–female decision in a plurality of homes. In cases where decisions are not jointly made, it is more likely
that men make the decisions in these matters.

                                               Figure 25: Agricultural decision making
                                              Sample: Smallholder households, n=2,993


                   When to harvest        46%                       20%          23%         4% 7%

                      What to plant       45%                       19%          24%         4% 8%

           Quantity of crops to sell      44%                   18%            23%       3% 12%
                                                                                                     Both

      When and where to sell crops        43%                  17%             24%       3% 12%      Wife/girlfriend
                                                                                                     Husband/boyfriend
           Purchase of farm inputs       40%                  19%              27%        4% 10%     Another family member
                                                                                                     Not applicable/Don't know
          Where to borrow money          39%                  17%          25%         3% 16%

             When to sell livestock     34%             12%         18%   3%           33%

        Quantity of livestock to sell   33%            12%       18%      3%         33%




Dedicated to agriculture and looking to expand their activities
Tenure and farming experience lead smallholder farming households in Tanzania. The majority of the heads of
households leading smallholder families in Tanzania have been farming for more than 10 years (Figure 26).
Relatively few newcomers to farming lead smallholder households; 3 percent have been farming under two
years and 18 percent for two to five years.

In terms of the length of time that smallholders have been farming, it is mostly the youngest generation (under
29 years old) that is newer to farming. Relatively few individuals adopted farming as a livelihood later in life
(Figure 27).




20   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
            Figure 26. How many years have you been                                  Figure 27. How many years have you been farming?
                            farming?                                                                  By age of respondent
          Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in                                     Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,638
            household's agricultural activities, n=2,638                           (% of smallholder farmers who participate in household’s
                                                                                        agricultural activities and in each age category)
                                               Less than 2 years
                   3%
                                                                             28%
                           18%                                                               59%
                                               2 to 5 years
                                                                             27%                             80%             82%              90%
                                                                                             20%
                                               6 to 10 years                 45%
                                                                                             21%             11%             8%              5%
                               16%                                                                            9%             10%             5%
      63%
                                                More than 10              Aged 15-29      Aged 30-39     Aged 40-49       Aged 50-59      Aged 60+
                                               years                       (n=637)         (n=675)        (n=532)          (n=358)         (n=436)

                                               Don’t know                        Five or less years     Six to 10 years     More than 10 years




Consistent across smallholder households in Tanzania, farming emerges as a life choice and part of an identity,
which can give some insights into the motivations of this population, despite its dire financial state. Ninety-
seven percent of smallholder farmers intend to keep working in agriculture (Figure 28). This intent is consistent
across tenure in farming and both genders. In fact, roughly eight in 10 of the newest smallholder farmers
(farming less than two years) believe they will continue farming (Figure 29). Their dedication to agriculture is
high despite their financial situations (Figure 30). Nearly all (97 percent) of those who self-report they “don’t
have enough money for food” (even though it might be the farm that feeds the family) want to continue
working in agriculture.

       Figure 28. Do you intend to keep                                   Figure 29. Do you intend to keep working in agriculture?
             working in agriculture?                                                   By number of years in farming
       Sample: Smallholder farmers who                              Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in household's agricultural
     participate in household's agricultural                                                  activities, n=2,638
               activities, n=2,638                                 2%                     3%                       3%
                                                                                                                                          15%
                     NoDon't
                     3%know
                        0%
                                                               98%                       97%                       97%
                                                                                                                                          83%




                        Yes                            More than 10 years          Six to 10 years        Two to five years        Less than two years
                        97%                                (n=1,699)                   (n=409)                (n=443)                     (n=80)
                                                                                               Yes          No




                                                                                                                                         Findings        21
                                              Figure 30. Do you intend to keep working in agriculture?
                                              By household's current financial situation (self-assessed)
                               Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in household's agricultural activities, n=2,638




                      98%                                97%                               96%                                89%



       We have enough money for food We don't have enough money for We have enough money for food                  We can afford to buy certain
              and clothes only                    food               and clothes and can save a bit,                    expensive goods
                                                                    but not enough to buy expensive
                                                                                 goods


                                                  Yes, intend to continue working in farming



Agriculture is not only what feeds the household, it is a livelihood that smallholders enjoy. Nearly all agree with
the statement “I enjoy agriculture” (93 percent). A large majority of smallholders want to expand their work
(94 percent), and many (67 percent) are satisfied with what they have achieved (Figure 31). Four in five think
of agriculture as the legacy they leave their children. Almost a similar amount want their children to continue
in agriculture (74 percent), although the age and tenure distribution suggest that the children have left the
farm. Agriculture is hard work, and smallholders know the realities (Figure 31).


Farming realities introduce a three-way clash for smallholders: dedication and commitment
meet high-risk, dire financial circumstances, prompting openness to alternative livelihoods
Smallholders have mixed feelings about their future aspirations. They profess a strong commitment to
agriculture, enjoy the work, and want to expand. At the same time, most (88 percent) work to make ends
meet, and would take full-time employment if the opportunity arose (Figure 31). They might not want to leave
agriculture, but they know that there might be other ways to make a living.

                                              Figure 31. Do you agree or disagree with the following statements?
                                    Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in household's agricultural activities, n=2,638

                                                      I enjoy agriculture                                  93%                                       7%
          I want to expand my agricultural activities by looking at new…                                     94%                                     6%
                                         I just want to make ends meet                                    88%                                     11%
              I would take full time employment if I were offered a job                                  86%                                      14%
  I regard my agricultural activities as the legacy I want to leave for my…                            81%                                     18%
                           I want my children to continue in agriculture                            74%                                    26%
       I am satisfied with what my agricultural activities have achieved                         67%                                     33%
                                 I would not want to do any other work                     50%                                    50%

                                                                        Agree   Disagree




22    Smallholder Households in Tanzania
The youngest generation of farming household heads in Tanzania (ages 15–29) show even more interest in full-
time employment outside of farming. Close to 90 percent would take full-time employment if offered (Figure
32); just over four in 10 feel they would not want to do any other type of work but farming.

                                      Figure 32. Do you agree or disagree with the following statements?
                                     Sample: Smallholder farmers aged 15-29 who participate in household's
                                                          agricultural activities, n=637

                         I would take full-time employement if I were
                                          offered a job
                                                                                            89%                    11%

                      I am satisfied with what my agriculture activities
                                        have achieved
                                                                                      61%                    39%

                        I would not want to do any other kind of work            45%                   55%

                                                                 Agree     Disagree


A similar clash emerged from the national survey of smallholder households in Uganda. 17 Smallholder farmers
largely want to remain in farming, but the stark realities of their limited resources and agriculture’s abundant
risks force some of them to think about life outside of farming, even if they have no other skills.

Uganda’s smallholder farming population is a lot younger than that of Tanzania. The relatively limited number
of young smallholder farmers in Tanzania exacerbates the threat of this clash, especially since most of
Tanzanian’s smallholder farmers have at least a primary school education. Observing these realities, coupled
with the relatively small number of young farmers (12 percent), could mean further flight from agriculture,
inducing a negative impact on the future of the industry in Tanzania.




17
     http://www.cgap.org/publications/national-survey-and-segmentation-smallholder-households-uganda

                                                                                                                         Findings   23
2.      Smallholder Household Dynamics in Tanzania: Income and Expenses

Farming activities determine household income
Smallholder households in Tanzania indicate that they generate most of their income from growing and selling
crops. It is likely that smallholder households also undertake other activities to supplement their income,
including making and selling goods. In addition to agriculture, smallholder households in Tanzania earn income
through other jobs, including a retail or manufacturing business, occasional jobs, or some type of business
service. Roughly one-fifth of smallholders in Tanzania receive remittances from family and friends (Figure 33).

Eight in 10 smallholder farmers in Tanzania say that farming is their primary job (i.e., where they spend the
most of their time); 19 percent point to labor, their own business, or something else as their primary
employment (Figure 33). Looking more closely at their sources of income, 68 percent of smallholders grow
crops to sell, and 21 percent rear livestock to sell (Figure 34).

             Figure 33. What is your primary job?            Figure 34. Do you generate income from any of the
             Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=5,034                            following sources?
                                                                   Sample: Smallholder farmers, n= 5,034
                1%                                                       Multiple responses allowed
                1%
                          8%                            Growing something and selling it,
                                                       such as crops, fruits, or vegetables
                                                                                                                 68%
           2%     7%
                                                       Rearing livestock, poultry, fish, or
                                                      bees and selling it or its byproducts
                                                                                                        21%

                                                        Running own business in retail or
                                                                manufacturing
                                                                                                        18%

                                  81%                 Earning wages from occasional job            11%

                                                           Getting money from family or
                                                                     friends
                                                                                               8%

                                                      Running own business by providing
                                                                  services
                                                                                               8%

                                                            Earning wages or salary from
                Farmer                                               regular job
                                                                                               7%
                Laborer
                                                      Getting a grant, pension, or subsidy
                Business owner
                                                                  of some sort
                                                                                              1%
                Professional (e.g. doctor, teacher)
                Shop owner                                                          Other          9%
                Other




24   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Smallholders in Tanzania who contribute to their household incomes consistently shared that growing and
selling crops are their most important, most reliable, and most enjoyable income-generating activities (Table
7). By comparing these three perspectives, data show that a large portion of smallholder farmers in Tanzania
equate the most important income source with the one they like getting the most and with the one that is the
most reliable. Running their own businesses in either retail or manufacturing, or working as some type of
service provider, seems important to Tanzanian smallholders, although generally only a tenth engage in this
type of work. Another point to note is that raising livestock to earn additional income is not common in
Tanzania, perhaps leaving room for growth potential as an alternative income-generating activity.


                                          Table 7. Which of the following income sources is…?
                                                 Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=5,034
                              Income sources                                Most important Like getting the most                     Most reliable
 Growing something and selling it, such as crops, fruits, or vegetables          59%                59%                                 59%
 Running own business in retail or manufacturing (selling or making
                                                                                 10%                10%                                    10%
 goods)
 Earning wages from occasional job                                                7%                 7%                                     7%
 Other                                                                            6%                 6%                                     6%
 Earning wages or salary from regular job                                         4%                 4%                                     4%
 Rearing livestock, poultry, fish, or bees and selling it                         5%                 5%                                     4%
 Running own business by providing services                                       5%                 5%                                     5%
 Getting money from family or friends                                             4%                 3%                                     3%
 Getting a grant, pension, or subsidy of some sort                                1%                 1%                                     1%
 Don’t know                                                                       0%                 0%                                     0%

Aside from crop production, very few smallholder households in Tanzania earn income from other agricultural
activities or sources (Figure 35). Five percent rent land, and very small percentages of farmers are involved in
supplementing their income by providing services to farmers or agricultural processors, buying products for
resale, or processing crops into other products for sale.

                                             Figure 35. Are there any other ways that you get income?
                                                       Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=5,034
                                                             Multiple responses allowed



                  5%
                                                      3%                                  2%                                   1%

    Rent land to farmers for farming   Buy/get agricultural products from Buy/get agricultural products from     Provide a service to farmers or
               purposes                  farmers/processors and sell it   farmers and process it/change it to    processors of farming products
                                                                           another form (e.g., maize to flour)   (e.g., renting ploughs, tractors,
                                                                                                                         other equipment)


More broadly, beyond agriculture, only 1 percent of smallholder households in Tanzania receive payments
from the government (e.g., pension, disability, welfare) (Figure 36). This low level of government transfers to
smallholders may be because most of them may not have had formal employment or would not have been
contributing to the Tanzania National Social Security fund. Of the few smallholders who do receive these
payments, half pick them up in cash and in person and just over two-fifths receive it via direct deposit to a
bank account (Figure 37). Comparatively, the 2015 nationally representative Financial Inclusion Insights survey




                                                                                                                                    Findings         25
of Tanzanian adults showed that 8 percent of Tanzanians with an active bank account receive government
payments through a bank, and 2 percent through mobile money. 18

          Figure 36. Do you receive income from                       Figure 37. How do you usually get this government payment?
                  any of the following?                                   Sample: Smallholder farmers who receive income from
          Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=5,034                                         government benefits, n=60
                Multiple responses allowed                                            Multiple responses allowed

                                                                     Personal pick-up in cash                                   50%

      Occasional sale of my                                  Direct deposit to a bank account                             42%
          belongings
                                                   47%
                                                                             Courier delivery      3%
        Occasional paid
     assignments, labor for           13%                                         Digital card     3%
             hire
     Remittances/monetary                                  Deposit to your m-money account       0%
       or other help from            12%
        family or friends                                     Deposit to another person's m-
                                                                     money account
                                                                                                 0%
      Government benefits
       (pension, disability,    1%                              Western Union/Money Gram         0%
          welfare, etc.)
                                                                    Personal pick-up in check    0%
         Other donor/NGO
             benefits
                               0%                             Deposit to an agent’s m-money
                                                                          account
                                                                                                 0%




Self-reported expenses are within income, but smallholders still struggle to get by
Most (85 percent) of smallholder households in Tanzania live below the poverty line, earning under $2.50 a
day or in extreme poverty, earning under $1.25 a day (Figures 11 and 12). Just over one-third of households
said their expenses are below 50,000 TZS ($23) or less each month. Twenty-seven percent said they need
between 50,001 and100,000 TZS ($23 and $46), and 37 percent of smallholder households require 100,001 TZS
($45) or more per month to manage their households (Figure 38).

Household income among smallholder households in Tanzania usually surpasses expenses, leaving majorities
of farming households in a slightly better financial situation month to month. This phenomenon should not be
taken for granted. The national survey of smallholder households in Mozambique shows a different tendency:
smallholder households barely break even each month and typically have to spend more than they earn in
Mozambique. 19

In Tanzania, more than three-quarters of smallholder households bring in more than what they need each
month. Those that need more to survive, however, are more vulnerable to falling short each month. Three in
10 households requiring 200,001 TZS or more per month fall short. This is more than double the percentage of
those earning between 50,001 and 100,000 TZS each month (Figure 39). While lower-income smallholder
households in Tanzania are vulnerable, we see more budgeting within means, and a self-reported lower
incidence of falling short. The self-reported data also suggest there is a little bit of extra money each month for
the lower-income households that can be redirected into a financial account, potentially increasing this



18   InterMmedia Tanzania Financial Inclusion Insights (FII) Tracker survey Wave 3 (N=3,001, 15+), July–August 2015.
19   CGAP National Surveys & Segmentation of Smallholder Households in Mozambique, 2015–2016;
http://www.cgap.org/publications/national-survey-segmentation-smallholder-households-mozambique

26        Smallholder Households in Tanzania
group’s attractiveness as a consumer segment. Certainly, the experience of falling short is far more
pronounced in the higher-income groups of smallholder households in Tanzania.

                Figure 38. What is the minimum amount
                                                                         Figure 39. What is the minimum amount your household
              your household needs to survive per month
                                                                       needs to survive per month (for personal expenses) and is your
                    (for personal expenses)? Quintile
                                                                                             income sufficient?
               Sample: Smallholder households who gave
                                                                                  Sample: Smallholder households, n=2,887
              a minimum amount for households' survival
                                n=2,959



         Below 50,000 TZS                                         Below 50,000 TZS
         (US$23.00 or less)
                                                     36%                                          48%              14%           38%
                                                                  (US$23.00 or less)

      50,001 - 100,000 TZS                                    50,001 - 100,000 TZS
     (US$23.00 - US$46.00)
                                                27%          (US$23.00 - US$46.00)
                                                                                          22%       14%                    64%


     100,001 - 150,000 TZS                                   100,001 - 150,000 TZS
     (US$46.00 - US$69.00)
                                      13%                    (US$46.00 - US$69.00)
                                                                                        9% 8%                        83%


     150,001 - 200,000 TZS                                   150,001 - 200,000 TZS
                                    9%                       (US$69.00 - US$91.00)
                                                                                       11% 7%                        82%
     (US$69.00 - US$91.00)

        Above 200,000 TZS                                        Above 200,000 TZS
                                         15%                       (US$91.00 +)
                                                                                   6%6%                            88%
          (US$91.00 +)


                                                                                 Don't make enough         Breaking even       Surplus




Traditional spending framework and prudent spending
Expenses for smallholder households in Tanzania reflect a traditional spending framework, where smaller
expenses are incurred more regularly than larger expenses (Figure 40). 20 Grocery expenses are the most
common, frequent expense for smallholders. They could potentially serve as a merchant channel for
expanding the digital financial ecosystem, given how much of the population this touches.

Separate from grocery expenses, bills (including utilities, rent, or airtime) and transportation costs are incurred
more often. Other, larger expenses such as investments, educational expenses, home repairs, or large
purchases, are incurred infrequently, if at all.

The presence of a traditional spending framework among smallholder farmers in Tanzania is a characterizing
factor for the country. This framework is not always present to the extent to which it is in Tanzania. In
Mozambique, for example, smallholder households do not have smaller, regular expenses and instead focus
their purchases on larger, infrequent expenditures. 21




20
   Expense question displayed in Figure 42 did not include agricultural inputs, such as seed and fertilizer, specifically, and instead focused on broad-
based household needs. Farming was only specific as a part of investments.
21 Ibid.




                                                                                                                                          Findings         27
                                        Figure 40. How often do you make each of the following expenses?
                                                     Sample: Smallholder households, n=5,034


                              Grocery purchases                                      78%                                     18%    4%
            Bills: utility bills, airtime, rent, etc.             36%                         28%                      35%
                                   Transportation       8%                           61%                                29%
                           Emergency expenses           7%                              72%                                  16%
 Medicine, medical payments, hospital charges           5%                                  85%                                    9%
        Investment in business, farm or future 2%                              60%                                 37%
            Educational expenses, school fees 2%                           51%                                   46%
                                    Home repairs 0%                       54%                                    45%
 Make a large purchase, such as TV, house, etc. 0%             29%                                         69%


                                                  At least once a week     Less often      Never



Male and female smallholders in Tanzania generally exhibit similar frequency spending habits for expenses. In
each expense category, the proportion of men and women that spent money on that expense at least once a
week is within 1 percent (Table 8). A greater proportion of men, though, spend in all expense categories at
least occasionally. There are also notable differences across geographic demographics. Compared to rural
smallholders, a greater proportion of urban smallholders spend on all expense categories at least once per
week. Additionally, a greater proportion of urban smallholders reported spending on all categories, at least
occasionally, compared with rural smallholders (Table 8).

                           Table 8. Expenses by demographics. Sample: Smallholder households, n=5,034
 Expense                                                       At least once a week / Less often / Never
                                                          Gender                                     Setting
                                                  Male                Female                Rural             Urban
 Grocery purchases                          77% 19% 4% 78% 18% 4% 76% 19% 5% 81% 16% 3%
 Bills: utility bills, airtime, rent, etc. 41% 29% 29% 32% 27% 41% 31% 27% 41% 44% 31% 24%
 Transportation                              9%    65% 25% 8% 62% 33% 4% 63% 32% 15% 59% 25%
 Emergency expenses                          7%    74% 14% 7% 71% 17% 5% 74% 16% 11% 70% 16%
 Medicine, medical payments,                 5%    86% 8%        6% 94% 10% 4% 86% 9%                      7% 84% 9%
 hospital charges
 Investment in business, farm or             2%    64% 33% 2% 56% 41% 1% 57% 40% 3% 64% 32%
 future
 Educational expenses, school fees           2%    53% 45% 2% 50% 47% 1% 48% 50% 3% 58% 38%
 Hope repairs                                1%    60% 38% 0% 49% 50% 0% 53% 46% 1% 56% 43%
 Make a large purchase, such as a            0% 34% 64% 0% 25% 74% 0% 24% 75% 1% 40% 59%
 TV, house, etc.
Due to rounding, percentages w/in demographic may not equal 100%.

Transactions that one would expect to be made with some regularity, such as utility bills, were not made in the
recent past. About 17 percent of smallholder households in Tanzania had paid utility bills in the 30 or 90 days
prior. In the past 90 days, more than two-fifths had deposited money or withdrawn money, about a third had
received money from family or friends, and a quarter had sent money to family members or friends (Figure
41).



28   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
                         Figure 41. Did you do the following activities AT LEAST ONCE in the past 30/90 days?
                                                 Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


                                                          51%                                            53% 57%
                         42%                        43%
                   34%                   31%
                                   24%                                      25%
                                                                      20%               16% 17%
     10% 14%
                                                                                                                       3% 6%

    Pay a school Deposit money Receive money        Withdraw     Send money to Pay utility bills        Buy airtime   Take a loan
        fee                     from family          money           family      (electricity,           top-ups
                                members or                        members or solar lantern,
                                   friends                          friends       water, TV)
                                                    Past 30 days    Past 90 days


Smallholder households in Tanzania have few resources, typically bring in limited funds, and are still obligated
to pay school fees and household costs. Yet there were not a high frequency of transactions in the three
months prior to this national survey of smallholder households. This suggests that smallholder families in
Tanzania make extremely prudent decisions about what to spend and where to spend it, even if it means
cutting back on necessities.


Risky money management practices with few options to mitigate an emergency
Smallholders in Tanzania find themselves in at-risk situations, despite their best intentions and actual desires.
They recognize the importance of sound financial behaviors, such as saving money and preparing for
unexpected events, but despite their best efforts, many have debts and/or expenses greater than their savings
and income.

Twelve percent of smallholders in Tanzania feel they always/most of the time spend more than they make.
They also report that they often cannot pay their bills on time. This could support the theory that they make
tough decisions about what to pay and what not to pay each month to live within their monthly incomes
(Figure 42). The question may not be only about paying bills on time, but about what bills they pay, or would
like to pay, on time but cannot.

Few smallholders in Tanzania have an emergency fund. While saving occurs frequently, the amount saved is
minimal. With minimal savings, their lack of creditworthiness reduces access to financial services and most
importantly their ability to invest (Figure 42). Their inability to access resources and invest limits the options
available to get out of poverty.




                                                                                                                       Findings     29
                                            Figure 42. How often does the following apply to you?
                                                    Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795

                                                                                                               16%
                                                    35%                                 30%
              50%
                                                                                                               48%
                                                    41%                                 50%
              28%
                                                                                                             24%
              16%                                 18%                           17%
              5%                                  4%                            3%                           12%
      I pay my bills on time         My savings are larger than my I have an emergency fund to I spend less money than I make
                                                 debts             cover for unplanned expenses          each month

                                      Always / Most of the time             Sometimes     Rarely       Never



More than half of smallholder households in Tanzania have plans to manage unexpected expenses. The most
common plan is to cope with a death in the family (62 percent). One in two smallholder households have a
plan to cover expenses associated with a major medical emergency (Figure 43). Roughly two in five have a plan
for expected crop failure, loss of harvest or livestock due to weather or disease, and loss of house due to fire,
floods, or natural disasters. Just over a third have plans for how to face bankruptcy; close to a third for how to
cope with job loss or an extended period without food.

                                         Figure 43. Does your family have a plan to manage these
                                       unexpected expenses, which might result from the following?
                                                               "Yes" answers
                                                   Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


                                                     Death in the family                              62%
                                   Major medical emergency, including
                                      illness, injury and childbirth
                                                                                                50%

                                                            Crop failure                      41%
                                     Loss of harvest or livestock due to
                                      weather conditions or a disease
                                                                                              40%
                                    Loss of a house due to fire, flood or
                                          another natural disaster
                                                                                              39%
                                   An extended period of time without
                                          your own food supply
                                                                                          36%

                                 Bankruptcy/loss of a job or a business                  32%

                               Loss of property due to theft or burglary                31%


While most smallholders in Tanzania have not made explicit plans to manage a variety of unexpected
expenses, they are exercising general fiscal preparedness. In the past year, most saved money (Table 9):
    • 84 percent of smallholders report saving money with at least one mechanism
    • 16 percent reporting saving with three or more mechanisms
    • The average number of savings channels used among smallholders in Tanzania is 1.53

The savings channels used tend to be informal; only 8 percent of smallholders in Tanzania used a formal
banking service, compared to 69 percent that used at-home saving (Figure 44).


30   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Male smallholders in Tanzania typically save slightly more than female smallholders. More substantive
differences emerge across levels of education: 79 percent of smallholders who did not attend school saved
with at least one channel in the past 12 months, compared with 86 percent of smallholders who did attend
school. This disparity increases when considering diversity of savings channels: 10 percent of smallholders who
did not attend school used three or more savings channels, compared to the 18 percent who did attend school
and used three or more channels.

Table 9. Saving methods, by demographics. Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795
     Number of           Total                   Gender                               Education*
  savings methods                        Men              Women              Attended         Did not attend
                                                n=1,376                 n=1,419                  n=2,140                 n=655
         0                    16%                 14%                     17%                      14%                    21%
         1                    40%                 39%                     41%                      37%                    49%
         2                    28%                 30%                     26%                      30%                    20%
         3                    12%                 12%                     11%                      13%                     5%
         4                     3%                  3%                      3%                       3%                     3%
         5                     1%                  1%                      1%                       1%                     1%
         6                     0%                  0%                      1%                       0%                     0%
         7                     0%                  0%                      0%                       0%                     0%
         8                     0%                  0%                      0%                       0%                     0%
         9                     0%                  0%                      0%                       0%                     0%
*Pearson = <0.0001


                                                   Figure 44. In the past 12 months, have you
                                                 saved money with any of the following groups?
                                                                  "Yes" answers
                                                      Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


                                                              Home                               69%

                                                      Mobile phone                    37%

                                                  Friends and family            18%

                                             Informal savings group        9%

                                                               Bank        8%

                                            Microfinance institution     4%

                                                              VSLAs      3%

                                                             SACCO       2%

                                                        Cooperative     1%


Even with savings, options for liquidity are limited. The majority of smallholders in Tanzania think they can get
extra money from relatives sending money or by selling some of their assets in the event of an emergency
(Figure 45). Still, the possibility of coming up with a relatively small amount of money—100,000 Tanzania
shillings (approximately $45) 22—in the next month causes some pause. Just about one-quarter said it was very
possible (Figure 46). Nearly half of smallholders said it was either not possible to come up with this money in a



 This amount was derived from the World Bank Global Findex question series, which tests whether respondents could come up with a nominal
22

amount, set at 1/20th GNI per capita in local currency. Source: http://bit.ly/1QqNaHl.

                                                                                                                              Findings     31
month. For those who said it would be possible, they would most likely draw the money from family or friends,
or draw the money from their limited savings.



      Figure 45. In the event of an emergency, could you get                     Figure 46. Imagine that you have an emergency and you
       extra money through relatives sending money or by                         need to pay 100,000 shillings. How possible is it that you
                           selling assets?                                     could come up with 100,000 shillings within the next month?
              Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795                                        Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


                             Don’t                                                                        Don't know
                             know                                                                            0% Very
                  No          0%                                                                                 possible
                 32%                                                                                               21%
                                                                                           Not possible
                                                                                               49%
                                                                                                                Somewhat
                                             Yes                                                                 possible
                                             68%                                                                  29%




Unable to cope with negative events that affect them
More than nine in 10 smallholders in Tanzania endured financial shocks and events in the year prior to this
survey (Figure 47). A significant number of smallholders experienced multiple financial shocks over the past
year. The most frequently reported event was a medical emergency, followed by crop failure and death in the
family (Figure 48). The dependency on one particular crop, maize, makes the significance of crop failure much
more daunting to smallholders. Increased crop diversity could reduce this vulnerability.

         Figure 47. In the past 12 months, have                   Figure 48. In the past 12 months, have you experienced any of these
              you experienced any events?                                                         events?
         Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795                                     Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795
                                                                                        Multiple responses allowed
                                                                   Medical emergencies                                                    76%
          No, have                                                          Crop failure                          36%
             not
          experienc
                                                               Death of a family member                        30%
            ed an                                               Birth of a family member                   23%
            event
             8%                                         Housing repair or construction                     22%
                                                                Income lost due to theft           12%
                                     Yes, experienced
                                         an event
                                                                   Wedding or marriage            11%
                                           92%                        Loss of wage labor         9%
                                                                             Loss of job        7%
                                                                             Relocation         6%


Smallholders in Tanzania feel weather poses the greatest risk to their household agricultural activities (Figure
49). In the past three years, more than three-quarters had their agricultural activities seriously affected by a
weather-related event, while pests or diseases (Figure 50) affected more than two-thirds of smallholder farmers
in Tanzania.



32   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
      Figure 49: What poses the most significant                  Figure 50: Have your agricultural activities been seriously affected
          risk to your agricultural activities?                         by any of the following events in the past three years?
           Sample: Smallholder farmers who                            Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in household’s
         participate in household’s agricultural                                    agricultural activities, n=2,638
                   activities, n=2,638
                                                                         Weather-related event                                        79%
 Weather-related event                        71%
                                                                                Pests / diseases                                67%
        Pests / diseases      12%
                                                         Unexpected price fluctuation of inputs                     32%
           Input prices       8%
                                                            Unexpected price fluctuation in the…                27%
         Market prices       4%
                             2%
                                                                           Health-related event               20%
                 Health
           Input quality     1%                           Market downturn / crops or livestock…           14%

                  Other      1%                                       Breakdown of equipment              13%

              Accidents      0%                                                Accident or theft          11%
         Breakdown of… 0%                                                        Death in family         8%
 Land being taken away       0%                                          Contracts not honored       1%
 Power failure/shortage      0%                                           Political unrest or war    1%
            Don’t know       0%                                                      Don’t know     0%



The five major regions of Tanzania face the same general types of events, but there are some regional
nuances. Problems with pests or diseases are more prevalent in the Lake and Coastal regions. Weather is a
major issue in Zanzibar and the Lake Region (Figure 51), which seems the most affected overall.

Across all experienced events, the majority of smallholders in Tanzania said they rely on their savings to cope.
However, a significant proportion of smallholder farmers in Tanzania reported that they do not to do anything
special to cope when shocks occur (Figure 52). Some reported having sold livestock to cope with price
fluctuations. Smallholders consider livestock to be a reliable fallback, in case expected agricultural revenues fall
short.

                              Figure 51: Have your agricultural activities been seriously affected by any of the following
                                                           events in the past three years?
                               Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in household’s agricultural activities in each
                                                                         region
                  Zanzibar
                                               88%                                 66%               9%
                   (n=45)
                     Lake
                                               85%                                   76%                      32%
                   (n=642)
                    Inland
                                              81%                              63%                  23%
                   (n=856)
                    Border
                                            75%                           55%                 29%
                   (n=541)
                   Coastal
                                           70%                              74%                     22%
                   (n=554)
                           Weather-related event           Pests / diseases         Unexpected market price fluctuation




                                                                                                                                    Findings   33
                                             Figure 52: How did you mainly cope when this happened?
                     Sample: Smallholder farmers who say their agricultural activities have been seriously affected by each category
                                                                                                              25%
                                                                            23%                         23%
                                                                                                                    20%       20%         20%
                                                                                                                                    17%
     15%                                                           14%14%
           12%13%                                                                                                                                    12%13%
                                                   8%                                                                                           9%
                                              6%        5%
                       4% 4%
                                   2%                                                   1% 1% 2%

 Temporary job         Took a loan             Borrowed            Sold livestock       Sold asset      Used savings Did not need to            Did not do
                                                                                                                       do anything               anything
                                                                                                                         special

                    Weather-related event                            Pests / diseases                   Unexpected market price fluctuation
                    (n=2,070)                                        (n=1,758)                          (n=647)




Enough water supply, encouraging growth
A minimal portion of smallholder farmers in Tanzania finds their households’ farming activities limited by the
amount of available water. Just close to one in 10 report having less water than they need for their agricultural
activities. Close to six in 10 report access to a reliable water supply and enough water for their agricultural
activities, but that they would like to have more water to expand their agricultural activities (Figure 53).
Twenty percent have enough for their farms, and are able to satisfy the needs of their agricultural activities.


                                       Figure 53. Which of the following best describes your water situation?
                              Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in household’s agricultural activities, n=4,742



                       I have
         I have
                   intermittent          I always have water
     intermittent
                       water               available, and it is
         water
                    supply, but             enough for the                          I always have enough water available,
        supply,
                     this does               needs of my                              but if I had more water, I would be
      which does
                     not affect         agricultural activities.                    able to grow my agricultural activities
       affect my
                         my                                                                          faster.
      agricultural
                    agricultural
       activities.
                     activities
                                                                                                     59%
        9%           12%                         20%




34     Smallholder Households in Tanzania
3.        Tools for Agricultural Risk Mitigation

Known importance, desire for risk mitigation
Smallholder farmers in Tanzania face the numerous agricultural risks considered routine and common to
agriculture, and their life experiences have taught them to recognize these vulnerabilities. Drought, flood, and
disease, along with lower-than-expected yield or insufficient crop storage, are known and real concerns that
smallholders are working to avoid. The household depends heavily on its own agricultural output. Any one of its
crops is likely to be consumed by the household, sold, and traded, and then any remainder is stored. Risk
mitigation, using whatever means smallholders have at hand, is therefore critical, and smallholder households
in Tanzania want to mitigate against risk even more than current circumstances allow.

Working to mitigate risks often involves planning as well as accessing resources, such as savings mechanisms,
that may often be outside the reach of smallholders. To assess their ability to mitigate risk, the national survey
of smallholder farmers in Tanzania assessed various tools that help foster the following:

      •    Preparedness, in the form of savings for known agricultural expenses
      •    Monetization of crops, in the form of being able to store and sell goods
      •    Maintenance of land, by being able to manage the land (e.g., weeding, planting)
      •    Knowledge, by way of having information channels for agricultural related messages


Preparedness: Importance and ability to save for needs
A majority of smallholders in Tanzania see the importance of setting aside money for certain agricultural
expenses, most notably seeds, pesticides, fertilizer, and equipment (Figure 54). There is less perceived relevance
in setting money aside for security, fuel, and irrigation, transportation, or staff.

Setting money aside for seed, pesticides, fertilizer, and equipment enables a household to begin its planting
season, which explains why this is of the utmost importance. Failure to have the resources to plant means, of
course, there will be no harvest.

                        Figure 54. How important is it to keep money aside for the following agricultural needs?
                        Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in household’s agricultural activities, n=2,638

                                Seeds                                   92%                                    6%2%
                           Pesticides                                   91%                                   6% 3%
                             Fertilizer                                87%                                  7% 6%
                          Equipment                                    87%                                  10% 2%
          Crop storage after harvest                                  84%                                  12% 4%
For future investment opportunities                                 77%                                15%      8%
          For agricultural machinery                               74%                               14%     11%
                Hiring staff/workers                             66%                             17%        17%
                      Transportation                             66%                              20%        14%
                            Irrigation                         61%                            16%         23%
                                  Fuel                        56%                            23%          20%
                              Security                       54%                           19%           28%

                                   Very Important          Somewhat Important             Not important




                                                                                                                      Findings   35
There is a large disparity between what smallholders in Tanzania want to do and what they actually practice
when it comes to agricultural savings (Figure 55). In addition to considering it important, most smallholders
want to be able to keep money aside for their agricultural expenses, particularly for those activities most
closely connected with getting a crop in the ground.

The desire of smallholder households in Tanzania to save surpasses their actual practice, sometimes at a two-
to-one ratio. The gap between aspirations and actual savings might inadvertently suggest that there is not as
much savings occurring within the population than there actually is, when in fact, farmers are saving for a
number of purposes.

Overall, more than half (57 percent) of smallholders in Tanzania set aside money for at least one agricultural
expense over the course of a season, whether it is for harvesting, equipment, staffing, transportation, or future
investment opportunities.

On average, the Tanzanian smallholder farmer is saving for just over three different agricultural expenses or
pursuits (3.08), and close to one-third of smallholders set money aside for five or more (Table 2).

The need for savings crosses over a number of items, and smallholders have to make potentially tough choices
on the materials that most need that savings. Therefore, the gap between what farmers want to save for, and
what they actually save for, could reflect more of a prioritization of limited resources. They save what they can,
when they can, and put those savings where it will help them most.

Compared to Mozambique and Uganda, smallholder households in Tanzania present themselves as more
engaged savers, doing what they can to proactively plan for needs or anticipate unfortunate circumstances, both
actions that can mitigate types of risk.

                         Figure 55. Do you want to keep money aside for any of the following agricultural needs? vs.
                               Do you currently keep money aside for any of the following agricultural needs?
                                                    Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


                              Seeds                                                    45%                                    88%
                          Pesticides                                           37%                                            87%
                         Equipment                                             37%                                           86%
                           Fertilizer                                   29%                                             82%
          Crop storage after harvest                                          34%                                       82%
 For future investment opportunities                               25%                                                 79%
          For agriculture machinery                        18%                                                   70%
                Hiring staff/workers                              24%                                            70%
                     Transportation                         19%                                                  70%
                                Fuel                       17%                                             64%
                           Irrigation                12%                                             59%
                            Security               10%                                             57%


                                        Want to keep money aside           Currently keep money aside


Smallholder families in Tanzania tend to set money aside for agricultural expenses or pursuits. Fifty-seven
percent set money aside for at least one expense (Table 10). Male smallholders typically set money aside more
frequently than do women, at 60 percent and 55 percent, respectively. Male smallholders also exhibit more
diverse “keeping aside,” with 32 percent setting money aside for five or more items and pursuits, compared

36   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
with 30 percent of female smallholders. As with savings, there are significant differences between smallholders
that attended school and those who did not attend. Forty-nine percent of smallholders who did not attend
school set money aside, with 21 percent setting money aside for five or more agricultural expenses, compared
with 60 percent and 34 percent, respectively, of smallholders that attended school.

          Table 10. Setting aside money for agricultural expenses or pursuits, by demographics (n=2,795)
        Number of          Total                    Gender                               Education*
        expenses                          Male               Female              Attended        Did not attend

           None             43%             40%                 45%                40%                51%
          Net (1+)          57%             60%                 55%                60%                49%
             1               7%              7%                  7%                 6%                11%
             2               7%              7%                  6%                 7%                 4%
             3               6%              7%                  7%                 7%                 7%
             4               6%              7%                  5%                 6%                 6%
             5               5%              5%                  6%                 6%                 4%
             6               5%              6%                  5%                 5%                 4%
             7               4%              4%                  4%                 4%                 4%
             8               5%              6%                  4%                 6%                 2%
             9               4%              4%                  4%                 5%                 1%
            10               4%              4%                  3%                4%                 2%
            11               2%              2%                  2%                2%                 2%
            12               2%              3%                  2%                3%                 0%
                                                  *Pearson = <0.0001

The data also show a relationship between the number of savings channels a smallholder in Tanzania has and
the number of agricultural expenses or pursuits for which he/she is saving money. This suggests that there may
be some perceived targeted savings mechanisms for what a household needs to do or produce for the farm.
That is, certain mechanisms may aid setting aside money for specific agricultural expenses. A linear regression
model suggests that, all else being equal and not adjusting for other factors, every increase in the number of
savings channels corresponds with a 0.77 increase in the number of agricultural expenses or pursuits for which
money is set aside (Figure 3). That means that for each additional savings product a smallholder has, there is
roughly one additional expense that they are saving toward (rounding 0.77 to 1), supporting the possibility
that certain mechanisms aid preparation for specific agricultural expenses.

Figure 56. Regression of number of savings channels on number of expenses or pursuits for which money is set aside
(n=2,795)
                        Coefficient             T                      P                       95% CI
 Savings channels       0.769                   7.78                   <0.001                  0.575-0.963


Opportunities for broadening savings as a risk mitigation tool
Figure 57 combines all three dimensions of these agricultural expenses: (1) importance of saving for them, (2)
desire to save for them, and (3) current practices. The importance of the item is represented in the size of the
bubble on a 10-point index, with the largest bubbles being perceived as the most important. The current
savings practices is shown as a percentage on the X (horizontal) axis, and the desire to set money aside for that
purpose is represented as a percentage on the Y (vertical) axis.

Pesticides, equipment, and seeds are together the most important, most desired and most common expenses
a farmer saves toward. This suggests that savings or even credit mechanisms for pesticides, equipment, and


                                                                                                       Findings      37
seeds are good options that are known and more common for smallholders in Tanzania, and have a broad
spectrum of interest.

Crop storage, fertilizer, and investments earn almost as much importance and interest as pesticides,
equipment, and seed, yet smallholder farmers in Tanzania save for these. This suggests some opportunity and
potential appeal in financial mechanisms to put more farmers within reach of crop storage and fertilizer.

Saving for other agricultural interests, such as security, irrigation, transportation, fuel, and agricultural
machinery, are relevant to a more niche group of smallholders. Fewer find these as important or want to save
for them, and fewer are currently saving for them. Expanding the use of these mechanisms for pro-active risk
management would have to include more of a value proposition to earn more widespread interest.

                                                                                  Figure 57. Perceptual map: Importance, desires and possession of agricultural expense
                                                                                                         Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,638

                                                                     100%
       Percentage of respondents that want to keep money aside for




                                                                     95%                                                                          Pesticides
                                                                     90%
                                                                                                                                                      Equipment                Seeds
                                                                                                                                            Crop storage
                                                                     85%
                                                                                                                                 Fertiliser
                                                                     80%                                               Investments
                          each item or expense




                                                                     75%
                                                                                                       Transportation
                                                                     70%                             Fuel          Staff/ workers
                                                                     65%                           Ag machinery
                                                                     60%
                                                                                           Irrigation
                                                                                     Security
                                                                     55%
                                                                     50%
                                                                     45%
                                                                            5%        10%          15%         20%          25%         30%          35%         40%            45%         50%
                                                                                            Percentage of respondents that keep money aside for each expense
                                                                                               Bubble size corresponds to perceived importance of expense




Preparedness: Purchasing inputs and contracts
The vast majority of smallholders in Tanzania purchase inputs such as seeds, fertilizers, or pesticides (79
percent), and they buy them largely from retailers. Small numbers of these smallholders buy from wholesalers,
middlemen, or cooperatives (Figure 58). Transactions, across all sources, tend to be in cash and paid at the
point of purchase (Figure 59). Very few smallholders even have an option to pay later (Figure 60), which can be
a source of strain for their budgeting and planning and explains their emphasis on savings for inputs.

                                                                                  Figure 58. Who do you normally purchase your agricultural and livestock inputs from?
                                                                                 Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in household’s agricultural activities, n=4,742
                                                                                                               Multiple responses allowed
                                                     70%

                                                                                                                                                                                          21%
                                                                                     9%                  3%                 3%                  1%                  0%

                                  Retailer                                       Wholesaler        Middleman /         Cooperative            Other             Processor              Do not buy
                                                                                                 Trading company                                                                         inputs



38   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
         Figure 59. How do you usually pay your suppliers of inputs?         Figure 60. Do your suppliers give you the option to
              Sample: Smallholder farmers who purchase main                  pay them later or do you have to pay immediately?
                  agricultural and livestock inputs, n=3,731                  Sample: Smallholder farmers who pay suppliers for
                         Multiple responses allowed                                            inputs, n=3,616



                     Cash                                97%

         Payment in-kind        0%
                                                                                                             Pay later
       Prepaid debit card       0%                                                         Pay                 4%
                                                                                        immediately
          Mobile banking        0%                                                         96%
       Pay cash into bank       0%

 Electronic funds transfer      0%




Monetization: Storing and selling goods
Even though they may not be setting cash aside for their agricultural needs, smallholder farmers in Tanzania are
storing crops. Close to eight in 10 smallholders currently store crops after the harvest (Figure 61). The most
commonly stored crop is maize, as most smallholder farmers in Tanzania grow this crop (Figure 62). Storage
focuses almost exclusively on food or staple crops and not cash crops. The storage location is normally in the
home (58 percent) or in sacks/bags (24 percent) (Figure 63).

Crop storage also emerges as a tool for risk mitigation. Whether the risk is hunger or the need for income,
smallholders who store their crops do so as some type of monetization of the crop. The main reason for storing
crops is so the family can consume them later, further emphasizing the dependence on their agricultural outputs
for subsistence (Figure 64). Nearly a third (31 percent) store until they get the market price they want, indicating
their willingness to wait to better monetize their crop. One-quarter (24 percent) treat their stored crop as a form
of savings, selling it when they need the money.

                                                                              Figure 62. Which crops do you normally store?
       Figure 61. Do you currently store any of your crops after            Sample: Smallholder farmers who currently store any
                             the harvest?                                              crops after harvest, n=2,008
            Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in
                                                                               Maize                                          62%
              household’s agricultural activities, n=2,638
                                                                               Beans                   25%
                                                                               Paddy             17%
                                                                        Groundnuts             11%
                                                                             Cassava          10%
                           No                                              Sunflower        5%
                          23%                                               Sorghum         5%
                                                                               Sweet…      4%
                                                                        Finger millet     2%
                                                                        Pigeon peas       2%
                                         Yes                                   Coffee     1%
                                                                              Simsim      1%
                                                                             Bananas      1%
                                                                              Cotton      1%
                                                                       Bulrush millet     1%




                                                                                                                          Findings   39
                                               Figure 63. Where do you store your crops?
                                 Sample: Smallholder farmers who currently store any crops after harvens,
                                                                n= 2,008
                                                       Multiple responses allowed
                                    In the home                                                          58%

                                In sacks or bags                             24%

                          In a grainery, barn, or
                                                                11%
                                warehouse

                               Somewhere else              5%

                                       In a shop        2%


                                                  Figure 64. Why do you store your crops?
                                        Sample: Smallholder farmers who currently store any crops after
                                                               harvest, n=2,008
                                                         Multiple responses allowed


                                      I store so we can consume it later                                       83%

                                 I am waiting for the price to get better                  31%

                                     I store for another major expense                 24%
                                     Storage is a good way to minimize
                                                   hazards
                                                                                       24%
                              So my family can have extra money after
                                          harvest season
                                                                                     19%

                                     I store so I can pay for school fees       6%


Approximately one-quarter of smallholder farmers in Tanzania do not store their crops after the harvest (Figure
65), mostly because there are no leftover crops after the harvest. Everything is either sold, traded, or consumed
by the family.

                                                                            Figure 66. Why do you not currently store any of your
                                                                                                    crops?
                                                                              Sample: Smallholder farmers who currently do not
        Figure 65. Do you currently store any of your                                store any crops after harvest, n=630
                   crops after the harvest?                                              Multiple responses allowed
       Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in
         household’s agricultural activities, n=2,638               There is no left over crops
                                                                                                                                    76%
                                                                             to store

                                                                                             Other            15%
                                                                      I need to use my money
                   No                                                                                       10%
                                                                           after the harvest
                  23%
                                                                          There is no available
                                                                                                         6%
                                                                          storage place nearby

                                      Yes                             Storage is too expensive         2%
                                      77%
                                                                  It is not a good idea to store
                                                                                                       1%
                                                                               crops

                                                                                      Don't know       1%



40   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Most smallholder farmers in Tanzania sell to a retailer (Figure 67), usually at a local market or in the village
(Figure 68). Other less common sales outlets include wholesalers, middlemen, and cooperatives. Less than one
in 10 smallholders in Tanzania (7 percent) sell directly to the public.

The majority of smallholder farmers choose their market based on factors related to price. Some are
motivated by the perceived competitiveness of the prices at their market (42 percent); lack of price
information from other markets is another key factor (53 percent) (Table 11).

Adding further complexity, the majority of smallholder farmers in Tanzania think they are not getting the
current market price for their goods (Figure 69). The most common reason that smallholders report they do
not get the current market price is that they are taken advantage of by their customers, followed closely by
having too few customers (Figure 70). Smallholders also feel transportation is a barrier to earning the most
competitive prices for what they sell.

                                                                        Figure 68. Where do you normally sell your crops and
       Figure 67. Who do you sell your crops and livestock
                                                                                             livestock?
                               to?
                                                                        Sample: Smallholder farmers who grow and sell crops,
      Sample: Smallholder farmers who grow and sell crops,
                                                                                               n=3,803
                             n=3,803
                                                                                    Multiple responses allowed
                   Multiple responses allowed
                       Retailer                              78%
                   Wholesaler              22%                                       In village                                49%
        Middleman / Trading…            11%
                  Cooperative                                                   Local market                             41%
                                      7%
          Direct to the public        7%                            At a farm to neighbor or
                                                                                                                   29%
                                                                       traveling merchant
                         Other      2%
                     Processor      1%                                                  Other           8%
         Government agency         0%                                        Regional market       2%




                            Table 11. Why do you sell your crops and livestock at this location?
                   Sample: Smallholder farmers who know where crops and livestock were sold, n=3,797
                                              Multiple responses allowed
                I am not aware of prices at other markets                                 53%
                I get the best price at this market                                       42%
                I do not have access to transport to other markets                        25%
                Poor road conditions to other markets                                     22%
                Other reason                                                              8%




                                                                                                                           Findings   41
         Figure 69. When you sell your crops and                       Figure 70. Why do you not get the current market price?
     livestock, do you get the current market price?                Sample: Smallholder farmers who do not get current market price
     Sample: Smallholder farmers who grow and sell                                for crops and livestock sold, n=2,355
                      crops, n=3,803                                                   Multiple responses allowed

                                                             My customers take advantage of me                        32%

                                                                               Too few customers                22%
                                                                   No access to transport to other
                                                                              markets
                                                                                                               19%
                 Yes                  No
                 37%                 62%                                         Poor crop quality          14%
                                                            I have to pay high commission rates to
                    Don't                                                 middlemen
                                                                                                     1%
                    know
                     2%                                                                Corruption    1%

                                                                               I do not know why     1%




In addition to capturing where smallholders in Tanzania bring their goods to sell (Figure 68), the survey also
asked to whom they sell their goods. Nearly all sales happen outside of a formal agreement (Figure 71).
Transactions are almost exclusively conducted in cash. No other form of payment surpasses 1 percent (Figure
72).

                                                                           Figure 72. How do you usually get paid for what you sell?
      Figure 71. Do you have a contract to sell any of                   Sample: Smallholder farmers who grow and sell crops, n=3,803
                  your crops or livestock?                                                Multiple responses allowed
      Sample: Smallholder farmers who grow and sell
                      crops, n=3,803
                                                                               Cash                                                     99%
               1% 3%
                                                                             Other       1%

                                               Yes                Payment in-kind        1%
                                               No              Prepaid debit card       0%
                                               Don't know
                                                                   Mobile banking       0%

                                                                             Check      0%
                 96%




Monetization: Livestock as investments
Investing in livestock also helps smallholder households in Tanzania mitigate risk. More than a quarter of
smallholders have ever made this type of investment, and a large portion currently have livestock they view as
a form of investment (Figure 73).




42   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
                                  Figure 73. Have you ever purchased livestock as an investment?
                       Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in household’s agricultural activities, n=2,638


                                                                                                         78% of those who
                                                                                                         have purchased
                                                                                                         livestock as an
                                                                           Yes
                                                                                                         investment
                                                                           29%
                                                                                                         currently have
                                                                                                         livestock that are
                                                                                                         investments (n=748)

                                                             No
                                                            71%




Land maintenance: Resources
Smallholder farmers in Tanzania view their family’s agricultural activities as a household business. They tend to
rely primarily on themselves and their family for labor to support their agricultural activities. They turn to
family for help first when they need it, and more than a third do not use any labor at all (35 percent) (Figure
74). Of those who do use labor, it is throughout all phases of the harvest (Figure 75). Much smaller numbers of
farmers use labor for selling crops or for the care or sale of livestock.


          Figure 74. For managing the land and livestock, what types                       Figure 75. What do you use the labor for?
                              of labor do you use?                                       Sample: Smallholder farmers who use labor for
          Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in household’s                          managing land and livestock n=3,083
                         agricultural activities, n=4,742                                         Multiple responses allowed
                          Multiple responses allowed
                                                                                           Land plowing and
                                                                                              preparation
                                                                                                                                         69%
                     Family labor                                      48%                          Weeding                        59%

                             None                             35%                                    Planting                     55%

  Hire labor for extended period                 14%                                              Harvesting                   47%
 Friends or neighbors labor, on a
         reciprocity basis
                                             11%                                                 Selling crops        9%

  Daily rate for agricultural labor         9%                                                 Livestock care         9%

                            Other     1%                                                       Livestock sale        3%




Knowledge gathering: Information sources
Smallholders in Tanzania most frequently turn to their family, friends, and community for information on
agricultural activities, followed by radio messages (Table 13). All other sources are used much less often, with
some getting only single digits for frequent use.

Friends and family, including the respondents’ spouses, are also the primary sources of financial advice. Nearly
91 percent of smallholders first go to them, and no other source rates above 5 percent (Figure 76). Only a
small portion of smallholder farmers in Tanzania (both men and women) turn to any groups or associations


                                                                                                                                     Findings   43
                   Table 12. How often do you use each of the following sources of information for agricultural activities?
                        Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in household’s agricultural activities, n=2,638
                                                      Daily           Weekly          Monthly         More than monthly       Never
 Friends or family members                            28%              19%             16%                   15%               21%
 Community members                                    16%              17%             15%                   14%               37%
 Radio                                                15%              19%             13%                   15%               38%
 Cell phone/SMS                                        8%              4%               3%                   4%                81%
 Intermediaries/middlemen                              6%              7%               9%                   9%                69%
 Television                                            5%              6%               5%                   9%                75%
 Merchants                                             2%              5%               8%                   9%                76%
 Newspapers/magazines                                  2%              4%               6%                   9%                79%
 Government officials                                  1%              3%               8%                   14%               74%
 Input suppliers                                       1%              6%              13%                   15%               64%
 Internet                                              1%              1%               1%                   2%                95%
 Religious leaders                                     1%              11%              7%                   8%                73%
 Rural development agents/NGOs                         1%              3%               8%                   11%               77%
 Government extension workers                          0%              1%               6%                   11%               81%
 School teachers                                       0%              2%               4%                   6%                87%

related to farming, savings or credit; the vast majority of smallholders are not members of any of these. The
highest percentage, 10 percent, are members of a planting, harvesting, and weeding group (Figure 77). This
indicates few natural aggregation points for smallholder households in Tanzania. It also identifies a need for
more information channels that reach farmers so they have access to meaningful information, especially as it
pertains to risk mitigation.

The concentration on family and friends as a source of financial advice, combined with the very limited
exposure to other outside sources, suggests there could be a lack of information channels for bringing in new,
current, and relevant news about financial mechanisms into smallholder farming communities. It also suggests
that family, friends, and community members could be circulating information from their own experiences but
not necessarily from a position of wider expertise.



                         Figure 76. When it comes to financial or income-related advice, who do you regularly talk to?
                                                    Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795
                                                          Multiple responses allowed

                                            Spouse                                                                                    66%
                               Friends and family                                                                   46%
                      Don’t have anyone to go to            4%
                                      Lead farmer           4%
                            Chief or village leader        3%
                              Don’t ask for advice         3%
                                      Middle men          2%
                         Other community group            2%
                         Other community leader           2%
                             Local Councilor or LC       1%
   Savings and credit group (e.g., chama, VSLA)         0%
            Farmers’ association or cooperative         0%
                         Don’t know who to go to        0%
                                 Extension agents       0%
Financial institution like a bank or microfinance       0%




44   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
                     Figure 77. Are you a member of any of the following groups or associations?
                Sample: Smallholder farmers who participate in household’s agricultural activities, n=2,638
                                              Multiple responses allowed
                                      None                                                                    74%
A planting, weeding, and harvesting group                  10%
                                     Other                 9%
           Women’s group or association               5%
         Informal saving and credit group         2%
           Cooperative/Producers’ group          1%
                                    SACCO        1%
                              Trade union        1%
        An exporting group or association       0%
                  Farm implement group          0%
                         Processors group       0%




                                                                                                                    Findings   45
4.       Mobile Phone Tools

Mobile phones: A critical tool for households and agriculture
Mobile phones are a critical tool for digital financial services, particularly in more rural communities where
financial service providers are far away, limiting the ability to make regular transactions. A mobile phone
transcends distance, allowing an individual to transact by way of a handset that they possess, and reduces the
need for brick-and-mortar financial institutions.

Nationwide, 96 percent of all Tanzanians have used a mobile phone and over three-quarters (77 percent) have
their own phone, 23 making Tanzania one of the African countries with higher mobile phone ownership.
Smallholder farmers in Tanzania reflect the national trend. Two-thirds (66 percent) have their own mobile
phone, and 82 percent have used a phone. In contrast, 46 percent of smallholder farmers in Uganda 24 and 33
percent in Mozambique have their own phone. 25, 26

There is widespread, known importance and interest in owning a mobile phone among smallholder farmers in
Tanzania, even surpassing the percentage that actually own a phone. Furthermore smallholder farmers in
Tanzania recognize the relevance of mobile phones for agricultural activities. In some cases, they recognize it
as a tool for helping them mitigate or cope with their biggest perceived risks. In Mozambique and Uganda,
there is less of a connection between what a person can potentially do with a mobile phone and their
agricultural needs.


Perceived high importance and relevance to farming
The mobile phone itself is considered a very important device: 99 percent of smallholders in Tanzania who
have ever used a phone agree with the statement that “A mobile phone is important.” That importance
transfers almost fully to a phone as a tool for the household (93 percent “very important”) or to support
agricultural activities (92 percent “very important”) (Figure 78). Widespread recognized importance means
that smallholder farmers in Tanzania do not need to be convinced that a mobile phone can help their home or
their farm. They have already made that connection. Comparatively speaking, fewer farmers in Uganda and
Mozambique make the same connection. In these countries, a mobile phone is primarily still seen as a
communications tool.

              •    In Uganda, 79 percent of smallholder farmers say a mobile phone is very important to the
                   household, and 72 percent say it is very important to agricultural activities. 27
              •    In Mozambique, 67 percent of smallholder farmers say a mobile phone it is very important to
                   the household, and 68 percent say it is very important to its agricultural activities. 28


23 InterMedia Tanzania 2015 (Wave 3) Financial Inclusion Insights Tracker survey, (N=3,001, 15+), September–October 2015.
24 CGAP National Surveys and Segmentation of Smallholder Households in Uganda, 2015–2016
(http://www.cgap.org/publications/national-survey-and-segmentation-smallholder-households-uganda).
25 CGAP National Surveys and Segmentation of Smallholder Households in Mozambique, 2015–2016

(http://www.cgap.org/publications/national-survey-segmentation-smallholder-households-mozambique).
26 CGAP National Surveys and Segmentation of Smallholder Households capture mobile phone use, and individual ownership as well as

household ownership. Comparisons to Financial Inclusion Insights data require using the individual ownership percentages for
compatibility.
27 CGAP National Surveys and Segmentation of Smallholder Households in Uganda, 2015–2016

(http://www.cgap.org/publications/national-survey-and-segmentation-smallholder-households-uganda).
28 CGAP National Surveys and Segmentation of Smallholder Households in Mozambique, 2015–2016

(http://www.cgap.org/publications/national-survey-segmentation-smallholder-households-mozambique).

46    Smallholder Households in Tanzania
                                       Figure 78. Regardless of what you have, how important is it to your
                                            household/agricultural activities to have a mobile phone?
                                     Sample: Smallholder households, n=2,993; Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


                                  To household                                                                      93%
                                                       5%
                                    (n=2,993)       1%
                                                    0.0%

                       To agricultural activities                                                                   92%
                                                      5%
                              (n=2,795)             2%
                                                    1.0%


                                  Very important      Somewhat important        Not important        Don't know



Smallholder farmers in Tanzania who have used a mobile phone make the connection between the device and
its relevance to financial transactions. More than half see the ability to conduct financial transactions as a
benefit of a mobile phone (Figure 79). That this connection between a mobile phone and financial transactions
is perceived by only 54 percent of smallholder farmers in Tanzania suggests training needs to be provided.
                                Figure 79. What are the benefits to having your own mobile phone or SIM card?
                                    Sample: Smallholder farmers who have ever used a mobile phone, n=2238
                                                          Multiple responses allowed


               98%
                                            54%
                                                                     14%                        3%                           3%

       Talking to friends and      Conducting financial     Running your business     Browsing social media          Getting information
               family                 transactions                                      (Facebook, Twitter,       related to crop protection
                                                                                      Instagram, WhatsApp)




Widespread phone ownership and use
Eighty-two percent of smallholder farmers in Tanzania have used a mobile phone (Figure 80), and of those, 80
percent have their own phone. This means that two-thirds (66 percent) of smallholder farmers in Tanzania
have their own phone, slightly lower than the 77 percent of the national population overall.

The most common phone is a basic phone without internet capability (Figure 81). The use of feature phones
and smartphones is quite low (13 and 7 percent, respectively) among smallholders in Tanzania.




                                                                                                                                  Findings     47
           Figure 80. Have you ever used a mobile phone?
                                                                                Figure 81. What type of phone have you used?
                Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795
                                                                               Sample: Smallholder farmers who have ever used a
                                                                                            mobile phone, n=2,238


                         No
                                                                         Basic phone                                              89%
                        18%


                                                                       Feature phone             13%


                                            Yes
                                            82%                          Smartphone          7%




There can be multiple handsets in smallholder households, suggesting that, with exposure, there is recognized
utility in the device (Figure 82).

                                     Figure 82. Number of mobile phones owned by household members?
                                                   Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,993

                                          36%
                                                                 31%



                19%


                                                                                          9%
                                                                                                                    5%



                None                      One                    Two                     Three                 Four or more




Phone ownership is inclusive of both genders and spans regions, with only a small gap. Eighty-four percent of
men and 77 percent of women have their own mobile phones. Similarly, urban farmers are only 10 points
more likely to have a cell phone than rural farmers (87 percent vs. 77 percent). 29

Those with a mobile phone typically use it to make calls or send texts (Figure 83). Close to half (47 percent)
have made a financial transaction with their phone. These types of transactions are not as frequent as calls and
texts. Most financial transactions have been made in the past 30 days or more, as opposed to the past day or
week.




29Urban/rural distinction information: According to the Tanzania National Human Settlements Policy 2000, rural areas comprise
hamlets and villages (human settlements with fewer than 10,000 people) and urban areas comprise minor towns, towns, municipals,
and cities (human settlements with 10,000 or more people).

48    Smallholder Households in Tanzania
      Figure 83. Apart from today, when was the last time you performed the following activities on the mobile phone you use?
      67%      Sample: Smallholder farmers who have ever used a mobile phone or borrow or pay to use phone, n=2,150
                                                                                                                    Yesterday
                                                                                                 53%
                                                                                                                    In the past 7 days
                                                            39%
                                       27%                                                                          In the past 30 days
           20%                               21%                                     21%
                                                                                           13%                      More than 30 days ago
                                                                               11%
                 6% 5%                             6% 6%
                           1%                                             2%                                        Never

         Made/received calls     Sent/received text messages or photos Made a financial transaction




Men and women are equally as likely to have made financial transactions with a mobile phone (46 percent and
47 percent, respectively) and with the same frequency. This suggests that gender is not a barrier to accessing a
financial account via a mobile phone for those smallholders who currently have a handset.


Interest in phone ownership
Overall, only 18 percent of smallholders in Tanzania have not used a mobile phone. The majority of that group,
82 percent, want to use one. An additional 11 percent are somewhat interested using a mobile device. Just a
few are not interested at all (9 percent) (Figures 84 and 85).

            Figure 84: Have you ever used a mobile phone?                           Figure 85: How interested would you be in using a
                 Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795                                                mobile phone?
                                                                                   Sample: Smallholder farmers who have never used a
                                                                                                  mobile phone, n=557


                                                                                 Very interested                                           82%

                                                    No
                 Yes                                                      Somewhat interested               9%
                                                   18%
                 82%
                                                                                  Not interested            9%


                                                                                     Don't know        1%




Expanding mobile phone ownership to include more smallholders in Tanzania has less to do with building
value, as the utility of a phone is clear, and more to do with minimizing the costs associated with phone
ownership and use. The main reason cited by smallholders for not having a mobile phone is cost. Almost two-
thirds (65 percent) feel they do not have the funds to purchase a phone (Table 12). There is no other barrier
that is as pervasive as the perceived cost of obtaining a handset.

Close to one-third of those who do not currently have a phone think they are very likely to purchase one in the
future (Figure 86). These cost-related barriers suggest that this purchase is a lot more deliberate and requires
planning or saving to obtain the device.




                                                                                                                                Findings     49
         Table 12. What is the main reason you do not have a mobile phone?
     Sample: Smallholder farmers who currently do not own a phone but have used a               Figure 86. How likely are you to purchase a mobile
                                    phone, n=754                                                        phone in the next twelve months?
                                                                                                 Sample: Smallholder farmers who currently do not
  I don’t have money to buy phone                                           65%
                                                                                                    own a phone but have used a phone, n=431
  I don’t have money to pay for airtime                                     2%
  I worry that the phone will get stolen                                    2%
  I am not allowed to use a phone by my spouse or family                    2%                  Very likely                                33%
  I don’t have a need to use a phone                                        1%
                                                                                        Somewhat likely                                          41%
  I don’t know how to use a phone                                           1%
  There is no network where I live/work                                     0%                   Not likely                          26%
  There is no place to charge a phone                                       0%
  No specific reason                                                        6%                Don't know        0%
  Other                                                                     21%



Smallholders have the necessary identification to open an account
A voter’s card is the most popular type of official identification among smallholder farmers in Tanzania, and
this is consistent for men and women (92 percent each). Voter cards suffice as documentation for obtaining a
mobile money account, as do a driver’s license, passport, school identification, and national identification.

A birth certificate and government-issued identification (the most newly introduced form of identification in
Tanzania) are in the second tier at 12 percent and 8 percent, respectively (Figure 87). Across all types of
identification tested, there was no gender disparity on the possession of identification.

Most of these forms of identification are also less prevalent in rural areas. Most notably, only 3 percent of rural
smallholders have government-issued identification, compared to 18 percent of urban smallholders (8 percent
overall).

                                      Figure 87. Do you have any of the following types of an official identification?
                                                          Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=5,034
                                                               Multiple responses allowed
                         Voter's card                                                                                                92%
                     Birth certificate                12%
              Government-issued ID                8%
                    School-issued ID           4%
                    Village / Local ID        3%
                     Driver’s license         3%
                         Employee ID          3%
                          Ration card      1%
              International Passport       1%
               East African passport       1%
                           Military ID    0%




50     Smallholder Households in Tanzania
5.       Financial Inclusion among Smallholder Households in Tanzania

Financial inclusion: Benefits of formal financial institutions known to smallholders but use is
minimal
Financial inclusion in Tanzania has historically been driven by mobile money services. The 2015 Financial
Inclusion Insights study in Tanzania shows that the access to mobile money services and their registered and
active use saw a steep increase after a slight drop in 2014. Bank use, in contrast, dropped sharply in 2015.

     •   62 percent of adults in Tanzania now have a registered financial account (vs. 50 percent in 2014).
     •   61 percent of adults now have a registered mobile money account, up from 38 percent in 2014 and 44
         percent in 2013.
     •   53 percent of adults are now active mobile money account users, up from 34 percent in 2014 and 38
         percent in 2013.
     •   8 percent had access to a full-service bank account in 2015 compared with 24 percent in 2014, while 5
         percent actively used bank accounts, a drop from 16 percent in 2014. (Directly comparable data from
         2013 are unavailable.)

Bank account access and ownership in Tanzania fell between 2013 and 2015, most notably among rural and
lower-income groups. This decline occurred as mobile money use increased among the same consumer
groups.

     •   Bank account access fell most sharply among the rural population (5 percent in 2015 from 24 percent
         in 2014) and among those below the poverty line (6 percent in 2015 from 24 percent in 2014).
     •   Number of bank account holders also fell most sharply among the rural population (5 percent in 2015
         from 19 percent in 2014) and among those below the poverty line (6 percent in 2015 from 19 percent
         in 2014).
     •   Women also showed a decline in bank account access in 2015, dropping to 6 percent from 21 percent
         in 2014. This group also showed a decline in bank account ownership in 2015, dropping to 6 percent
         from 16 percent in 2014.

Smallholder farmers in Tanzania are showing similar trends, though the use of digital financial services is not as
widespread, making them less financially included. Only 10 percent of smallholders in Tanzania personally
have a bank account registered in their own name, characterizing them as “financially included,” as defined in
the nationally representative Financial Inclusion Insights survey of Tanzanian adults. Of these farmers holding
bank accounts, only 8 percent are women while 11 percent are men. Compared to the total population,
smallholders are lagging behind in financial inclusion.

Over three-quarters of smallholder farmers in Tanzania have never been inside a bank (Figure 88). Most
farmers acknowledge the ability to save money (69 percent) and saving money in a secure location (51
percent) as the benefits of having an account with a formal financial institution; fewer mention ability to get
loan (16 percent) as a benefit (Figure 89). Access to loans would further improve some smallholder farmer
operations, and more awareness about the benefits of having a bank account is essential in Tanzania.




                                                                                                    Findings      51
          Figure 88. Have you ever been inside a bank?                     Figure 89. What are the benefits to having a account with a
              Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795                                          formal financial institution?
                                                                                       Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795
                                                                                             Multiple responses allowed
                                                                                  Ability to save money                            69%

                                       Yes                            Saving money in a secure location                     51%
                                       23%                                            Ability to get loan             16%
                                                                       Ability to send or receive money…          10%
                                                                        Avoid lengthy wait times for bill…        8%

                     No                                             Ability to send or receive payments           8%
                    77%
                                                                            Ability to do more business          6%
                                                                                             Don’t know           8%


Only 10 percent of smallholder farmers have a bank account registered in their name (Figure 90). Full-service
banks can offer a range of services, including savings, money transfers, insurance, investments, and even
sometimes loans. However, nearly half of smallholder farmers do not have or use accounts at full-service
institutions because they have found that the institution did not offer loans.

Among smallholders who do not have a bank account, almost three-quarters have a perception that they lack
means (“I do not have money”). Lack of interest (“I never thought about using a bank”), unfamiliarity (“I do not
know how to open an account”), and barriers to access (“no banks close to where I live”) are barriers for less
than 10 percent of smallholders in Tanzania (Figure 91).

       Figure 90. Do you personally have a bank                   Figure 91. What is the main reason you do not have a bank account?
       account that is registered in your name?                   Sample: Smallholder farmers who don't have a bank account, n=2,505
         Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795
                                                               I do not have money/ I do not have
                                                              enough money to make transactions
                                                                                                                                  74%

                             Yes                                I never thought about using a bank           9%
                             10%
                                                                    I do not know how to open one            8%

                                                           There are no banks close to where I live         3%
                                                              I do not need one, I do not make any
                                                                          transactions
                                                                                                            3%

                                                                            I do not know what it is        1%

                    No                                   Registration fee is too high/ Fees for using
                                                                a bank account are too high
                                                                                                            1%
                   90%
                                                             Banks do not offer the services I need         1%



Smallholder farmers with a bank account tend to use their account monthly or infrequently. Only 15 percent
had used their account in the immediate day or the seven days prior to taking part in the survey (Figure 92).
There are two primary ways that smallholder farmers in Tanzania use bank accounts: over the counter at the
branch of a financial institution or through an automated teller machine (ATM) (Figure 93). When asked about
their preferred method, smallholder farmers said they prefer using an ATM (58 percent) and making
transactions over the counter at a bank branch (35 percent) (Figure 94).




52   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
                        Figure 92. Apart from today, when was the last time you made a deposit or withdrawal using a bank
                                           account or used a bank account for any other financial activity?
                             Sample: Smallholder farmers who have ever used a full-service bank for any financial activity

                                                                 35%
                                                                                                          29%

                                                                                      19%

                                           11%
                     4%
                                                                                                                                 2%

                 Yesterday              Past 7 days          Past 30 days        Past 90 days      More than 90 days           Never
                                                                                                          ago



             Figure 93. When you use a bank account for any                              Figure 94. Of the different ways you use a bank for
           financial activity, do you use any of the following?                           financial activities, which is your preferred way?
         Sample: Smallholder farmers who have access to a full-                         Sample: Smallholder farmers who have access to a full-
         service bank and have used it for any financial activity,                      service bank and have used it for any financial activity,
                                   n=260                                                                         n=260
                        Multiple responses allowed
                                ATM                              72%                                         ATM                           58%

   Over the counter in a branch of
              the bank
                                                              60%             Over the counter in a branch of the
                                                                                            bank
                                                                                                                                   35%
  Over the counter at a retail store       4%
                                                                               Through a mobile wallet, transfer
  Through a mobile wallet, transfer                                                                                    3%
   money from account to phone
                                           4%                                   money from account to phone

                        Mobile app        3%
                                                                                Over the counter at a retail store     2%
   A door-to-door agent or person
        associated with bank
                                          2%
                                                                                                      Mobile app       2%
                    Bank’s website       0%



Seventy percent of smallholder farmers who have ever used a full-service bank do not use their account for
business purposes (Figure 95). A small percentage use the account to make investments.

                                     Figure 95. Do you use a bank account for the following payments or purchases?
                                   Sample: Smallholder farmers who have access to a full-service bank and have used it for
                                                               any financial activity, n=260

                    Do not use bank account for business transactions                                                          70%

                                                Pay for agricultural inputs           11%

                                                             Pay suppliers         9%

                                       Receive payments from customers             9%

                                                           Pay employees           8%

                                       Pay business associated expenses          6%

                                                       Make investments          6%

                                        Receive payments from suppliers       3%



                                                                                                                                         Findings   53
Gender observations
The differences between male and female smallholders in Tanzania and their use of financial services are
minimal. Access to bank service either by owning an account or use another’s account is at 14 percent for men
and 11 percent for women, while access to mobile money service among smallholders is at 58 percent for men
and 55 percent for women. Access to nonbank financial institutions is at 8 percent for male and 10 percent for
female smallholders in Tanzania. Smallholders who hold bank accounts are at 11 percent for men and 8
percent for women, while those holding mobile money accounts are at 52 percent for men and 45 percent for
women.

Farmers in Tanzania who have ever used a mobile phone comprise 85 percent for men and 78 percent for
women, while those most likely to purchase a mobile phone in the next 12 months are 38 percent for men and
29 percent for women. Among smallholders in Tanzania who have an active, working SIM card registered in
their name, 85 percent are men and 81 percent are women.


Financial inclusion: High awareness of mobile money
Three-quarters of the smallholder farmers in Tanzania say they have heard of mobile money (Figure 96), and
the majority of them (97 percent) see benefits to having a mobile money account (Figure 97). They see a range
of benefits from mobile money services, including the ability to do person-to-person transfers (sending and
receiving remittances) as well as the ability to save money (Figure 98). Half of those who perceive benefits to
having an account view mobile money as a secure location for saving money. Conducting business via a mobile
money account does not seem to register highly as a benefit, as it was one of the lowest-scoring applications
for this financial mechanism.

Male and female smallholders in Tanzania are equally as likely to have saved money with a bank or other
formal financial institution (men, 9 percent, and women, 8 percent) in the past 12 months. Most of these
farmers are in urban areas (16 percent) compared to those in rural areas (4 percent). The older farmers (25
years and older) also show a higher percentage for saving money in a financial institution compared to the
younger farmers (younger than 25 years).



      Figure 96. Have you ever heard of something called     Figure 97. Are there benefits to having a mobile money
                        mobile money?                                               account?
             Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795          Sample: Smallholder farmers who are aware of mobile money
                                                                                concept, n=2,095)
                                                                                   No
                      No                                                           3%
                     24%



                                   Yes
                                   76%
                                                                                    Yes
                                                                                    97%




54   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
                                         Figure 98. What are the benefits to having a mobile money account?
                Sample: Smallholder farmers who believe there are benefits to having a mobile money account, n=2,022 Multiple responses
                                                                        allowed

             77%

                           50%
                                           37%
                                                           19%            17%             16%             14%
                                                                                                                           7%               6%




Smallholder farmers in Tanzania commonly use mobile money services for basic financial activities, with
deposit and/or withdrawal (i.e., cash in, cash out [CICO]) at 90 percent and person-to-person money transfers
at 66 percent.

Advanced use of mobile money is still at a lower rate of adoption with smallholders purchasing airtime at 42
percent and saving money for a long-term purpose at 32 percent (Figure 99).

                       Figure 99. To the best of your knowledge, for what types of financial activities can you use mobile money?
                                      Sample: Smallholder farmers who are aware of mobile money concept, n=2,095
                                                              Multiple responses allowed

         90%

                              66%

                                                    42%
                                                                         32%
                                                                                                19%                  19%
                                                                                                                                             2%

     Deposit and/or     Person-to-person         Buy airtime      Save or store money     Make business             Bill pay              Don’t know
      withdrawal        money transfers                             for a long-term        transactions
                                                                        purpose



Overall awareness of mobile money providers is high for three providers: Vodacom, Tigo, and Airtel. Eighty-
four percent named Vodacom M-Pesa unprompted, 78 percent mentioned Tigo Pesa ,while 75 percent
mentioned Airtel Money. Ezy Pesa, Halotel, and Smart-B Pesa showed lower awareness scores comparatively
(Figure 100).




                                                                                                                                Findings         55
                                Figure 100. Please tell me the names of any mobile money providers that you
                                                                are aware of?
                                        By overall awareness and awareness of mobile money concept
                                                    Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,771
                                                          Multiple responses allowed
                             Vodacom                                                                  84%
                             M_PESA                                                                     87%

                              Tigo Pesa                                                           78%
                                                                                                74%

                          Airtel money                                                              75%
                                                                                                    75%

                              Ezy Pesa                                 39%
                                                    13%

                        Halotel/Viettel                          31%
                                                  11%

                          Smart-B Pesa            11%
                                            1%

                                          Aware of mobile money concept           Overall awareness
                                          (n=2095)                                (n=2,405)



                 Figure 101. When was the last time you made a financial transaction such as send/receive money, pay debt, or banking
                                                          transaction on your mobile phone
                         Sample: Smallholder farmers who currently own phone or can borrow/pay to use phone in each category


                                                                                                                                       57%
                                                                                                                              53%53%52%
                                                                                                                                          45%


                                                                24%
                                                    21%21%20%
                                           16%               18%
                           11%11%11%
                                    8%                                       7% 7% 6% 6% 7%               7% 6% 8% 8% 5%
     2% 1% 2% 1% 3%

         Yesterday           In the past 7 days      In the past 30 days      In the past 90 days     More than 90 days ago             Never

                      Total (n=2,150)         Male (n=1,117)        Female (n=1033)         Rural (n=1,396)        Urban (n=754)




Use of mobile phones for financial transactions among smallholders in Tanzania is largely monthly. Close to three
in 10 (26 percent) have made a financial transaction in the past 30 days. Most of the smallholders transacting
monthly are men in rural areas (Figure 101). 30




30Urban/rural distinction information: According to the Tanzania National Human Settlements Policy 2000, rural areas comprise
hamlets and villages (human settlements with fewer than 10,000 people) and urban areas comprise minor towns, towns, municipals,
and cities (human settlements with 10,000 or more people).

56    Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Financial Inclusion: Use of nonbank or informal financial institutions is not widespread among
smallholder farmers
Smallholder farmers in Tanzania are not embracing the options available with nonbank financial institutions. The
highest use of nonbank financial service providers is among microfinance institutions (5 percent), though
account ownership is even lower at 3 percent (Figure 102).

                                      Figure 102. Have you ever used any of the following?
                           Do you have an account/membership in your name with any of the following?
                                              Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795

                                     Microfinance                                                   5%
                                                                                         3%

                                            SACCO                                        3%
                                                                               2%             Have used

                                                                                              Have account
                                      Cooperative                    1%
                                                                     1%

                                        Post office                  1%
                                                                     1%


Informal financial service providers are used at a slightly higher rate than nonbank financial institutions, with
over one-tenth of smallholders saying they have used a merry-go-round/informal saving network (Figure 103).
Smallholders are also looking to shopkeepers and money guards or someone in the workplace or neighborhood
that collects and keeps saving deposits for informal financial services.

                                       Figure 103. Have you ever used any of the following?
                                               Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795

                                 Mery go round/Informal saving
                                           network
                                                                                              11%



                                                      Shop keepers                  4%


                                A money guard/ someone in
                               workplace or neighborhood that                       4%
                                 collects and keeps savings…


                                               Savings collectors              2%



                                                      Other groups             2%


                                A digital card or recharge card is
                                 not attached to a bank or MFI            0%
                                             account




                                                                                                             Findings   57
The smallholder farmers who use merry-go-rounds/informal saving networks, shopkeepers, or money guards do
so on a somewhat regular basis. The majority (almost nine in 10) had used shopkeepers in the prior week, half
used an informal saving network, and about a third used a money guard in the same time period (Figure 104).

                Figure 104. Apart from today when was the last time you used these services or service providers for any
                                                         financial activity?
                                                   Sample: Smallholder farmers


                                                                                              30%             Past 7 days
                  49%                                                                                         Past 30 days
                                                                                                              More than 30 days ago
                                                       87%                                    25%
                                                                                                              Stopped using
                  20%                                                                                         Don't know
                                                                                              32%
                  21%
                                                        3%                                    12%
                  10%                                   8%
                   0%                                   2%
                                                        0%                                     2%
     Mery go round/Informal saving                  Shopkeeper               A money guard/ someone in workplace
               network                                (n=112)                  or neighborhood that collects and
                (n=308)                                                              keeps savings deposits
                                                                                             (n=94)




The main reason smallholders in Tanzania do not have membership with any informal financial service
institutions is mostly financial. Close to two-thirds report that they do not have any money for a membership.
One-fifth do not know about them (Figure 105).

                                  Figure 105. Why do you not have a membership with any of these groups?
                Sample: Smallholder farmers who do not have any membership with an informal financial service provider, n=2,276
                                                         Multiple responses allowed

         63%




                          20%              17%
                                                             10%               9%
                                                                                                5%                4%              2%

     You don’t have   You don’t know   You don’t trust You don’t need Another reason Groups require People steal your You have an
       any money        about them         them        any service from              too much time in   money        account in a bank
                                                            them                         meetings                    or other financial
                                                                                                                         institution




58     Smallholder Households in Tanzania
There is traction for financial planning products
Saving plans and investment plans are common among smallholders in Tanzania; about two–fifths have them.
Living wills and insurance are also somewhat common among smallholders (Figure 106).

                                 Figure 106. Do you have any of the following?
                                     Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


                                        A savings plan                                     41%


                                   An investment plan                                     40%

A living will; I know what will happen to my money if I
                     die unexpectedly
                                                                                 27%


                                    An insurance plan                   18%

 A retirement plan that will help me live comfortably
                 after I stop working
                                                          1%



Even though only 18 percent of smallholders in Tanzania have insurance, the majority believe their households
need insurance. Medical insurance is clearly the most desired, trailed by agricultural and life insurance (Figure
107).

                            Figure 107. Which of the following types of insurance do you feel your household needs the most?
                                                          Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795

                                                                                                                                    71%




                                                                                                     8%               11%
                                                                                   4%
           0%                 0%                 0%               0%




                                                                                                                               Findings   59
High trust in banks and mobile money highlights an opportunity for smallholders
Roughly half of smallholders in Tanzania fully trust banks, bank agents, mobile money providers, and mobile
money agents. This is much higher than their trust in nonbank and informal financial institutions (Figure 108).
This solid level of trust is a strong foundation that can be built on to financially include more smallholder farmers.

                                Figure 108. How much do you trust each of the following as financial sources?
                                                  Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795

                                  Banks                                 64%                                     9%         16%        4% 6%1%

                    Mobile money agents                           52%                                 20%                  19%         5% 3%
                                                                                                                                           1%

              Mobile money providers                             51%                                 21%                   18%         5% 4%
                                                                                                                                           1%

                            Bank agents                          49%                               20%                    19%         5% 5%
                                                                                                                                          1%

              Microfinance institutions                29%                          26%                     27%                  9%     8% 1%

     Friends, family who borrow from /
                                                     26%                      23%                     28%                  8%         15%    1%
                save money

                          Savings groups             26%                      24%                         32%                    8%     9% 1%


      Fully trust       Somewhat trust       Neither trust nor distrust       Somewhat distrust          Fully distrust         Don't know




60    Smallholder Households in Tanzania
6.   Tools and Financial Inclusion: Segmentation—Tanzania’s Five Unique
Smallholder Farming Household Segments

The segmentation technique
A collection of demographic, psychographic, behavioral, and attitudinal dimensions can often characterize
unique groups within an overall population, more so than any single factor or variable. The CGAP National
Survey and Segmentation of Smallholder Households in Tanzania anticipated the complexity of smallholder
households, expecting there would be unique personas within the broader population. 31 To that end, it sought
to explore the key dimensions that underlie different groups of smallholder households using a segmentation
analysis.

Segmentation is a form of statistical multivariate analysis that groups people based on their psychographics, 32
attitudes, expectations, or behaviors with respect to their own household dynamics. The groups, also referred
to as clusters, that emerge from the analysis ultimately allow us to deepen our understanding of how various
characteristics drive financial inclusion. Classifying smallholder households by key attitudinal and behavioral
characteristics provided a better understanding of the population and the challenges on the path to financial
inclusion.

The segmentation process uncovered various underlying structures that delineated groups of people. This
clustering technique looked for homogenous groups that exist within the population sample examined. It did
not create these groups. Rather the technique identified groups through analysis of the responses given by
each respondent to various questions, examining how respondents in the sample are similar to each other and
how they differ from one another.

Truly effective segmentation analyses are rooted in dimensions that lead to a common, desired, and shared
goal for the population overall. This allows a segmentation analysis to be more germane and better targeted,
therefore, more useful to relevant parties. In the case of smallholder households in Tanzania, the common,
shared goal is building strategies that lead to more useful, reliable, trusted, consumer-focused financial
services, formal or informal, that are connected to agriculture and that also meet the wide range of other
household needs. This segmentation therefore is rooted in defining elements that correlate with greater
formal financial inclusion.

Looking beyond the initial analysis, this segmentation can be repeated in follow-up or tangential studies,
where the discerning indicators that define the unique segments are included to create the same groups
within the target audience. For instance, an organization bringing a financial mechanism to market can use
these segments to do the following:

     •    Identify which segment poses the most potential for the organization and its intentions.
     •    Customize type of mechanism based on the needs of a desired segment.
     •    Fine-tune application and go-to market strategy based on market readiness of the segment.
     •    Optimize market positioning of the mechanism to capture a specific segment of the population.
     •    Level-set expectations for uptake and use based on the size of the desired segment.
     •    Track impact of the mechanism within the most relevant and intended segment.


31Personas as profiles that create reliable and realistic representations of key audience segments for reference.
32Psychographics refer to behaviors, interests, activities. and acquisitions of a population, together with demographics and other
attitudinal factors.

                                                                                                                        Findings     61
Phases of the Smallholder Household33 Segmentation

Predicting corollary values
The first phase of the segmentation analysis involved a machine learning algorithm called Random Forest 34
that assessed the individual factors that most correlate with formal financial account ownership (mobile
money, bank, NBFI) (Annex 2). The six most predictable and discerning measures of financial account
ownership are as follows:

     1.   Educational attainment of the head of household
     2.   Socioeconomic status or PPI of head of household
     3.   Access to emergency funds
     4.   Mobile phone ownership
     5.   Attitude toward the future
     6.   Encountering unexpected life and farming events


                                           Figure 109: Tanzanian Smallholder Farmers
                                                (Sample: All Smallholder Farmers)

                     Education               Socio-Economic Status (PPI)          Access to emergency funds
                     (n=2,993)                       (n=2,993)                              (n=2,795)
                                                      $2.50+,                          21%              Very possible
                        65% up to  11%,                15%
                 23%                                                                      29%           Somewhat
                 none    primary Secondary
                                  or more                       Below
                                                                $2.50,                             49% Not possible
                                                                 85%                0%                  Unsure




                 Mobile Phone                  Attitude: The Future Will                  Experienced an
                  Ownership                        Take Care of Itself                   unexpected event
                  (n=2,993)                            (n=2,795)                            (n=2,795)

                    81%                            Agree:   33%                                 None
                                                                                                 8%
                   have at least
                    one mobile                     Disagree:   67%                           At least one
                     phone in                                                                    92%
                       their
                    household


These measures emerged as the most discerning after extensive tests and modeling, which considered more
than 30 demographic, psychographic, and farmographic (e.g., size of land, type of crops, value chains, inputs
used, cash crops, consumption crops) variables collected by the surveys. The model showed that listed
variables (Figure 109) correlated the most with the tendency to have a formal financial account. None of the


33 The segmentation analysis is based on a three-part survey that gathered information from all aspects of the smallholder farmer—the
household, all household members who contribute to the income of the household, and a randomly selected household member. The
term “smallholder household” is used throughout this report to refer to the sampled population, which draws information from the
head of household or a randomly selected household member.
34 See Annex 2 and http://www.statsoft.com/Textbook/Random-Forest for documentation on the Random Forest Algorithm.




62    Smallholder Households in Tanzania
agricultural or land-specific questions correlated with formal financial account ownership (mobile money,
bank, NBFI) with enough relative strength to be considered part of the model.

At first, this seemed perplexing, knowing that agriculture is central to smallholder households. Further
exploration suggested that the relative homogeneity of smallholder farming activities in Tanzania was in fact
manifesting itself in the modeling. For instance, the number of crops or tendency to sell versus consume them
are not the factors that drive smallholders to have a financial account. In an ecosystem where sales
relationships exist with formal contracts, payments were digital, or loans were more formal, you might see
some more direct correlations. Here, correlations manifest themselves through socioeconomic elements
including education, PPI, access to funds, phone ownership, and other experiences or attitudes.


Forming segments
The second phase of the segmentation analysis was to explore the degree to which these factors together
explained the variation within the population and formed meaningful cleavages within it, carving out distinct
personas. Individually, these measures are the strongest predictors of financial inclusion and are useful in
helping determine the likelihood of becoming part of the financial fold. Compiled together in a segmentation
model, these factors cause meaningful divisions that enable greater understanding of the population and can
facilitate targeted strategies for moving the group to the end goal.

Using the most predictive variables identified in the Random Forest 35 exercise, the clustering analysis
delineated five unique segments of smallholder households:

        1.   Farming for sustenance
        2.   Battling the elements
        3.   Diversified and pragmatic
        4.   Options for growth
        5.   Strategic agricultural entrepreneurship

Since the sample was randomly selected and represents the population of smallholder farmers and households
across Tanzania, we can reasonably assert the five segments represent natural groups in the population as a
whole. We also expect that similar groups exist in smallholder farming populations outside of Tanzania, though
the description and the incidence of each reported herein is unique to Tanzania.




35   See Annex 2 and http://www.statsoft.com/Textbook/Random-Forest for documentation on the Random Forest Algorithm.

                                                                                                                Findings   63
                                       Figure 110: Tanzania Smallholder Household Segments


                                                                                                            Strategic
                   Farming for          Battling the        Diversified and         Options for
                                                                                                           agricultural
                   sustenance            elements             pragmatic              growth
                                                                                                        entrepreneurship

                       Every day,          Persevered       The realities would    Stable, optimistic   Actively engaged in
                     quintessential      through harsh         lead them to       for the future and     agriculture, and
                  farming household       agricultural        diversify out of    has options for the      growing their
                   that struggles to    challenges and        something they       future within and        agricultural
                   support its needs   remain optimistic     enjoy if given the   outside of farming         activities
                                        toward farming            choice

                  Stands to gain the        Financial          Embody the         Could pivot into or      Model or “use
                       most from        mechanisms have     realism and inner       out of farming       case” for inspiring
                     financial and      enabled some of      conflict that can      depending on          growth in other
                      agricultural     their perseverance      characterize         opportunities            segments
                     mechanisms                                households




By segmentation variables only, the five clusters or segments of smallholder households in Tanzania are as
follows:

     1. Farming for sustenance. The “farming for sustenance” segment represents a more entrenched,
        economically vulnerable smallholder household in Tanzania. The segment indexes low on the Progress
        out of Poverty Index, has been farming for many years, and is the highest in wanting their children to
        continue farming. This segment has the lowest household income of all five, and truly does live off of
        what the farm produces, consuming, selling, or trading the fruits of their agricultural labor. This is a
        highly vulnerable group, and perhaps stands to gain the most from financial and agricultural
        mechanisms that can optimize their daily labor.

     2. Battling the elements. The “battling the elements” segment also has some risk mitigation advantages.
        A greater portion of this group, compared with the “farming for sustenance” segment, generates
        income from agriculture, and a greater portion of these households has multiple income sources. This
        segment is still challenged by somewhat limited education and the incidence of unexpected life or
        farm-related events, such as weather challenges or illnesses in the family. Experience with negative
        farm events (e.g., pests, diseases) is the highest for this group, but these challenges have not
        dampened their future aspirations or dissuaded them from working hard. This group has persevered,
        sometimes using financial tools, making them a group that might better understand the value of
        having some form of a safety net. The biggest difference between this group and the “farming for
        sustenance” segment is that its smallholders are relatively more educated, have greater access to
        emergency funds, and are younger.

     3. Diversified and pragmatic. The “diversified and pragmatic” segment of smallholder households in
        Tanzania reflects the realism and inner conflict that can characterize smallholder families. These
        households grow more, sell more, and earn more, and have more income streams and connectivity to
        financial mechanisms. They have suffered unexpected life events to a similar level as other segments,
        and have had resources to overcome what they do experience. In some ways, they have an
        aspirational profile like “farming for sustenance” and “battling the elements.” The conflict that arises


64    Smallholder Households in Tanzania
        in this group, however, is that despite enjoying farming, taking pride in it, and looking for opportunities
        to expand their agricultural activities, many would diversify out of agriculture if given the opportunity,
        potentially out of frustration with its realities. They are thoughtful about what they do, but can also be
        impulsive, looking for opportunities to improve their situation. This is an important segment, as they
        represent smallholder households that have diversified within and outside of agriculture to best
        sustain their household needs.

    4. Options for growth. The “options for growth” group earns a higher income, has more resources for
       when the unexpected occurs, and is optimistic about the future. Their future, though, could take them
       in one of two directions, within or outside of agriculture. This diversification appears deliberate, so
       that a household has options to take care of itself if their agricultural yield becomes too difficult to
       maintain. While the segment relies heavily on agricultural income, it is also the most likely to be
       engaged in more stable income sources outside of agriculture. They are equally as passionate about
       farming, continuity in agriculture, and satisfaction with farming as they are embracing of opportunities
       outside of the agricultural sector. The youngest of all five groups, this segment could pivot in either
       direction, depending in part on how they are cultivated by policy makers, development organizations,
       and financial institutions.

    5. Strategic agricultural entrepreneurship. The “strategic agricultural entrepreneurship” segment of
       smallholder households in Tanzania includes households that appear to be actively engaged in building
       their agricultural work with some indications of success or at least progress. The group is more
       enabled than others, with a relatively higher income, greater access to emergency funds, and more
       financial mechanisms at their disposal. This group of smallholders has been impacted by the realities
       and challenges of farming, and has been able to rely on their savings or other resources to get them
       through tough times. What characterizes them more definitively, though, is their mindset.
       Smallholders in this segment put much thought into what they do and have big aspirations that include
       a future in agriculture. Farming is what they want to do, what satisfies them, and the origin of their
       legacies. They are not as likely to want out, or be willing to take work outside of agriculture. This is a
       group that can be a model or a use-case for carrying meaningful messages or examples for growth to
       other segments of the population.

There is greater definition and characterization of these segments when we explore more deeply how they
behave, what they believe, and where their interests lie.

As a whole, these five segments of smallholder households in Tanzania behaviorally characterize smallholder
households across Tanzania, and there is no one segment that dominates the landscape. Comparatively, the
smallholder population in both Uganda and Mozambique is predominantly the “farming for sustenance”
segment (54 percent and 77 percent, respectively), showing that movement in the marketplace really must be
through evolving portions of this massive group into the financial fold. Tanzania’s smallholders, however, are
more evenly distributed across the five segments, and each requires a distinct, targeted approach for
advancing the marketplace.




                                                                                                    Findings    65
                                                             Figure 111: Tanzania Smallholder Household Segments
                                                                        (Shown: All smallholder farmers)




                                                            Strategic agricultural             Farming for
                                                             entrepreneurship,               sustenance, 18%
                                                                    15%




                                                                                                             Battling the
                                                    Options for growth,                                    elements, 15%
                                                           22%




                                                                                     Diversified and
                                                                                     pragmatic, 29%




                    Figure 112: Uganda Smallholder Household Segments
                                                                                                              Figure 113: Mozambique Smallholder Household Segments
                               (Shown: All smallholder farmers)                                                            (Shown: All smallholder farmers)

                                                                                                                             Options for growth,
                                                                                                                                     2%      Strategic agricultural
                           Strategic agricultural                                                                 Diversified and
                                                                                                                  pragmatic, 4%               entrepreneurship,
                            entrepreneurship,                                                                                                         1%
                                    4%

            Options for growth,                                                                          Battling the
                   16%                                                                                 elements, 15%




       Diversified and                                      Farming for
       pragmatic, 4%                                      sustenance, 54%




          Battling the
         elements, 21%
                                                                                                                                                       Farming for
                                                                                                                                                     sustenance, 77%




66   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Table 13 shows each segment and how it fares on each of the cluster-defining variables: education,
socioeconomic status, access to emergency funds, mobile phone ownership, attitude toward the future, and
experience with unexpected events.


                             Table 13. Tanzania Smallholder Household Segments by Clustering Criteria
                                                 (Shown: All smallholder farmers)
                                                                                                                    Strategic
                                        Farming for        Battling the     Diversified and     Options for
   Segment=                                                                                                        agricultural
                                        sustenance          elements          pragmatic          growth
                                                                                                                entrepreneurship
   n= 2,795                              557                   393               826                628                391
   Educational attainment of household head
   Never attended school                 41%                  25%                37%               6%                  2%
   Preprimary                             1%                  0%                 1%                0%                  0%
   Primary                               57%                  69%                54%               85%                 66%
   Secondary                              1%                  5%                 7%                8%                  25%
   Higher education                       0%                  1%                 0%                1%                  7%

   Socioeconomic status
   Above the poverty line                  4%                 4%                 13%               12%                 43%
   Below the poverty line                  96%                96%                87%               88%                 57%

   Access to emergency funds: Can come up with 100,000 shillings within the next month
   Very possible                         9%                 16%               17%                  21%                 51%
   Somewhat possible                    17%                 26%               31%                  27%                 49%
   Not possible                         73%                 57%               52%                  52%                 0%
   Don’t know                            0%                  0%                0%                  1%                  0%

   Mobile phone ownership – at
   least one phone in the
   household
   No                                      54%                38%                2%                 0%                  0%
   Yes                                     46%                62%                98%               100%                100%

   Attitude: The future will take care of itself
   Agree                                      38%          41%                 32%                27%                   28%
   Disagree                                   61%          59%                 67%                72%                   72%
   Don’t know                                  1%           0%                  1%                 1%                    0%
   In the past 12 months, experienced any unexpected events (including, but not limited to death, illness, accidents, etc.).
   No, I didn't                                9%           5%                 7%                 10%                   7%
   Yes, I did                                 91%          95%                 93%                90%                   93%



The profiles in Figures 114 and 115 detail the dynamics of each segment, bringing character and depth to each
of them. Perhaps the best illustration of the differences in the segments, however, is the linear progression of
the five groups, where the “farming for sustenance” (and largest group) is the most impoverished and in need,
and the “options for growth” are at the far other end showing models of progress within the population.




                                                                                                                       Findings    67
                                                 Figure 114: Tanzania Smallholder Household Segment Mindset
                                                                (Shown: All smallholder farmers)




                                             18%                                                      29%                         22%
             Tanzania                                                     15%                                                                                  15%



                                                                                                                                                          Strategic
             Mindsets                   Farming for                    Battling the              Diversified                 Options for
                                                                                                                                                         agricultural
             (% agree)                  sustenance                      elements                and pragmatic                 growth
                                                                                                                                                      entrepreneurship
         My life is
         determined by                      95%                            96%                         94%                        95%                          95%
         my own actions
         I can determine
         what will happen                   51%                            51%                         51%                        49%                          53%
         in my life
         I can only focus
         on the short term
                                            38%                            31%                         33%                        28%                          35%
         I live more for the
         present than                       49%                            49%                         44%                        41%                          44%
         tomorrow
         What is going to
         happen will                        75%                            78%                         77%                        78%                          76%
         happen




                                        Figure 115: Smallholder Farmers in Tanzania Financial Inclusion* by Segment
                                                              (Shown: All smallholder farmers)




                                                                                                                                                      90%
                                                                                                                         76%

                                                                                            57%
                   Total: 49%




                                                               14%
                                  1%
                         Farming for                  Battling the              Diversified and            Options for growth Strategic agricultural
                         sustenance                    elements                   pragmatic                                     entrepreneurship

                                                                           Tanzania: Financially included



                         * Financial Inclusion defined as having a full-service bank, mobile money or nonbank financial institution account with access in one’s
                         own name.




68   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Segment 1: “Farming for Sustenance”: Dependent on the Farm for Day-to-Day
Survival
The farming for sustenance segment includes 18 percent of smallholder households in Tanzania. It is a mid-
sized segment that does not overpower or dominate the population. Its presence is still notable, especially
because of the vulnerability within the segment.

Segment synopsis

Representing the most vulnerable Tanzanian farming household, the “farming for sustenance” segment
indexes very low on the Progress out of Poverty Index, shows a high number of years in farming, and generally
wants their children to continue farming, even though they themselves could be interested in full-time
employment.

This segment truly does live off of what the farm produces, either consuming, selling, or trading the fruits of
their agricultural labor, without much else to sustain their households.

This is a highly vulnerable group, and perhaps stands to gain the most from financial and agricultural
mechanisms that can facilitate their daily labor.

Demographics: Nearly all households live in poverty and are largely headed by older farmers.

Relative to other segments, the “farming for sustenance” segment skews older. More than half the population
of this segment (57 percent) is over 50, and more than one-third (37 percent) is over 60. Only 23 percent are
under 40. While the age distribution is concerning for such a vulnerable group, the absence of youth is
potentially a good thing so as not to perpetuate the vulnerability in the next generation of farming.

                               Figure 116. Age distribution (Head of Household)
                                   (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)
                                                                                      37%

                             16%                    20%                     20%
          8%


         15-29              30-39                  40-49                   50-59    over 60

                                     Farming for sustenance (n=557)


Households are concentrated in the Border (32 percent), Lake (27 percent), and Inland (27 percent) zones. Few
are Coastal (13 percent) or in Zanzibar (1 percent). Nearly all (96 percent) live under the poverty line as defined
by the Progress out of Poverty Index ($2.50 or less a day) with the vast majority living in extreme poverty (76
percent earning $1.25 a day or less).




                                                                                                     Findings     69
Farming: Experienced, and dependent on crops for income

“Farming for sustenance” households are tenured in their craft. Three-quarters (75 percent) have been
working in agriculture for 10 or more years.

These households intend to continue working in agriculture (97 percent). They generally enjoy it (90 percent)
and want to expand their capabilities (92 percent). That said, full-time employment could also be attractive to
most of these households (83 percent).

Fewer than seven in 10 (69 percent) of smallholders in this segment are satisfied with what their agricultural
work has achieved (Figure 117). This suggests they are critical of themselves, and perhaps want better
outcomes than their circumstances can support.

These are more unifying sentiments across the segments than they are differentiating. Even the segments that
are more financially included and more prosperous show a similar trend. However, farming for sustenance
households are further handicapped by extreme poverty and age, as well as a lack of resources. This can
translate to them being trapped in their circumstances, and less capable of changing the course of their lives.
While they might intend to keep working in agriculture, only 57 percent agree with the statement, “I would not
want to be doing any other type of work,” suggesting that their trajectory might be more predetermined based
on their skills, abilities, and access to other income streams, versus a true choice.

                           Figure 117. View of success in agriculture vs. willingness to continue working in it
                         Sample: All smallholder households who participate in agricultural activities by segment

                                     Total                                                   67%
                                                                                                                    97%
                  Farming for sustenance                                                      69%
                                                                                                                    97%
                    Battling the elements                                                 63%
                                                                                                                    98%
                  Diversified & pragmatic                                                    68%
                                                                                                                96%
                      Options for growth                                                    66%
                                                                                                                    98%
            Strategic ag entrepreneurship                                                     69%
                                                                                                                    97%




“Farming for sustenance” households lack income diversification. They tend to depend almost exclusively on
what the farm will yield. On average, these households have 2.55 income sources, with the top two income
sources related to agriculture: 80 percent of “farming for sustenance” households generate income from
crops, and 28 percent generate income from livestock. Crops tend to be this segment’s single biggest source of
income (73 percent), with no other single source of income reported as a significant contributor to households.
Thirteen percent report only one source of income, just over a third report two (39 percent), and crops and
livestock are again the most common sources of income. Forty-five percent have three or more income
sources.




70   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Collective reporting from all household members active in agriculture shows that average land size is 3.26
hectares for “farming for sustenance” households. 36

On average, the smallholder households in the “farming for sustenance” segment are growing four crops (4.26
precisely) each year on their land. They tend to sell on average two of the four crops they grow (1.95
precisely). Maize (94 percent), beans (50 percent), cassava (46 percent), ground nuts (34 percent), sweet
potatoes (33 percent), and paddy (29 percent) are the most commonly grown crops by smallholders in this
segment.


Vulnerable to outside elements
The vulnerability of this segment of smallholders becomes even more apparent when comparing the
percentage generating income from agriculture against the percentage whose agricultural events have been
seriously affected by an outside element. Nearly all smallholders in this group who participate in agricultural
activities (99 percent) were impacted by weather, pests, disease, accidents, market fluctuations, equipment
failure,and/or their own health issues. Sixty-three percent were affected by more than one issue. Weather has
impacted the vast majority of this segment (77 percent), and many have also suffered crop loss due to pests
and disease (64 percent).

Smallholders in the “farming for sustenance” segment in Tanzania have less experience, with their agricultural
activities being impacted by price fluctuations in the market, not being able to sell crops, or fire and theft.
When the unexpected does happen, and agriculture activities are impacted, “farming for sustenance”
households are likely to have had no specific response (29 percent). The tendency to do nothing outweighs any
single action that a farmer could take, if that resource was in place.

     •    25 percent turned to their savings
     •    22 percent took a temporary job
     •    16 percent sold crops/livestock
     •    12 percent borrowed from someone they know
     •    5 percent borrowed from a bank

Reflecting lack of access to credit or loans, close to three-quarters (73 percent) report that they would not be
able to come up with 100,000 Tanzanian Shillings in the event of emergency.


Financial attitudes
The segmentation model is built on predictors of financial inclusion, which is defined here as those having a
full-service bank, mobile money, or NBFI account in their name. It follows, then, that ordering segments from
more vulnerable “farming for sustenance” and “battling the elements” groups to “strategic agricultural
entrepreneurship” shows a somewhat linear relationship with financial inclusion.




36The land size measurement comes from the household survey where multiple members of the agricultural household offer up their
recollection of various dynamics so as to capture full dynamics instead of relying on just one member’s knowledge of the household. An
aggregate estimate of this measure was then created and appended to the segmentation, which is based on participant responses to
the individual questionnaire (asked of just one randomly selected household member). These data are weighted accordingly. Use data
with caution surrounding extrapolation and inferences. These should be used only as added descriptive measures.

                                                                                                                     Findings      71
Extremely limited access to financial services
Overall, 49 percent of Tanzanian smallholder households are financially included, and mobile money accounts
are the most common for smallholders. The “farming for sustenance” segment comes in lowest, with only 1
percent being financially included. Most of that 1 percent has an account at a NBFI. Only few have a mobile
money account.

The barriers to mobile money for the “farming for sustenance” segment begin with awareness. A mere one-
third of this segment (32 percent) is aware of mobile money accounts, compared to 76 percent of smallholder
farmers in Tanzania overall. This is a segment that has not been exposed to the broad-based messaging and
mobile money campaigns that have otherwise swept the nation. The second barrier is the conversion from
awareness of mobile money to use, indicating that exposure to the concept has not offered a compelling
reason to use the service, either because the segment does not know how, does not think they qualify, or does
not have access to mobile money. Close to half of this segment (46 percent) have at least one mobile phone in
their home, creating a third barrier, which is access. For the 54 percent who do not have a phone in their
home, access to mobile money is that much harder.

Just 1 percent of “farming for sustenance” smallholders have an NBFI account, and 2 percent have used such
an account. Less than half of 1 percent of smallholder farmers in this segment report having a bank account or
using a bank account.

While more prevalent than formal financial services, still only 13 percent of the “farming for sustenance”
segment in Tanzania has access to an informal financial mechanism such as a savings or loan association,
ROSCA, moneylender, or money guard. Informal savings networks (merry-go-round) are the most common (7
percent), followed by shopkeepers (4 percent), and VSLAs (3 percent).

           Table 14. Informal and formal financial mechanisms (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)

                             Financially         Own bank           Own mobile             Own NBFI      Access to
                              included            account             money                 account      informal
                                                                     account                              savings
           Farming for            1%                  0%               <.5%                    1%          13%
           Sustenance

Close to eight in 10 of “farming for sustenance” households managed to save money in the past year (78
percent), trailing the overall population of smallholders but only by a small gap (84 percent all smallholders).


High perceived importance of financial practices
Though “farming for sustenance” households might be without financial mechanisms, formal or informal, they
do possess a strong sense of the importance of savings, investing, and using formal financial institutions.

     •     They are as likely as other smallholders in Tanzania to think it is very important to save for future
           purchases (93 percent), for an unexpected event (85 percent), for regular purchases (81 percent), and
           school fees (78 percent).
     •     They are as likely as other smallholders in Tanzania to think it is very important to invest in the farm
           (94 percent), healthcare (94 percent), the home (87 percent), and education (82 percent).




72       Smallholder Households in Tanzania
This segment of smallholder households in Tanzania finds it highly important to save at home (79 percent).
Saving with a financial institution also earns high importance (78 percent); however, when having to choose,
saving at home ranks as most important.

“Farming for sustenance” finds it more important to save on a mobile phone than to save with an informal
group (68 percent, compared to 48 percent). More select it as the most important savings channel over an
informal one by three to one.

                            Figure 118. View saving money through different mediums as "very important"
                                          Sample: "Farming for sustenance" households, n=557



                          At home                                                                           79%


               Financial institution                                                                       78%


                On a mobile phone                                                                   68%


            With an informal group                                                  48%



                                        Figure 119. Perceived Importance of savings channels
                                              (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)

                                                                              66%


                    15%                                                                                   12%
                                                 4%

              Save money at a          Save money with an           Save money at home         Save money on a mobile
            financial institution        informal group                                               phone

                                                      Farming for sustenance



Segment 2: “Battling the Elements”: Challenged, with Limited Resources, but
Perseverant
The battling the elements group comprises 15 percent of smallholder farming households in Tanzania and is a
mid-sized segment. It is an important group because it contains much of the younger generation—the future
of farming. These households face many of the same limiting circumstances as those in the “farming for
sustenance” group (e.g., low education, high poverty, limited financial resources), but are optimistic,
committed to farming, and taking better financial steps in their lives, despite facing the brutal realities of
farming.




                                                                                                                  Findings   73
Segment synopsis

The “battling the elements” segment is also a vulnerable group, but as a group, does not face the limitations of
the “farming for sustenance” segment. A greater portion generates income from agriculture, and a greater
portion of these households have multiple income sources. This segment is more educated and has better
access to emergency funds, but is still challenged by the incidence of unexpected life or farm-related events.

Experience with unexpected life events is somewhat greater for this group than the others. Challenges have
not dampened their future aspirations or dissuaded them from working hard. This group has persevered
through those challenges, sometimes with the support of financial tools, which might make them the group
that best understands the value of having some form of a safety net.

Compared to the “farming for sustenance” group the “battling the elements” segment can call on a stronger
financial support network and is younger.

Demographics: A majority of households live in poverty, are concentrated in the Lake and Inland parts of the
country, and represent a younger group of farmers.

“Battling the elements” smallholders include a preponderance of youth. In fact, a plurality (41 percent) are
under 40. The greatest density of this segment is found in the Lake zone of the country (32 percent), followed
by Inland (28 percent). There are less “battling the elements” households in the Border zone (24 percent) and
the Coastal zone (16 percent). Like farming for sustenance, 96 percent are below the poverty line. The vast
majority, 96 percent, live under the poverty line, with 71 percent living in extreme poverty.

                                        Figure 120. Age distribution
                             (Sample: Smallholder heads of household by segment)
                                                                                    37%
                               24%              20% 23%                 20% 18%
            17%          16%                                                              18%
       8%


         15-29             30-39                   40-49                   50-59    over 60

                          Farming for sustenance            Battling the elements


Farming: Experienced farmers who enjoy their work, even though they contemplate life outside of farming.

“Battling the elements” households include a mix of mature, tenured farmers as well as newer, younger
farmers. Six-in-10 (59 percent) have been farming for over 10 years, and the balance, close to 40 percent, have
been farming for 10 or less years. By age (described above), this segment is younger than the others,
underscoring the lack of tenure compared to “farming for sustenance.”


Enjoyment of farming
These households intend to continue working in agriculture (98 percent). They generally enjoy it (95 percent),
and many would like to expand their capabilities (96 percent). Close to two-thirds are satisfied with their
farming achievements (63 percent) (Figure 121). That said, it is worth noting that full-time employment also
could be attractive to some households (87 percent). Only about four-in-10 (44 percent) say that they do not
want to do any other kind of work outside of agriculture.


74   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
                                 Figure 121. View of success in agriculture vs. willingness to continue working in it
                               Sample: All smallholder households who participate in agricultural activities by segment

                                           Total                                                   67%
                                                                                                                          97%
                       Farming for sustenance                                                       69%
                                                                                                                          97%
                         Battling the elements                                                  63%
                                                                                                                          98%
                       Diversified & pragmatic                                                     68%
                                                                                                                      96%
                            Options for growth                                                    66%
                                                                                                                          98%
                Strategic ag entrepreneurship                                                       69%
                                                                                                                          97%




Most “battling the elements” households in Tanzania generate income from agriculture, either selling crops
(79 percent) or livestock (28 percent). Agriculture is still this segment’s largest reported income source (67
percent crops, 8 percent livestock as largest source), but dependence on agriculture is less so. Roughly half
have three or more sources for generating income (vs. 45 percent for “farming for sustenance”), including the
following:

     •    An occasional job (20 percent)
     •    Running a retail or manufacturing business (20 percent)
     •    Running another type of business (12 percent)
     •    Remittances from family and friends (15 percent)

On average, smallholder households in the “battling the elements” segment in Tanzania have 3.48 hectares of
land or less 37 and are growing five crops each year on their land. They tend to sell, on average, two crops they
grow. Commonly grown crops include the following:

     •    Maize (93 percent)
     •    Cassava (49 percent)
     •    Beans (45 percent)
     •    Sweet potatoes (39 percent)
     •    Paddy (34 percent)


Vulnerable to weather
All “battling the elements” households experienced a unexpected event in the past three years in their
agricultural activities (including weather, pests, illness, loss, accidents) that caused a loss of income. The most
common is weather (75 percent), followed by pests (69 percent).


37 The land size measurement comes from the household survey where multiple members of the agricultural household offer up their recollection of

various dynamics so as to capture full dynamics instead of relying on just one member’s knowledge of the household. An aggregate estimate of this
measure was then created and appended to the segmentation, which is based on participant responses to the individual questionnaire (asked of just
one randomly selected household member). These data are weighted accordingly. Use data with caution surrounding extrapolation and inferences.
These should be used only as added descriptive measures.

                                                                                                                                  Findings          75
Price fluctuations hurt this group more so than they did the “farming for sustenance” segment. About one-
quarter (26 percent) were impacted by market-driven price fluctuations when it came to selling their crops,
and a third (33 percent) were impacted by changes in the cost of inputs. And just over one in 10 (13 percent)
faced a market downturn where they could not sell their crops or livestock.

Among those that were seriously affected by any of the above events, close to one-quarter (24 percent) of
smallholder households in Tanzania did nothing specific in response. Others turned to what they either had,
including savings, or options they had for bringing in more money (e.g., temporary job, borrowing, selling):

     •     30 percent used savings
     •     20 percent sold livestock or crops
     •     20 percent took a temporary job
     •     11 percent borrowed from someone they knew


Financial attitudes
Compared with all of the other groups, the “battling the elements” segment comes in with the second lowest
percentage of those who are financially included. Only 14 percent of this segment of smallholder households in
Tanzania are financially included, compared to 49 percent of Tanzania smallholder households overall. This
segment is 14 times as likely to have formal financial mechanisms in place compared with the “farming for
sustenance” group.

Some formal financial accounts
All of the financially included in this segment have a mobile money account (14 percent). Among this group, 2
percent also have an NBFI account, in addition to their mobile money account. Less than a quarter of 1 percent
have a bank account, though some have access to one.

“Battling for elements” smallholder households in Tanzania are more equipped for a mobile money account
than “farming for sustenance” households. Close to two-thirds (62 percent) have a mobile phone in their
home, 70 percent are aware of mobile money, and more than one-third (37 percent) have tried mobile money.

Mobile money awareness is much greater than use. The actual conversion rate, comparing awareness of
mobile money to use is about two to one (1.89), and awareness to account ownership is five to one, indicating
there is still some barriers to entry. In this case, the barriers are more about perceived eligibility and ability to
access mobile money providers, which suggests a need for building meaningful awareness that goes beyond
conceptual awareness. There is a general sense among this segment that it is important to save money on a
mobile phone, more so than through an informal channel. This segment also has to feel like this is a service
they can afford and fits their needs.

Access to informal financial accounts is on par with formal accounts, with just 17 percent having used some
informal group. Informal savings networks are the most common (6 percent), followed by shopkeepers (5
percent), and money guards (4 percent) (Figure 122).




76       Smallholder Households in Tanzania
                     Table 15. Informal and formal financial mechanisms (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)
                           Financially         Own bank           Own mobile             Own NBFI              Access to
                            included            account             money                 account              informal
                                                                   account                                      savings
          Farming for           1%                 0%                <.5%                    1%                  14%
          Sustenance
          Battling the         14%                 0%                  14%                   2%                     17%
          Elements



Overall, 80 percent of smallholders in the “battling the elements” segment have saved money in the past year.
Like “farming for sustenance,” “battling the elements” thinks it is very important that they save for future
purchases (94 percent), unexpected events (83 percent), or even regular purchases (81 percent). Being able to
afford school fees is also important (81 percent). A similar proportion find it important to invest money in the
farm (93 percent), home improvements (80 percent), and an educational opportunity (which can include
school fees) (83 percent). For this segment, household-related items are nearly as important as farming items,
indicating that there could be multiple ways of appealing to this segment, and that appeals do not have to be
squarely focused on agriculture.

The “battling the elements” segment places greater emphasis on saving with financial institutions than they do
at home, or with informal groups. Saving on a mobile phone earns the same importance as saving at home.
Close to eight in 10 of “battling the elements” households managed to save money in the past year (78
percent), trailing the overall population of smallholders, but only by a small gap (84 percent of all
smallholders).



                              Figure 122. View saving money through different mediums as very important
                                           Sample: "Battling the elements" households, n=393



               Financial institution                                                                                 76%


                On a mobile phone                                                                             68%


                          At home                                                                           66%


            With an informal group                                                 42%




                                                                                                                          Findings   77
                                     Figure 123. Perceived most important savings medium
                                           (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)

                                                                      66%
                                                                              45%
                        28%                                                                            22%
                15%                                                                             12%
                                          4%      4%

              Save money at a        Save money with an          Save money at home        Save money on a mobile
            financial institution      informal group                                             phone

                                    Farming for sustenance          Battling the elements



Segment 3: “Diversified and Pragmatic”: Realistic, Grounded, and Planning for the Realities of
Agricultural Life38

The diversified and pragmatic segment, which includes 29 percent of Tanzania’s smallholder households, is
moving away from vulnerability and onto a path of stability. Perhaps what is most important about this group
is its large size, suggesting plenty of use cases and models in the marketplace for coming out of vulnerability.
Its size is also important in level-setting expectations as to what financial and agricultural mechanisms mean
for a less-entrenched household.

Segment synopsis

The “diversified and pragmatic” segment reflects the realism and inner conflict that can characterize
smallholder farming households. These households grow more, sell more, earn more, are slightly less
dependent on farming, and have a marginally broader portfolio of financial mechanisms.

They are empowered, but believe that someone else or circumstances more generally might have more power
than they do to shape their destiny. They think through decisions, but also know that reality can get in the way
of the best-laid plans. This is an important group, as it represents smallholder households that have diversified
within and outside of agriculture to best sustain their household needs.

Their experience has conditioned them to take a more pragmatic approach to farming. They tend to diversify
income sources, plan for the unexpected, and perhaps even consider full-time employment outside of
agriculture if the opportunity presented itself, though they enjoy and take pride in farming.

Demographics: The majority still live in poverty. This segment is evenly distributed, with a slightly higher
concentration seen in the Lake region, and largely headed by older farmers.

The “diversified and pragmatic” group tends to be slightly older (42 percent, 50-plus years), second to the
“farming for sustenance” group. They are evenly distributed in the mainland, with all regions having more than
20 percent. The highest concentration of this segment is in the Lake region (29 percent), followed by Coastal
and Inland (24 percent). The majority of this group (87 percent) lives below the poverty line (earning less than
$2.50 a day).




78   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
                                                         Figure 124. Age distribution
                                            (Sample: Farming for Sustenence, Battling the Elements)
                                                                                                                  37%
                                            24% 24%
                                                               20%   23% 27%             20% 18% 17%
                                                                                                                               25%
                   17%                16%                                                                                18%
              8%           8%


                   15-29                   30-39                    40-49                    50-59                      over 60

                     Farming for sustenance               Battling the elements               Diversified and pragmatic


Farming: Experience, income, and crops.

“Diversified and pragmatic” smallholder households are mostly experienced in farming. More than two-thirds
have been farming for over 10 years (69 percent), and 31 percent have been farming for 10 years or less.
Compared to the “battling the elements” group, more people in the “diversified and pragmatic” segment are
tenured in agriculture, and have been working in the sector for more than 10 years (compared to 59 percent of
“battling the elements”).

Enjoyment of farming
The “diversified and pragmatic” segment of smallholder households in Tanzania intend to continue working in
agriculture (96 percent), showing similar intentions as other segments. They enjoy it (96 percent), and many
would like to expand their capabilities (94 percent). Farming is hard work and is susceptible to elements that
make it unpredictable or difficult to grow the business. This segment feels only somewhat satisfied with their
agricultural achievements (68 percent), suggesting they may have wanted better outcomes than their
circumstances could support (Figure 125).

It is critical to point out with this segment that full-time employment is attractive (84 percent). And that
pragmatism might be more than just idealistic. This group, despite their age, is more likely to find
opportunities to leave agriculture than either the “farming for sustenance” or “battling the elements”
segments. Their income streams are more diverse, and one could develop into full-time employment.

                              Figure 125. View of success in agriculture vs. willingness to continue working in it
                            Sample: All smallholder households who participate in agricultural activities by segment

                                        Total                                                   67%
                                                                                                                       97%
                    Farming for sustenance                                                       69%
                                                                                                                       97%
                     Battling the elements                                                   63%
                                                                                                                       98%
                    Diversified & pragmatic                                                     68%
                                                                                                                   96%
                         Options for growth                                                    66%
                                                                                                                       98%
             Strategic ag entrepreneurship                                                       69%
                                                                                                                       97%




                                                                                                                                  Findings   79
More sources of income
Close to three-quarters (74 percent) of “diversified and pragmatic” smallholder households in Tanzania
generate income from crops, and 30 percent generate income from livestock. Other sources of income for the
“diversified and pragmatic” households can include the following:

     •     Running own business in retail or manufacturing (selling or making goods) (26 percent). Eleven percent
           say this is their largest source of income.
     •     Money from family and friends (17 percent).
     •     Wages from occasional jobs (17 percent).
     •     Running a business that provides services (9 percent).

The average land size for “diversified and pragmatic” is 3.9 hectares, and they typically grow four crops each
year on their land. They tend to sell, on average, two crops they grow. Commonly grown crops include the
following:

     •     Maize (93 percent)
     •     Beans (53 percent)
     •     Cassava (46 percent)
     •     Sweet potatoes (36 percent)
     •     Ground nuts (36 percent)
     •     Paddy rice (34 percent)

Affected by outside elements
All in this group have experienced unexpected events (100 percent), and are more likely to have experienced
two or more unexpected events in the past three years (74 percent).

     •     Four in five (81 percent) were affected by weather alone.
     •     Almost seven in 10 (69 percent) of this segment of smallholders faced notable challenges with pests
           and disease.

Price fluctuations are also a significant challenge for this group (27 percent). Fluctuations are also surrounding
the cost of inputs (32 percent) and a quarter were affected by health-related issues. Smallholders in this
segment cope with this events in a number of ways. Most notably, this segment was more likely to have used
their savings to recover than they were to have done nothing to address the problems. Borrowing also was
used to cope more often that among the “farming for sustenance” or “battling the elements” segments.

     •     Savings (33 percent)
     •     Doing nothing (26 percent)
     •     Selling livestock/crop (23 percent)
     •     Temporary job (19 percent)
     •     Borrowing from someone (13 percent) or taking a loan from a financial institution (5 percent)




80       Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Financial attitudes
The segmentation model itself is built off of predictors of financial inclusion. More than half (57 percent) of the
“diversified and pragmatic” segment of smallholder households in Tanzania are financially included. The level
of financial inclusion among this segment surpasses the overall level of financial inclusion among smallholder
families in Tanzania (49 percent).

This segment is the one that offers hope that farming households can put their livelihoods on a path toward
greater stability that includes mechanisms for household management. With more than half of this segment
financially included, it suggests an opportunity to foster more advanced use of mobile money accounts since
these individuals already have the account and are already using them. Their audience size and digital
capabilities might help fuel expansion of merchant payments, digital savings, and/or bill pay. And, the
segments use could set examples for other farmers. Therefore, the collective reach of those efforts might
extend far beyond the people within the segment.

A “pragmatic” approach to finances
Among the “diversified and pragmatic” segment of smallholder households in Tanzania, almost all households
have access to a mobile phone (98 percent) and are aware of mobile money (83 percent). It then follows that
mobile money accounts are the most popular formal financial mechanisms, with 56 percent of the segment
using a mobile money account registered in their name.

Six percent of smallholders in this segment have NBFI accounts, and 6 percent have bank accounts. Only 8
percent have ever used a bank. Similarly, 8 percent have every used an NBFI. More than one in five (23
percent) have used informal savings mechanisms such as a moneylender, merry-go-round, VSLA, or savings
collector.

                         Table 16. Informal and formal financial mechanisms (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)
                          Financially          Own bank            Own mobile              Own NBFI                Access to
                           included             account           money account             account                informal
                                                                                                                    savings
                                                                                                                    groups
     Farming tor               1%                  0%                    <.5%                  1%                    14%
     Sustenance
     Battling the             14%                  0%                    14%                   2%                      17%
     Elements
     Diversified and          57%                  6%                    56%                   6%                      23%
     Pragmatic



Over eight in 10 (84 percent) have saved money for something in the past 12 months, and 45 percent of the
segment have two or more savings channels. A majority believe saving for specific purposes (e.g., school fees,
regular expenses, the future, health) is very important. Saving for a dowry was ranked the least important (37
percent), followed by death in the family (65 percent). The rest vary between seven and nine in 10 with future
expenses being most important (94 percent) followed by the need for the household to invest in the farm,
home improvement, education, business, and health.




                                                                                                                       Findings   81
Similar to all other groups, those in the “diversified and pragmatic” segment find saving at a financial
institution to be very important (77 percent) (Figure 126). This is followed by saving on a mobile phone (70
percent), and distantly by saving money at home.

When asked to choose which of the four (financial institution, on a mobile, at home, or with an informal group)
is most important, smallholders in this segment are somewhat divided. A plurality (36 percent) say saving at
home is the most important savings medium for their household, reflecting the need to be in close proximity
to one’s money). A notable portion choose “financial institution” or “mobile phone” over saving at home
(Figure 127).

                              Figure 126. View saving money through different mediums as very important
                                           Sample: "Diverse and pragmatic" households, n=826



               Financial institution                                                                            77%


                On a mobile phone                                                                         70%


                          At home                                                              59%


            With an informal group                                            40%




                                       Figure 127. Perceived most important medium for saving money
                                                  (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)

                                                                          66%
                                                                                 45%
                                                                                       36%
                    28% 30%                                                                                 22% 26%
              15%                                                                                     12%
                                              4%    4%     6%

              Save money at a              Save money with an          Save money at home         Save money on a mobile
            financial institution            informal group                                              phone

                    Farming for sustenance               Battling the elements           Diversified and Pragmatic




Segment 4: “Options for Growth”: Stable, Optimistic, and Building Various
Paths for the Future
Smallholder households in the “options for growth” segment comprise 22 percent of the smallholder
population in Tanzania. Their most significant characterizing elements are their level of financial inclusion,
youth, and recent entry into agriculture, which together distinguish them from the other segments. They have
access to financial tools, a range of livelihood opportunities, and feel more empowered than other groups.

Though they are optimistic, there is still room for growth. Their optimism conveys they have improved their
current situations, largely because of their net incomes. Furthermore, it might not be farming income alone
that helps stabilize their households, as agriculture is but one of the household’s diverse revenue streams.


82   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Segment Synopsis

The “options for growth” segment has greater access to financial tools and external support. It includes few
uneducated individuals and feels least oppressed by powerful figures. But their youth, optimism, and interest
in opportunities, including those outside of agriculture, could also mean that their future takes them away
from farming.

The segment relies heavily on agricultural income. At the same time, smallholder farmers in the “options for
growth” segment are also the most likely to be engaged in more stable income sources outside of agriculture,
such as running one’s own business or working at a regular, full-time job.

This segment could pivot in either direction depending, in part, on how they are cultivated by policy makers,
development organizations, and financial institutions.

Demographics: Smallholders young and old, and mostly poor.

Close to two-thirds of the “options for growth” segment of smallholder households in Tanzania is over 40 years
old (64 percent). They are more concentrated in the Lake (32 percent) and Inland areas (29 percent), with
smaller portions in Coastal and Boarder zones (22 and 17 percent, respectively).

Twelve percent live above the poverty line. It may seem counterintuitive that some portion of a segment called
“options for growth” falls below the poverty line. Individual upward mobility and drive for financial services
(on which the segmentation model was built), however, can cross the poverty line. This results in lower-
income groups with tendencies and attitudes similar to higher-income groups.

                                      Figure 128. Age distribution (Head of Household)
                                          (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)
                                                                                                37%
                               24%24%24%                  27%28%                                       25%
             17%            16%                     20%23%                    20%18%17%18%          18%   18%
        8%         8% 12%


             15-29                30-39                   40-49                      50-59            over 60
         Farming for sustenance    Battling the elements        Diversified and pragmatic    Options for growth




Farming: Experience, income and crops.

The “options for growth” segment is newer to farming: 59 percent have been farming for 10 years or less. This
segment of smallholder households sees their future in farming, and almost all (98 percent) intend to continue
working in agriculture. They derive great enjoyment from it (91 percent), and many would like to expand their
agricultural activities (93 percent).

Wanting to expand their agricultural activities
That said, full-time employment could also be very attractive. Many say they want to expand their agricultural
activities (93 percent), but most also say they would welcome full-time employment (89 percent). This
suggests that they may, at some point, determine that the best path for their future is outside of agriculture.




                                                                                                           Findings   83
Two-thirds (66 percent) of this segment are satisfied with what their agricultural work has achieved (Figure
129), exacerbating this contradiction. This is also a potential call to action. If this segment of smallholder
households in Tanzania cannot be successful in agriculture and discovers other options, then they may change
direction. The question becomes, “What do they need to stay in farming?”

                              Figure 129. View of success in agriculture vs. willingness to continue working in it
                            Sample: All smallholder households who participate in agricultural activities by segment
                                                                   (n=2,638)
                                        Total                                                   67%
                                                                                                                       97%
                     Farming for sustenance                                                      69%
                                                                                                                       97%
                       Battling the elements                                                 63%
                                                                                                                       98%
                     Diversified & pragmatic                                                    68%
                                                                                                                   96%
                         Options for growth                                                    66%
                                                                                                                       98%
               Strategic ag entrepreneurship                                                     69%
                                                                                                                       97%




The mean land size for “options for growth” farming households in Tanzania is 3.76 hectares. On average,
these farmers grow four crops each year, two of which they grow to sell.

“Options for growth” households tend to have more sources of income (58 percent have three or more), and
can therefore rely on more than just agriculture for revenue. These farmers also have revenue streams that
could potentially convert to full-time employment.

     •     Close to one-third (32 percent) generate income from their own retail or manufacturing business.
     •     13 percent run a business providing services.
     •     11 percent have salary or wages from a regular job.

Agriculture still generates income for most (73 percent get income from selling crops, 29 percent from
livestock), and it tends to be the largest reported source of income. It is also the source of income most
vulnerable due to unexpected events.

All smallholder households in the “options for growth” segment have had their agricultural activities seriously
affected by an unexpected event, and close to three-quarters experienced two or more unexpected events in
the three years prior to the survey. This group experiences both environmental events as well as market-based
issues.

     •     Over eight in 10 (84 percent) experienced a weather-related event.
     •     Over two-thirds (68 percent) were impacted by pests or disease.
     •     30 percent were impacted by unexpected changes in sales price fluxes for their goods, and 34 percent
           by unexpected changes in the price of inputs.
     •     16 percent were impacted by market downturns that meant they could not sell goods.




84       Smallholder Households in Tanzania
The “options for growth” segment is also most enabled by savings when disaster does strike. Thirty-eight
percent turned to their savings (similar to the next segment, the “strategic agricultural entrepreneurs”). Only
two in 10 had no specific response to the shock. This group also had other agency during times of disaster:

    •   23 percent sold livestock
    •   19 percent took a temporary job
    •   10 percent borrowed from friends or family
    •   9 percent took a loan

Financial attitudes
The segmentation model is built on predictors of financial inclusion defined as those having a full-service bank,
mobile money, or NBFI account in their name. It follows, then, that ordering segments from “farming for
sustenance” to the more optimized groups shows a somewhat linear relationship with financial inclusion.
Overall, 49 percent of Tanzania smallholder households are financially included.

Much higher financial inclusion
Just over three-quarters (76 percent) of the “options for growth” segment of smallholder households in
Tanzania are financially included, which is 19 percent higher than the “diversified and pragmatic” segment.
While a small portion of the population, this segment is also one that offers hope that smallholder households
can put their livelihoods on a path toward greater stability as well as growth.

Mobile money accounts are the most common formal financial mechanism among those in the “options for
growth” segment. Three quarters (75 percent) of smallholder farmers have a mobile money account, and 80
percent can access mobile money either through their own or through someone else’s account. Ninety-one
percent of smallholders in the “options for growth” segment had heard of mobile money prior to the survey.

Nine percent of smallholders in the “options for growth” segment have an NBFI account, and 14 percent have
a bank account. One-third (35 percent) had been in a bank—18 times that of those in the “farming for
sustenance” segment.

Roughly one-quarter (23 percent) have used an informal financial institution, most commonly an informal
savings network, such as a merry-go-round (14 percent).

                         Table 17. Informal and formal financial mechanisms (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)
                          Financially          Own bank            Own mobile              Own NBFI                Access to
                           included             account           money account             account                informal
                                                                                                                    savings
     Farming for               1%                  0%                    <.5%                  1%                    14%
     Sustenance
     Battling the             14%                  0%                    14%                   2%                      17%
     Elements
     Diversified and          57%                  6%                    56%                   6%                      23%
     Pragmatic
     Options for              76%                 14%                    75%                   9%                      23%
     Growth


Apart from access to financial mechanisms, there is deep acknowledgment in this segment of the importance
of various financial behaviors, such as saving. Nearly all smallholders in this group (94 percent) feel it is very

                                                                                                                       Findings   85
important to save for future purchases, as well as healthcare (94 percent). Many also find it very important to
save for school fees (81 percent). Perhaps due to their tendency to experience shocks, most also find it very
important to save for the unexpected (85 percent) and future loss of income (75 percent) as well as regular
purchases (84 percent). There is a strong belief in the importance of investing in the farm; 94 percent of
smallholders in this segment consider it very important.

Smallholder households in the “options for growth” segment consider saving at a financial institution or on a
mobile phone more important than saving at home or with an informal group (Figure 130). When asked to
choose which is more important, the segment mostly chooses a financial institution or mobile phone over
informal options, indicating that it sees the value proposition in the formal sources that others have not yet
discovered (Figure 131).
                              Figure 130. View saving money through different mediums as "very important"
                                             Sample: "Options for growth" households, n=628



                 Financial institution                                                                              82%


                  On a mobile phone                                                                           77%


                            At home                                                           56%


              With an informal group                                             42%




                                         Figure 131. Most important medium for saving money
                                               (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)

                                                                      66%
                                                                            45% 36%
             28% 30% 33%                                                            26%                       26% 33%
       15%                               4% 4% 6% 6%                                                  12% 22%

     Save money at a financial       Save money with an              Save money at home             Save money on a mobile
           institution                 informal group                                                      phone

          Farming for sustenance         Battling the elements       Diversified and Pragmatic        Options for Growth




86    Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Segment 5: “Strategic Agricultural Entrepreneurship”: Actively Engaged,
Empowered, and Expanding Their Agricultural Activities39
The strategic agricultural entrepreneurship segment includes 15 percent of Tanzania’s smallholder
households. They have emerged from life’s events empowered, enabled, and perhaps even succeeding, and
have a distinct profile of for their agricultural activities.

Segment synopsis

The “strategic agricultural entrepreneurship” segment includes households who appear to be actively engaged
in building their agricultural work, with some indications of success or at least progress. The segment is more
enabled than the others, has a higher income, more education, greater access to emergency funds, and more
financial mechanisms at their disposal. They’ve been impacted by the realities of farming, and have been able
to rely on their savings or other resources to get through tough times.

What characterizes those in this segment more definitively is their mindset. They put much thought into what
they do. They have big aspirations that include a future in agriculture. Farming is what they want to do, what
satisfies them, and where their legacy lives. Though they aren’t as likely to want out of agriculture, and are the
most satisfied with their achievements in the sector, they are also the most pessimistic about the future.

This is a group that can be a model or a use-case for carrying meaningful messages or examples for growth to
other segments of the population.

Demographics: Close to half of this group is above the poverty line, making it least impoverished, and they are
evenly distributed across the regions and across age groups.

The age of the household head in the “strategic agricultural entrepreneurship” segment is more evenly
distributed across the age groups. No one age group has a distribution larger than 24 percent. Close to four in
10 (38 percent) heads of household in the “strategic agricultural entrepreneurship” segment are under 40,
which is a sizable youth population.

The segment is also evenly distributed across the regions, with the largest groups in the Coastal zone (33
percent) and the Inland zone (28 percent). This is also the least impoverished segment, with only 57 percent
below the poverty line. No smallholder households in this segment live in extreme poverty (earning under
$1.25 a day).

                                                               Figure 132. Age distribution
                                                         (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)
                                                                                                                       37%
                                        24%24%24%24%                   27%28%24%                                              25%
              17%                    16%                         20%23%                       20%18%17%18%21%              18% 18%17%
                          14%
         8%         8% 12%


                15-29                       30-39                        40-49                       50-59                    over 60


          Farming for sustenance     Battling the Elements     Diversified and Pragmatic     Options for Growth   Strategic ag entepreneurship




39   Caution: Small segment size limits analysis. Proceed with caution in extrapolating findings.

                                                                                                                          Findings      87
Farming: Experience, income and crops.

Over half of smallholder households in the “strategic agricultural entrepreneurship” segment are new to
farming and have worked in the sector for 10 years or less (53 percent). Nearly all intend to continue working
in agriculture (97 percent), showing similar intentions as other segments. Almost all of them enjoy it (95
percent), and many would like to expand their capabilities (95 percent), even more so than most other
segments. That said, full-time employment could also be attractive to many in this segment (87 percent).
Seven in 10 (69 percent) smallholders in this segment are satisfied with what their agricultural work has
achieved (Figure 133), the second most among all segments.

Considering that so smallholders in this segment want to expand their agricultural activities and find them
satisfying, and yet would also consider alternatives outside of farming suggests a wider entrepreneurial spirit.
The question becomes, “What can be done to feed the entrepreneurial spirit of this segment, and expand their
reach and influence in agriculture in Tanzania?”

                              Figure 133. View of success in agriculture vs. willingness to continue working in it
                            Sample: All smallholder households who participate in agricultural activities by segment

                                        Total                                                   67%
                                                                                                                       97%
                     Farming for sustenance                                                      69%
                                                                                                                       97%
                       Battling the elements                                                 63%
                                                                                                                       98%
                     Diversified & pragmatic                                                    68%
                                                                                                                   96%
                         Options for growth                                                    66%
                                                                                                                       98%
               Strategic ag entrepreneurship                                                     69%
                                                                                                                       97%




More sources of income
Compared to the other segments, a smaller portion of the “strategic agricultural entrepreneurship” segment
generates income from livestock (24 percent) and growing crops, fruits, or vegetables (67 percent). Larger
portions also generate income from earning wages from a regular job (22 percent), earning wages from an
occasional job (20 percent), and running a business in retail or manufacturing (36 percent). This suggests that
agricultural pursuits are key components of a larger and diversified income strategy.

On average, those in the “strategic agricultural entrepreneurship” segment grow the fewest types of crops
each year (3.52). They tend to sell on average two crops they grow. They also have the most land with an
average of 4.44 hectares. 40

All (100 percent) of the “strategic agricultural entrepreneurship” smallholders have been seriously affected by
an outside element including weather, pests and disease, accidents, market fluctuations, equipment failure,

40The land size measurement comes from the household survey where multiple members of the agricultural household offer up their
recollection of various dynamics so as to capture full dynamics instead of relying on just one member’s knowledge of the household. An
aggregate estimate of this measure was then created and appended to the segmentation, which is based on participant responses to
the individual questionnaire (asked of just one randomly selected household member). These data are weighted accordingly. Use data
with caution surrounding extrapolation and inferences. These should be used only as added descriptive measures.

88    Smallholder Households in Tanzania
and/or their own health issues. Just 13 percent had no specific response when coping with these events,
indicating a wider range of coping mechanisms and options at their disposal.


Financial attitudes
Overall, 49 percent of Tanzanian smallholder households across the country are financially included. The
majority (90 percent) of smallholder households in the “strategic agricultural entrepreneurship” segment is
financially included. Most smallholders in this group (89 percent) have mobile money accounts, the highest of
all five segments.

Ninety-three percent have access to a mobile money service, and nearly all (98 percent) have heard of mobile
money. Bank account and NBFI account ownership are at 32 percent and 12 percent, respectively. Roughly
three in 10 (27 percent) have used an informal group at some point in their life (even if they are not using it
now). Experience with these informal financial mechanisms ranged, but was overall relatively low:

     •    Merry-go-round: 16 percent
     •    Money guard: 5 percent
     •    Shopkeepers: 4 percent
     •    VSLA: 3 percent
     •    Other: 3 percent


Table 18. Informal and formal financial mechanisms (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)

                                 Financially         Own bank            Own mobile           Own NBFI   Access to
                                  included            account           money account          account   informal
                                                                                                          savings
      Farming tor                    1%                   0%                   <.5%             1%         14%
      sustenance
      Battling the                   14%                  0%                   14%              2%         17%
      elements
      Diversified and                57%                  6%                   56%              6%         23%
      pragmatic
      Options for                    76%                 14%                   75%              9%         23%
      growth
      Strategic                      90%                 32%                   89%              12%        27%
      agricultural
      entrepreneurs


Importance of saving
Smallholder households in the “strategic agricultural entrepreneurship” segment consider saving important.
Ninety-five percent have saved money in the past 12 months and on average have two savings channels at
their disposal. Around one-third (35 percent) have three or more channels at their disposal.

Most (96 percent) feel it is very important to save for future purchases, unexpected expenses (89 percent), and
school fees (84 percent). There is also emphasis on investing in the farm (94 percent).

Smallholders in the “strategic agricultural entrepreneurship” segment consider saving with a financial
institution and on a mobile phone more than two times as important than saving at home or through an

                                                                                                           Findings   89
informal channel. This shows that the group values the functions of a formal account in way that other
segments haven’t yet discovered (Figure 134). When indicating their preference, this segment is more likely to
indicate that saving at a financial institution or a mobile phone is the most important channel for their
household.

                                    Figure 134. View saving money through different mediums as very important
                                         Sample: "Strategic agricultural entrepreneurship" households, n=391

                     Financial institution                                                                           80%


                     On a mobile phone                                                                           76%


                                At home                                     35%


                 With an informal group                                    34%




                                                Figure 135. Most important medium for saving money
                                                      (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)

                                                                               66%

                             41%                                                        45%                                                  43%
                                                                                              36%                                      33%
               28% 30% 33%                                                                          26%                    22% 26%
         15%                                                                                              10%        12%
                                             4% 4% 6% 6% 5%

     Save money at a financial               Save money with an                  Save money at home                  Save money on a mobile
           institution                         informal group                                                               phone
           Farming for sustenance   Battling the elements   Diversified and Pragmatic    Options for Growth     Strategic Agricultural Entpreneurs




Market implications
There is a collection of attitudinal, behavioral, and circumstantial factors that define smallholder farming
households in Tanzania. This segmentation model offers a dynamically nuanced perspective to capture the
unique points within each segment and leverage them for positive market interventions.

Smallholder farmers in Tanzania are not a monolithic group. Instead, there are five segments that characterize
the landscape.

     •     The “farming for sustenance” and “battling the elements” segments are the furthest from financial
           inclusion. They currently lack the skills and tools to join the digital financial ecosystem. They are more
           vulnerable segments, as they are the poorest and the least educated, with the least savings and the
           fewest places to turn when something goes wrong. Together they comprise about a third (33 percent)
           of the smallholder farming population in Tanzania.

                 o   “Farming for sustenance” farmers are the most vulnerable and they are relatively older. Very
                     few are under 30 in this segment, most are over 50.




90       Smallholder Households in Tanzania
             o    “Battling the elements” farmers are considerably younger, with sizable portions under 40 and
                  even under 30. They are newer to farming, are slightly more educated, and do not suffer from
                  extreme poverty to the degree that “farming for sustenance” does.

    •   The “diversified and pragmatic” segment is the largest segment, encompassing about a third (29
        percent) of smallholder households in Tanzania. They have paved a way for themselves in agriculture,
        but have diversified, so that farming alone does not have to sustain them.

    •   The “options for growth” segment is also a sizable segment, including over two in 10 of the country’s
        smallholder households. They have built a good life for themselves in agriculture, while also cultivating
        other revenue streams. Their future offers choices and options for how they sustain themselves. Their
        profile is similar to the “diversified and pragmatic” segment, though smallholder households in the
        “options for growth” segment are younger, more financially stable, and more financially included.

    •   The segment of “strategic agricultural entrepreneurs” is the smallest group, comprising just 15 percent
        of smallholder household in Tanzania. Though relatively small, this segment is important. These are
        the potential trendsetters and catalysts within the smallholder household sector in Tanzania. They are
        financially included and are using and innovating with mobile money.

Fostering greater financial inclusion, agricultural stability and growth, as well as overall economic well-being
requires an approach specific to each segment. This segmentation highlights several agricultural and digital
financial implications for the field.

Agricultural Finance Implications

Implication 1: Household income sources expand and diversify for more stable households
The more vulnerable “farming for sustenance” and “battling the elements” segments are highly dependent on
their land, and unexpected events that impact this resource impact them, sometimes severely. Along the
segmental progression toward “strategic agricultural entrepreneurs,” income sources grow and diversify,
implying that the more vulnerable segments could benefit from more diverse revenue streams.



                              Figure 136. Number of income sources for the smallholder household
                                      (Sample: Smallholder farming households by segment)




         56%                 45%                 54%                   54%                   58%
                                                                                                               69%

                             39%                 29%                   31%
         30%                                                                                 29%
                                                                                                               22%
          12%                13%               15%               13%                 12%                        7%
           2%                 3%                2%                2%                  1%                        1%
    Total (n=2,795)       Farming for       Battling the      Diversified     Options for growth             Strategic
                      sustenance (n=557) elements (n=393) pragmatists (n=826)      (n=628)                 entrepreneur
                                                                                                             (n=391)

               No sources              One source                Two sources                 Three or more sources




                                                                                                                     Findings   91
Implication 2: More stable, diversified, and productive households might have greater needs to
manage unexpected events
The higher income, more stable segments may have greater risk management needs. All farmers face income
loss due to weather, pests, and disease, but the “diversified and pragmatic,” “options for growth,” and
“strategic agricultural entrepreneur” segments have a heightened chance of losing income to market
fluctuations when buying inputs or selling crops. To cope they rely on their savings or a temporary job, or they
just take the loss.

Very few have any kind of insurance, let alone a mechanism to protect them against market fluctuations. Risk
management mechanisms that protect these segments from the income impact that results from changing
prices for crops and inputs could be important to make agriculture work better for these important segments
of smallholder households in Tanzania.

                                Figure 137. Experienced income loss due to market factors
                                        (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)


                                                                      14%
                                                          8%
 Market downturn, could not sell crops                               13%
                                                                            17%
                                                               10%
                                                                            17%

                                                                                                   32%
                                                                                  22%
              Price of inputs increased                                                             33%
                                                                                                   32%
                                                                                                     34%
                                                                                                                   42%

                                                                                             27%
                                                                           16%
     Market price for crops decreased                                                       26%
                                                                                              27%
                                                                                                 30%
                                                                                                         36%


         Total (n=2,795)                    Farming for sustenance (n=557)        Battling the elements (n=393)
         Diversified pragmatists (n=826)    Options for growth (n=628)            Strategic entrepreneur (n=391)




Implication 3: There are suggestions of more fruitful land-to-crop ratios among the less
vulnerable segments
Compared to the other segments, the “strategic agricultural entrepreneurs,” “options for growth,” and
“diversified and pragmatic” segments tend to have more land, grow fewer crops (overall and for sale), have
more income sources, and show higher incomes and greater economic stability. It can be surmised that there
is income stability that comes from diversification, as well as strategy for a ratio of crops to land.

As their name would suggest, the “strategic agricultural entrepreneurs” may have found a sweet spot for
balancing land, crops, and income sources. They have the most land, grow the fewest number of crops, have
more income sources, and boast the highest incomes and stability among smallholder households in Tanzania.




92   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
                                                       Figure 138: Perceptual map of crop growth, income and land
                                                           (Sample: Smallholder farming households by segment)
                                                                              Crops sold
                                                                               4.5



                                                                                 4



                                                                               3.5



                                                                                 3



                                                                               2.5



                                                                                 2


                     All income                                                1.5
                     sources                                                                                                             Crops grown

                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                               Less land, more crops,
                                        
                                                                                                                               fewer income sources
                    More land, fewer crops,
                     more income sources




                                                                             Land Size
                      Farming for Sustenance   Battling the Elements   Diversified and Pragmatic   Options for Growth   Strategic Agricultural Entrepreneurship


About this graph: A radar graph shows four different dimensions on one plane to spatially depict those dimensions alongside each
other to show the relationship between the dimensions, and the dynamic that it forms for the population. This radar graph plots the
following four dimensions; number of crops grown, number of crops sold, number of income sources, and land size in hectares. Specific
values for each variable are in the grid below for reference.


Table 19. Individual scores and percentages for crops, land size and income sources (Sample: Smallholder households
by segment)
 Segment               # Crops   # Crops    Land size      Number of         Income from       Largest income
                       grown     grown/      hectares        Income         crops/livestock         source
                                   sold                      Sources                           (crop/livestock)
 Farming for             4.26      1.95       3.26 ha          2.55        79.82% / 28.26%     72.88% / 4.77%
 sustenance
 (n=557)
 Battling the            4.51      2.19       3.48 ha          2.92        79.25% / 28.20%     66.83% / 7.91%
 elements (n=393)
 Diversified             4.46      2.08       3.91 ha          2.84        73.71% / 29.94%     61.09% / 4.88%
 pragmatists
 (n=826)
 Options for             4.09      1.92       3.76 ha          2.98        73.07% / 28.64%     60.95% / 2.28%
 growth (n=628)
 Strategic               3.52     1.898       4.44 ha          3.48        66.68% / 24.40%     41.95% / 6.08%
 Agricultural
 entrepreneurship
 (n=391)




                                                                                                                                                                  Findings   93
Implication 4: Young farmers are in a precarious position in the market, and might need
targeted assistance
Among smallholder families in Tanzania, young heads of households are a minority. And the young heads of
households are most likely to be found in the “battling the elements”, “strategic agricultural entrepreneurs,”
and “options for growth” segments. These segments are also newer to farming, mostly because of the youth
within the segment.

The preponderance of youth in the vulnerable “battling the elements” segment is a concern. These younger
farmers need a new, contemporary way to operate their farm to minimize their vulnerability and build
opportunity.

Young smallholders in the “options for growth” and “strategic agricultural entrepreneurs” segments are not as
vulnerable, and are making a living off farming. They also have a back-up plan if farming does not yield enough
support for their households, and could leave the agricultural sector. If retaining young farmers is important
for the sector, these two segments will need special attention and retention efforts so that farming continues
to be a viable option for them.
                                        Figure 139. Age distribution (Head of Household)
                                            (Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment)




                                    18%                                                18%               17%
                                                             25%
              37%
                                    18%                                                18%               21%
                                                             17%
              20%                   23%                                                28%               24%
                                                             27%
              20%                   24%
                                                                                       24%               24%
                                                             24%
              16%
                                    17%                                                12%               14%
              8%                                              8%
          Farming for       Battling the Elements      Diversified and        Options for Growth     Strategic ag
          sustenance                                     Pragmatic                                 entepreneurship

                    15-29             30-39                 40-49                   50-59          over 60



Digital Finance Implications

Implication 1: Mobile money is a critical tool for the financially included segments
Mobile money enables close to half (49 percent) of the population of smallholder farmers in Tanzania to be
financially included. No other formal financial channel is as prominent across the population as mobile money.
It is even more prominent than any of the informal financial mechanisms.

Its presence, combined with the ways in which the market has begun to use mobile money, signifies just how
important a component it is for agricultural finance and digital finance.

Furthermore, many smallholders have adopted a mindset conducive to the perception of mobile phones as a
channel for digital finance. Smallholders want to save money on their mobile phone, consider a mobile phone
an important tool for their financial and agricultural lives, and are generally interested in doing more with their
phone.

94   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Implication 2: Less financially included segments need access to mobile phones to catalyze
financial inclusion
Perhaps the first, and most notable barrier to bringing the “farming for sustenance” and “battling the
elements” segments into the financial fold is equipping them with a mobile phone. Only 46 percent and 62
percent of these segments, respectively, have a phone in their home, and fewer have their own. This is in stark
contrast to the other segments, who all largely have a phone in their home.

Figure 140 depicts each of the five smallholder farming segments on a three-dimensional chart, called a bubble
chart. The size of the bubble represents the size of the segments relative to each other. The x-axis represents
the percentage of each segment that is financially included, and the y-axis represents the percentage that have
a mobile phone in their household. The “farming for sustenance” and “battling the elements” segments appear
in the lower left hand side of the chart, illustrating their low cell phone ownership and financial inclusion
compared to other segments.

                                                                 Figure 140. Perceptual map of mobile phone ownership (household) and financial inclusion by size
                                                                                                       of market segment
                                                                                                Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment
                                                     110%
    Percent at least one mobile phone in household




                                                     100%

                                                     90%                                                                           Options for growth
                                                                                                                                              Strategic entrepreneurs
                                                     80%                                                    Diversified pragmatists
                                                                  Battling the elements
                                                     70%

                                                     60%

                                                     50%

                                                     40%
                                                                   Farming for sustenance
                                                     30%

                                                     20%

                                                     10%

                                                      0%
                                                            0%      10%       20%         30%       40%        50%        60%        70%      80%        90%       100%
                                                                                            Percent formally financially included
About this graph: A bubble chart shows three different dimensions on one plane to spatially depict relationships and placement of groups of people, or
in this case, segments. The size of the bubble represents the size of segment (percentage of overall population). The X axis represents the percentage of
the segment that is financially included, and the y axis represents the percentage of the segment that have a mobile phone.




                                                                                                                                                                   Findings   95
Implication 3: Less financially included segments also need meaningful knowledge about
mobile money
There is a notable awareness gap between the more vulnerable segments, and the more stable segments. The
“farming for sustenance” and “battling the elements” segments are not nearly as aware of a mobile money
provider as the others. This indicates a need to introduce these farmers to providers, ideally with value-based
messaging that pairs what the farmer needs or aspires to with what digital financial services offer.

In Figure 141, the size of the bubble represents the size of the segments relative to each other. The x-axis
represents the percentage of each segment that is financially included, and the y-axis represents the
percentage that are aware of a mobile money provider. The “farming for sustenance” segment appears in the
lower left hand side of the chart, illustrating its low awareness of a mobile money providers and financial
inclusion compared to other segments. The “battling the elements” segment is higher, exhibiting more
awareness, but still lagging other segments.



                                                             Figure 141: Perceptual map of awareness of mobile money provider and financial inclusion by size of
                                                                                                    market segment:
                                                                                          Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment
                                                100%
     Percent aware of a mobile money provider




                                                90%
                                                                                                              Diversified                             Strategic
                                                80%           Battling the elements                           pragmatists                           entrepreneurs
                                                                                                                              Options for growth
                                                70%

                                                60%

                                                50%         Farming for
                                                            sustenance
                                                40%

                                                30%

                                                20%

                                                10%

                                                 0%
                                                       0%       10%        20%        30%       40%       50%        60%        70%       80%        90%       100%
                                                                                      Percent formally financially included
About this graph: A bubble chart shows three different dimensions on one plane to spatially depict relationships and placement of
groups of people, or in this case, segments. The size of the bubble represents the size of segment (percentage of overall population).
The X axis represents the percentage of the segment that is financially included, and the y axis represents the percentage of the
segment that are aware of the mobile money provider




96                                        Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Implication 4: There are synergies between mobile phones and finance that bode well for
making agricultural finance easy and accessible
The more stable segments, “options for growth,” “strategic agricultural entrepreneurs,” and “diversified and
pragmatic,” have a connection between a mobile phone and their financial lives for various financial functions,
and particularly savings. In fact, large portions think it is most important to save on a mobile phone, more so
than in a bank or through an informal savings mechanism. Cultivating this connection and building the digital
ecosystem can help facilitate agricultural finance for those financially included segments, and it is desirable for
those who are not yet included.

In Figure 142, each of the five segments are positioned on the bubble chart at the intersection of financial
inclusion and perceived importance of saving on a mobile phone. The bubble represents the size of the
segment relative to other segments. The x-axis represents the percentage of each segment that is financially
included, and the y-axis represents the percentage that think it is more important to save on a mobile phone
than any other means. The connection is strongest for “strategic agricultural entrepreneurs,” the most
financially included. “Diversified and pragmatic” and “options for growth” lag. “Farming for sustenance” and
“battling the elements” also lag; however, these face other barriers to financial inclusion.


                                                             Figure 142. Perceptual map of importance of saving on a mobile phone and financial inclusion by size of
                                                                                                      market segment:
                                                                                            Sample: Smallholder farmers by segment


                                 100%
Percent who say saving on a mobile phone is most




                                           90%
                                           80%
                                           70%
           important for household




                                           60%
                                           50%
                                                                                                                                                   Strategic entrepreneurs
                                           40%
                                           30%                          Battling the elements                                      Options for growth
                                                                                                                  Diversified pragmatists
                                           20%
                                           10%
                                                             Farming for sustenance
                                                   0%
                                                        0%     10%         20%         30%         40%         50%         60%         70%         80%         90%     100%
                                                                                          Percent formally financially included

About this graph: A bubble chart shows three different dimensions on one plane to spatially depict relationships and placement of
groups of people, or in this case, segments. The size of the bubble represents the size of segment (percentage of overall population).
The X axis represents the percentage of the segment that is financially included, and the y axis represents the percentage of the
segment that are aware of the mobile money provider.




                                                                                                                                                                       Findings   97
Cultivating all segments
These several agricultural and financial implications show that there is a need for more targeted approaches to
supporting the smallholder farming population in Tanzania. It is important to tend to the segments that
struggle, as well as cultivate those segments that are more stable and already financially included.

There is value in tending to the segments that struggle. Finding entry points to financial inclusion among these
vulnerable segments of smallholder households in Tanzania will be challenging, but given that these two
segments comprise a third (33 percent) of the sector, its size also presents opportunities. The “battling the
elements” segment also includes a preponderance of young smallholders who are the heads of households.
They, therefore, have greater lifetime value and importance in the sector, given their overall scarcity in the
marketplace. “Farming for sustenance” and “battling the elements” segments need mobile phones, awareness
of mobile money, products to help protect them against weather, pests and disease, and perhaps even crop
planning so they can better manage their land and diversify income sources.

It is also important to cultivate those segments that are more stable and already financially included, keeping
them, and especially their youth, a satisfied and productive part of the agricultural sector in Tanzania.
“Diversified and pragmatic,” “options for growth,” and “strategic agricultural entrepreneurs” could benefit
from a growing digital ecosystem that makes agricultural finance easy for them, as well as mechanisms for
persevering market fluctuations, and perhaps even ways to invest in their agricultural endeavors.

In a market as heterogeneous as Tanzania, it will take multiple approaches and strategies to best position
financial and agricultural mechanisms for meaningful uptake and use within a population. Providers have the
opportunity to choose their target segment, and better calculate their approach as well as potential return
with each segment. At the same time, stakeholders can consider how to shape the sector according to the
distinct needs of each.




98   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
7.      Desires and Aspirations
The national survey of smallholder farmers in Tanzania also included a series of questions on what financial and
agricultural tools farmers considered relevant in their agricultural and financial lives, what they want and need,
and how that differs from what they have now. This section analyzes the desires and aspirations of smallholder
households in Tanzania as a tool for identifying where financial and agricultural mechanisms can be most
relevant, and what farmers think they want (or need) the most. This analysis of the smallholder population in
Tanzania presents the overall picture, as opposed to focusing on any one behavioral segment, largely because
many of these desires and aspirations span the population.

Smallholder households know the importance of saving, investing in financial institutions
Financial products, particularly financial accounts and insurance, are highly relevant to all smallholder
households in Tanzania. They not only recognize how important these mechanisms are for their household,
but also for their agricultural activities. And there is some strength in that belief. Most feel that insurance and
accounts are “very important,” compared to just “somewhat important,” showing intensity.

Close to nine in 10 smallholder households consider insurance and mobile money “very important.” Close to
eight in 10 and seven in 10 say that having a savings accounts and nonsavings bank accounts are also seen as
important. Though credit lags somewhat, 45 percent still feel it is very important to their household (Figure
143). The findings are similar when you ask smallholder farmers about the perceived relevance of these
financial products to their agricultural activities (Figure 144).
                   Figure 143. Regardless of what you have, how important is it to your household to have the following?
                                                 Sample: Smallholder households, n=2,993


                         Insurance                                           86%                                             9%    5% 1%

            Mobile money account                                             85%                                            10% 5% 0%

                   Savings account                                        78%                                          13%         8% 0%

        Bank account (non-savings)                                   69%                                     13%             17%     1%

                             Credit                      45%                              22%                        31%             2%


                           Very important          Somewhat important            Not important          Don't know

                            Figure 144. How important is it to your agricultural activities to have the following?
                                                 Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


                          Insurance                                           87%                                            7% 5%1%

             Mobile money account                                            85%                                           10%     5% 1%

                   Savings account                                        78%                                        13%          8% 1%

         Bank account (non-savings)                                 65%                                   15%              19%       1%

                               Loan                              59%                                 17%               23%           1%

                              Credit                     43%                           20%                       34%                3%


                           Very important          Somewhat important            Not important          Don't know



                                                                                                                                   Findings   99
This perceived relevance of financial tools for either their households or their agricultural activities among
smallholder households in Tanzania carries through to the importance of saving. When asked where they
should save, a majority of smallholder farmers believe it is very important to save at a financial institution and
even on a mobile phone (Figure 145). There is a great opportunity here as the inherent importance for
Tanzania smallholder farmers is already present. Saving with an informal group received the lowest level of
importance.
                               Figure 145. How important is it for your household to save at each of the following?
                                                    Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795
                0%                                   1%                                 0%
                9%                                                                                                          1%
                                                     10%                                17%
                12%                                                                                                         31%
                                                     17%
                                                                                        23%
                                                                                                                            26%
                79%                                  72%
                                                                                        59%
                                                                                                                            42%


      Save money at a financial        Save money on a mobile phone             Save money at home             Save money with an informal
            institution                                                                                                  group

                               Very important          Somewhat important          Not important         Don't know



Savings priorities: Health and future expenses
The majority of smallholder farmers in Tanzania feel it is very important to save for future purchases, health
care, an unexpected event, regular purchases, and school fees (Figure 146). Looking at the trend, smallholder
farmers tend to save for a planned future purchase and also recognize the fact that healthcare and having a
safety net is important. When asked what they need to do the most, they chose health care as a planned
future purchase, followed by saving for both the future and unexpected events (Figure 147).

        Figure 146. How important is it for your household to save for
                           each of the following?
                    Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795
                                                                                         Figure 147. Which of the following do you feel
                                                                                          your household needs to save for the most?
                                                                                             Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,793
                                                                                                                                      32%
      Save money for a future
                                                   94%                    1%
                                                                         4%
            purchase
   Save money for health care                      94%                    1%
                                                                         5%         20%          20%
Save money for an unexpected
                                                 85%                 11%4%
           event                                                                                              11%
      Save money for regular
                                                 82%                 15%3%                                                6%
             purchases
   Save money for school fees                   81%                11%8%

                                                                                 Save money Save money Save money Save money Save money
                                  0%     20%    40%      60%     80%     100%
                                                                                 for a future  for an   for regular for school for health
       Very important        Somewhat important            Not important          purchase unexpected purchases        fees       care
                                                                                               event


Smallholder farmers in Tanzania demonstrate that trust, purpose, and ease of access are important factors to
consider while saving. They value storing money in a trustable place that can be easily accessed in case of an
emergency with minimal risk of losing it. They also perceive that saving money for purpose is critical mainly

100    Smallholder Households in Tanzania
because it provides a target and ensures discipline (Figure 148). When this desired mindset is in place, it serves
as the first step in building relevance of financial mechanisms that pair to these beliefs.

                                       Figure 148. Do you agree or disagree with the following statements?
                                                       Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795

                        I like to store my money somewhere I trust                                     97%                         3%
                                                                                                                                    0%
           I like to store money somewhere for a specific purpose                                  94%                            6%0%
                  I like to save my money in case of an emergency                                  93%                            7%0%
               I need to be able to access my money immediately                                    91%                            9%0%
          I like to save my money in an account because it is safer                              85%                           15% 0%
 Storing my money somewhere is easier than saving in an account                              71%                        28%        1%
  When my money is in an account, it is constantly working for me                          63%                        34%          3%

                                                                  Agree    Disagree        Don't know



Investing priorities: The farm
While savings tends to serve health and future purposes, nearly all (93 percent) smallholder farmers in
Tanzania consider the farm an important place to invest as well (Figure 149). Many say the farm is the most
important place to invest their money, followed by healthcare (Figure 150). Investing in educational
opportunities and the home are also considered “very important” to a smaller portion of the population.

                                                                                      Figure 150. Which of the following do you
       Figure 149. How important is it for your household to invest in                feel your household needs to do the most?
                          each of the following?                                        Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,794
                   Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795                                                 Don’t
                                                                                                        know
                                                                                                         1%
        Invest money in a farm                93%            5% 2%
                                                                                           Healthcar
                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                     Invest
                                                                                             28%
       Invest money in a future                                                                                     money in
                                        85%           11%        4%                                                  a farm
       educational opportunity
                                                                                                                      43%

 Invest money in a home/home                                                                  Invest money in
                                       84%           12%         4%
         improvement                                                                              a future
                                                                                                educational   Invest money in a
                                                                                                opportunity      home/home
                                                                                Business             9%         improvement
       Very important       Somewhat important           Not important
                                                                                  12%                                7%




                                                                                                                               Findings   101
Desires and aspirations: Smallholder households prefer to borrow from banks even though they
ultimately turn to other sources for loans
Smallholder farmers in Tanzania recognize the importance of borrowing from formal institutions such as banks
for their agricultural activities. Banks also tend to carry greater importance than family and friends, MFIs, or
informal options (Figure 151).

Nevertheless, despite the perceived the importance of banks, smallholders will turn to family and friends or
informal financial mechanisms more frequently than banks for credit. (Figures 152 and 153). This suggests that
there are some barriers, either real or perceived, that prohibit farmers from even attempting to borrow from
banks when the need arises.
                  Figure 151. For your agricultural activities, how important to you is it to borrow from each of the following?
                                                      Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


                   Bank                                       66%                                              16%                 17%   1%

      Friends and family                               53%                                            27%                          19%   1%

Microfinance institution                             46%                                       28%                            25%        1%

            Cooperative                        37%                                25%                                  37%               1%

                 SACCO                      36%                                 25%                                   37%                2%

 Informal money lender                   28%                         22%                                       49%                       1%


                              Very important          Somewhat important           Not important          Don't know




                                                                                Figure 153. If the need arose, would you attempt
            Figure 152. In the past 12 months, have you                               to borrow from any of the following?
          attempted to borrow from any of the following?                                           "Yes" answers
                            "Yes" answers                                             Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795
               Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795                        Friends and family                                    78%
             Friends and family                    37%
                                                                                        Bank                                 62%
         Informal money lender        5%
        Microfinance institution     4%
                                                                                Microfinance…                          50%

                            VSLA     3%                                                 VSLA                         44%

                            Bank     3%                                               SACCO                       40%

                           SACCO    2%                                           Cooperative                     38%
                    Cooperative     1%                                       Informal money…                 29%


Smallholder farmers in Tanzania consider a host of factors when borrowing money, including interest rate,
quick access, repayment terms, convenience, and the loan amount that they could receive (Figure 154). The
top reasons for borrowing money are focused on either investing in their business or in their farms and
agricultural activities. The only other major reason is in case of an emergency (Figure 156). Only one in 10
currently have an outstanding loan (Figure 155).



102     Smallholder Households in Tanzania
     Figure 154. What factors would you consider when you want                              Figure 155. Do you currently have any loans?
                          to borrow money?                                                      Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795
                 Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795
                     Multiple responses allowed


                 Best interest rates                                         68%
         Quickest access to money                                      50%
                                                                                                                         Yes
            Best repayment terms                                      47%                                                10%
        Most convenient to get to                              33%
                           Loan size                      27%
     Trust in a financial institution               19%
                      Easiest to use            13%
Was desperate / no other options                13%
      Met minimum requirements                  11%                                                           No
                                                                                                             90%
        Recommended by a friend                7%
Have borrowed from them before                 7%
                        Don't know        2%
                              Other       2%



                                        Figure 156. What would be the main reasons for borrowing money?
                                                      Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795
                                                           Multiple responses allowed

    44%

                    37%            36%
                                                    33%


                                                                     21%
                                                                                   18%
                                                                                               14%           13%

                                                                                                                               5%
                                                                                                                                           2%

To start a new   To buy inputs For emergency     For other     To improve the To make big To cover daily    To pay for         Other    Don't know
 business or                     expenses       agricultural      cash flow    purchases such expenses     school fees
 expand my                                       activities    situation of my    as land or
   business                                                        business        modern
                                                                                 equipment




                                                                                                                                       Findings      103
Desires and aspirations: There is high interest in plans for credit or savings inputs and school
fees
Smallholder farmers in Tanzania consider savings, credit, and payment plans for school fees and inputs (Figure
157) important to their agricultural activities. Comparatively, prepaid cards and mobile money accounts have
less recognized importance. While financial practices and consumer interests orient smallholder farmers in
Tanzania toward informal financial mechanisms, a number of financial products resonate as important for this
group, presenting an opportunity to build meaning and relevance for more formal financial mechanisms.

Very few smallholder farmers in Tanzania currently have any of these products, with the highest percentages at
8 percent and 9 percent for payment and savings plans for inputs, respectively (Figure 158). For those who do
not currently have these products, the highest demand is for payment and savings plans for inputs, showcasing
how important these are to their agricultural activities. School fees present an important opportunity, as 69
percent of smallholder farmers want a credit or layaway plan to address school fees. This comports with what
we know about the smallholder’s economic cycle. Income is cyclical with the agricultural cycle, while various
payments are due more regularly.

                                Figure 157. How important is each of the following products to your agricultural activities?
                                                         Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


                                       A savings plan for inputs                                  71%                                     16%           12% 1%
                                     A payment plan for inputs                                   70%                                      17%           12% 1%
                                   A credit plan for school fees                           59%                                      18%           21%         2%
 A goal savings plan or contractual savings plan for school fees                           57%                                  21%               21%         2%
       A mobile money account that came with a smartphone                            45%                                 23%                    29%           2%
                             A pre-paid card to make payments                       41%                            20%                    35%                 4%
                          A pre-paid card for receiving income                      40%                       19%                         37%                 4%


                                   Very important          Somewhat important              Not important             Don't know



                         Figure 158. Do you currently have any of the following products for your agricultural activities?
                               Do you want to have any of the following products for your agricultural activities?
                                                      Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795                            69%                        70%
                                                                               58%                    59%
                                                         51%
               44%                  45%




                                                                                                                               8%                9%
                2%                   2%                   3%                   5%                      4%
         Pre-paid card for     Pre-paid card to     Mobile money      Goal savings or            Credit plan for     Payment plan for      Savings plan for
         receiving income      make payments      account that came contractual savings           school fees            inputs                 inputs
                                                  with a smartphone plan for school fees


                                                                   Currently have           Want




104     Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Smallholders report moderate to high importance on loans that come with a particular service or accounts. Close
to seven in 10 identify a loan bundled with an insurance plan as the most important. This is followed closely by
a range of other credit products, including a loan that comes with a bank account, a loan that can be accessed
through a bank account, a loan that can be accessed through a mobile money account, a loan bundled with a
mobile money account, and a loan that can be accessed through a mobile money account and linked to a bank
account (Figure 159). Very few smallholder farmers in Tanzania currently have any of these loans, yet large
numbers say they want them (Figure 160).

                               Figure 159. How important is each of the following products to your agricultural activities
                                                       Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


                               A loan that came with an insurance plan                             68%                             14%         17%   1%

                                  A loan that came with a bank account                          65%                                17%         17%   1%

                 A loan that is accessed directly through a bank account                        61%                             20%        18%       1%

               A loan that is accessed through a mobile money account                        56%                             22%          20%        2%

                        A loan that came with a mobile money account                         56%                             22%          21%        2%

 A loan that is accessed through a mobile money account and linked to a
                              bank account
                                                                                            54%                          21%             23%         2%


                                 Very important          Somewhat important            Not important         Don't know



                            Figure 160. Do you currently have any of the following products for your agricultural activities?
                                  Do you want to have any of the following products for your agricultural activities?
                                                         Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795                                      72%
                                                                                   66%                    67%
                                     62%                    62%
              58%




               2%                     3%                     3%                     2%                     3%                       3%
      Loan that is accessed Loan that came with a Loan that is accessed Loan that is accessed Loan that came with a Loan that came with
        through a mobile mobile money account through a mobile           directly through a       bank account       an insurance plan
       money account and                            money account          bank account
         linked to a bank
             account
                                                             Currently have              Want




                                                                                                                                    Findings     105
Desires and aspirations: Mobile products conjure interest
Smallholder farmers can see the importance of leveraging their mobile phone as a tool for their agricultural
activities. About eight in 10 state that it would be very important to access financial services, farming
information, and weather on their mobile phone. The same number believe that being able to access mobile
services by having a centralized charging location for their phones as important. Close to eight in 10 identify the
ability to access to market prices and track shipments as important (Figure 161). The ability to buy and sell on a
mobile phone ranked lowest, perhaps because it may be difficult to visualize.

In Tanzania, most smallholder households lack the ability to access most of this services, with the highest ability
being a third who can charge their phones and access financial services (Figure 162). Generally, six to eight in 10
stated that they would want to have these abilities on a mobile phone.

                      Figure 161. How important is each of the following abilities to your household’s agricultural activities?
                                                     Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


            Ability to access financial services on a mobile phone                                 84%                                       8% 7% 1%

         Ability to access farming information on a mobile phone                                  81%                                   10%     8% 1%

         Ability to access weather information on a mobile phone                                  80%                                   10%     9% 1%

                  Ability to charge my phone at a central location                                80%                                   11%     9% 1%

   Ability to access market pricing information on a mobile phone                                79%                                    12%     8% 1%

 Ability to track shipments of inputs and crops on a mobile phone                              75%                                     14%     10% 1%

                        Ability to buy and sell on a mobile phone                           67%                                  16%          16% 1%


                               Very important          Somewhat important             Not important          Don't know



                            Figure 162. Do you currently have any of the following abilities for your agricultural activities?
                                  Do you want to have any of the following abilities for your agricultural activities?
                                                        Sample: Smallholder farmers, n=2,795


                                                                       79%                   80%                   81%                       82%
                                                 72%
      55%                  57%
            36%                  35%

                                                       11%                    7%                   10%                    10%                      9%


 Ability to charge my   Ability to access Ability to buy and sell    Ability to track    Ability to access       Ability to access   Ability to access
  phone at a central financial services on a on a mobile phone shipments of inputs        market pricing       farming information weather information
        location         mobile phone                             and crops on a mobile information on a        on a mobile phone on a mobile phone
                                                                         phone            mobile phone

                                                               Want       Currently have




106     Smallholder Households in Tanzania
8.       Concluding Observations
This working paper is designed to provide a foundational assessment of the core findings with the deep and
robust nationally representative survey and segmentation of smallholder households in Tanzania. The survey
and segmentation itself will sustain any number of inquiries about the agricultural and financial landscape of
smallholder farmers in the country. This includes, but is not limited to market sizing, value chain assessments,
product positioning, target audience profiling and recruitment, and marketing strategy and messaging, as well
as benchmarking and tracking for future growth.

Through the process of analyzing the data for this working paper, the research team identified five challenges
within the smallholder population in Tanzania.

     •   The smallholder population in Tanzania is older and aging. And young smallholders are trapped in a
         more vulnerable segment of the population, living in extreme poverty, dependent on their land, with
         little income diversity and very few financial tools to help them manage their lives. Smallholder
         farmers are heavily concentrated on three to four crops: maize, cassava, beans, and sweet potatoes.
         There is little diversity in what smallholders cultivate.

     •   There is a heavy dependence on agricultural income among smallholder households in Tanzania, and
         limited other income sources. Only small portions of the smallholder sector have multiple income
         streams and, even then, farming is still reported to be the biggest.

     •   The 51 percent of smallholder households in Tanzania who are not financially included are fairly
         distanced from financial inclusion. They lack mobile phones for digital access and knowledge of mobile
         money providers, have never been in a bank, and do not perceive formal financial tools as important.

     •   Few information channels reach smallholder households in Tanzania. The community shares small
         amounts of information, mostly through word-of-mouth based on experience or hearsay.

Within those challenges, there are opportunities:

     •   There are models of sustainable, prosperous smallholder households in Tanzania. Some success has
         come to smallholders who are more diverse and thoughtfully manage their land, crops and livestock,
         and income streams, showing that the sector can yield positive experiences.

     •   This is a mobile money-driven market. Mobile phones are a key connectivity tool for digital finance.
         The financially included embrace that connection, see a phone as a communications tool, and want to
         do more with it to foster their financial and agricultural lives.

     •   There are signs of a budding digital financial ecosystem. Those who have digital financial services,
         specifically mobile money, are using their accounts frequently and starting to experiment with more
         advanced uses. They value having a mobile money account for savings and transacting purposes and
         want to be able to use it in more ways than they currently are.




                                                                                                  Findings   107
Combined, the challenges and opportunities for smallholder households in Tanzania have three big-picture
implications.

      •    There is a real need to continue cultivating the digital financial ecosystem. No other formal channel
           can compete with mobile money. Without it, many smallholders would not be financially included.
           They need this type of access to formal financial services to work.

      •    The retention and even recruitment of young farmers has to be a critical imperative for sustaining
           Tanzania’s agricultural sector. There are few young heads of households within the farming
           community, and any mass attrition could impact the future of farming for the country.

      •    Smallholder households need information and tools to plan their agricultural and financial lives.
           Insurance and savings mechanisms are critical to guard smallholders from the shocks that most of
           them experience. And it is especially important for those households where so much of their income
           depends on so few crops. With proper sensitization and product development, these services will be
           attractive to smallholder households and offer them a credible safety net. Households that depend on
           what the market will bear may also need some insurance against price fluctuations. The provision of
           credit services is critical as both a facilitation tool for smallholder household planning and as an
           incentive or motivation to invest. This could catalyze new product adoption, or even additional
           financial services, such as savings products to offset a line of credit.




108       Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Annex 1: Methodology and Design
The smallholder household survey in Tanzania is a nationally representative survey with a target sample size of
3,000 smallholder households. The sample was designed to provide reliable survey estimates at the national
level.

Sampling Frame
The sampling frame is the list of enumeration areas (EAs) containing agricultural households. These EAs were
created in preparation for the 2012 population and housing census. The census questionnaire included a
question on whether any household member operated any land for agricultural purposes during the 2011–2012
agricultural year. The information collected led to the identification of agricultural households during the census.
Table 1 shows the distribution of agricultural households according to the zone and urban–rural classification.


                                  Table A1-1. Distribution of agricultural households
                  Zone                        Rural                Urban                 Total
                  Border                        1,236,971               471,788               1,708,759
                  Coastal                         953,697             1,386,499               2,340,196
                  Inland                        2,178,697               633,648               2,812,345
                  Lake                          1,643,881               437,164               2,081,045
                  Zanzibar                        137,662               112,550                250,212
                  Tanzania                      6,150,908             3,041,649               9,192,557

                             Source: Database from East African Statistical Training Center


Sample allocation and selection
For the sample allocation, regions were combined into the following zones:

    •   Border: Ruvuma, Iringa, Mbeya, Rukwa, and Kigoma
    •   Coastal: Tanga, Pwani, Dar es Salaam, Lindi, and Mtwara
    •   Inland: Dodoma, Arusha, Kilimanjaro, Morogoro, Singida, Tabora, Manyara, Njombe, and Katavi
    •   Lake: Shinyanga, Kagera, Mwanza, Mara, Simiyu, and Geita
    •   Zanzibar: all islands


To take nonresponse into account, the target sample size was increased to 3,158 households assuming a
nonresponse rate of 5 percent observed in similar national household surveys. The total sample size was first
allocated to the zones proportionally to the number of agricultural households in the sampling frame. Within
each zone, the resulting sample was then distributed to urban and rural areas proportionally to their number of
agricultural households (Table A1-2).




                                                                            Annex 1. Methodology and Design     109
Given that EAs were the primary sampling units and 15 households were selected in each EA, a total of 212 EAs
were selected (Table A1-3).
                                   Table A1-2. Proportional allocation of the sample
                   Zone                       Rural               Urban                Total
                   Border                              425                  162                 587
                   Coastal                             328                  476                 804
                   Inland                              748                  218                 966
                   Lake                                565                  150                 715
                   Zanzibar                             47                   39                  86
                   Tanzania                           2,113                1,045               3,158


                                         Table A1-3. Number of EAs to select
                   Zone                       Rural                Urban               Total
                   Border                               28                   11                  39
                   Coastal                              22                   32                  54
                   Inland                               50                   15                  65
                   Lake                                 38                   10                  48
                   Zanzibar                              3                     3                  6
                   Tanzania                            141                   71                 212


The sample for the smallholder survey is a stratified multistage sample. Stratification was achieved by separating
each zone into urban and rural areas. The urban–rural classification is based on the 2012 population census.
Therefore, 10 strata were created and the sample was selected independently in each stratum.

In the first stage, EAs were selected as primary sampling units with probability proportional to size, the size being
the number of agricultural households in the EAs. A household listing operation was carried out in all selected
EAs to identify smallholder households and to provide a frame for the selection of smallholder households to be
included in the sample. In the second stage, 15 smallholders were sampled in each EA with equal probability.

In each sampled household, a household questionnaire was administered to the head of the household, the
spouse or any knowledgeable adult household member to collect information about household characteristics.
A multiple respondent questionnaire was administered to all adult members in each sampled household to
collect information on their agricultural activities, financial behaviors and mobile money use. In addition, in each
sampled household only one household member was selected using the Kish grid and was administered the
single respondent questionnaire.

Household listing
The household listing operation was conducted in all selected EAs between 7 December 2015 and 20 January
2016. For this purpose, Intermedia developed a manual describing the listing and mapping procedures. This
manual was used for the training of 25 listing teams held in Dar es Salaam. Each listing team consisted of one
supervisor, one lister, and one mapper recruited from Ipsos’s pool of enumerators. The training involved both
classroom sessions as well field practice.


110   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
The household listing was done on smartphones and this required IPSOS to develop a script in Dooblo
SurveyToGo software for the listing forms. The script was field tested and validated before it was used for the
listing operation.

Sampling weights
The sample for the smallholder survey is not self-weighting, therefore, sampling weights were calculated. The
first component of the weights is the design weight based on the probability of selection for each stage of
selection. The second component uses nonresponse rates at both household and individual levels.

The design weights for households were adjusted for nonresponse at the household level to produce adjusted
household weights. Sampling weights for the multiple respondent data file were derived from adjusted
household weights by applying to them nonresponse rates at the individual level. For the single respondent data
file, the same process was applied after taking into account the subsampling done within the household.

Finally, household and individual sampling weights were normalized separately at the national level so the
weighted number of cases equals the total sample size. The normalized sampling weights were attached to the
respective data files and used during analysis.

Sampling errors
The sample design for the smallholder survey is a complex sample design featuring clustering, stratification and
unequal probabilities of selection. For key survey estimates, sampling errors taking into account the design
features will be produced using either the SPSS Complex Sample module or STATA based on the Taylor series
approximation method.

Questionnaire
To capture the complexity of smallholder households, the questionnaire consisted of three parts, with certain
questions asked of all relevant individuals in the household, not just one household member (see Table A1-4).

In each selected household, a Household questionnaire was administered to the head of the household, the
spouse, or any knowledgeable adult household member aged 15 and over to collect information about
household characteristics. Basic information such as age, gender, education attainment, schooling status, and
relationship with the household head was collected on all household members. The Household questionnaire
also collected information on whether each household member contributes to the household income or
participates in the household’s agricultural activities. This information was later used to identify all household
members eligible for the other two questionnaires. Information on household assets and dwelling characteristics
was also collected to derive the socioeconomic/poverty status of households.

A Multiple-Respondent questionnaire was administered to all eligible adult members in each selected household
to collect information on their agricultural activities, financial behaviors, and mobile money use. In addition, in
each selected household only one eligible household member was selected using the Kish grid and was
administered the Single-Respondent questionnaire.




                                                                        Annex 1. Methodology and Design        111
        Table A1-4. Smallholder household survey in Tanzania: Questionnaire sections, respondents, and content
  Questionnaire            Household           Achieved                               Content
     section             respondent(s)        Sample size
 1. Household      Head of the household,      n= 2,933      • Basic information on all household members (e.g.,
 Survey            their spouse, or a                          age, gender, education attainment, schooling status)
                   knowledgeable adult                       • Information about household assets and dwelling
                                                               characteristics to derive poverty status
 2. Multiple-      All household members        n=5,034      • Demographics (e.g., land size, crop and livestock,
 Respondent        over 15 years old who                       decision-making, associations and markets, financial
 Survey            contributed to the                          behaviors)
                   household income or                       • Agricultural activities (e.g., selling, trading, consuming
                   participated in its                         crops, livestock, suppliers)
                   agricultural activities                   • Household economics (e.g., employment, income
                                                               sources, expenses, shocks, borrowing, saving habits,
                                                               investments)
 3. Single-        One randomly selected        n=2,795      • Agricultural activities (e.g., market relationships,
 Respondent        adult in the household                      storage, risk mitigation)
 Survey                                                      • Household economics (e.g., expense prioritization,
                                                               insurance, financial outlook)
                                                             • Mobile phones (e.g., use, access, ownership, desire
                                                               and importance)
                                                             • Formal and informal financial tools (e.g., ownership,
                                                               usage, access, importance, attitudes toward financial
                                                               service providers)


All three questionnaires were translated in Swahili and pretested. After the pretest, debriefing sessions were
held with the pretest field staff and the questionnaires were modified based on the observations from the
pretest. Following the finalization of questionnaires, a script was developed to support data collection on mobile
phones. The script was tested and validated before it was used in the field. The questionnaire are found in the
user guide accompanying the datasets for this household survey.

Main training, fieldwork, and data processing
InterMedia’s local field partner recruited the interviewers and supervisors for the main fieldwork, taking into
account their language skills. Following the recruitment of field staff, a centralized training session was
conducted in Dar es Salam from 27 January to 2 February 2016. Each training session consisted of instructions
on interview techniques and field procedures, a detailed review of the survey questionnaires, mock interviews
between participants in the classroom, and a field practice with real respondents in the areas outside the
sampled EAs. Five independent field quality control (QC) staff, directly hired by InterMedia also attended the
training.

Twenty-four interviewing teams carried out data collection for the survey on mobile phones. Each team
consisted of one supervisor and four to five interviewers. Four staff members from Intermedia’s local field
partner coordinated and supervised fieldwork activities in addition to the independent QC team hired by
Intermedia. The QC team stayed with the survey teams during fieldwork to closely supervise and monitor them.
Data collection took place from 6 February to 8 March 2016.

The final data file was checked for inconsistencies and errors by InterMedia, and corrections were made as
necessary and where possible.




112   Smallholder Households in Tanzania
Deviations in the sample design
The smallholder survey in Tanzania is the third survey in the series following the surveys in Mozambique and
Uganda. Fieldwork in those two countries has experienced a lot of failed call backs where identified eligible
households and household members could not be interviewed during the time allocated to fieldwork in each
country. As a result, the final sample size fell slightly short of the target. For this reason, in Tanzania the number
of households selected in each EA was increased from 15 to 17 following the household listing operation in all
sample EAs

Response rates
The Tables A1-5, A1-6, and A1-7 show household and household member response rates for the Tanzania
smallholder household survey. A total of 3,503 households were selected for the survey, of which 3,020 were
found to be occupied during data collection. Of these, 2,993 were successfully interviewed, yielding a household
response rate of 99.1 percent.
                              Table A1-5. Response Rate for the Household Questionnaire
                                  Border    Coastal   Inland    Lake     Zanzibar    Rural     Urban      Total
       Households selected           659        857   1,098       816          73    2,364     1,139      3,503
       Households occupied           601        680      960      710          69    2,092       928      3,020
       Households interviewed        600        676      940      710          67    2,073       920      2,993
       Household response          99.8%      99.4%    97.9%   100.0%       97.1%    99.1%     99.1%      99.1%
       rate


In the interviewed households 5,935 eligible household members were identified for the multiple respondent
questionnaire. Completed interviews were conducted with 5,034 of them thus yielding a response rate of 84.8
percent for the Multiple Respondent questionnaire.
                         Table A1-6. Response Rate for the Multiple Respondent Questionnaire
                                Border     Coastal    Inland    Lake     Zanzibar     Rural     Urban       Total

    Eligible household            1,132      1,250     1,972     1,468        113      4,193      1,742      5,935
    members
    Eligible household            1,020      1,039     1,622     1,261         92      3,588      1,446      5,034
    members interviewed
    Response rate                90.1%       83.1%     82.3%    85.9%       81.4%      85.6%     83.0%      84.8%



Among the 2,993 eligible household members selected for the Single Respondent questionnaire, 2,795 were
successfully interviewed, corresponding to a response rate of 93.4 percent.
                          Table A1-7. Response Rate for the Single Respondent Questionnaire
                               Border      Coastal    Inland    Lake     Zanzibar     Rural     Urban       Total

    Eligible household            600          676       940      710           67     2,073       920       2,993
    members
    Eligible household            558          629       886      664           58     1,929       866       2,795
    members interviewed
    Response rate               93.0%        93.0%     94.3%    93.5%        86.6%     93.1%     94.1%      93.4%




                                                                          Annex 1. Methodology and Design            113
Annex 2: Random Forest

A Random Forest consists of a collection or ensemble of simple tree predictors, each capable of producing a
response when presented with a set of predictor values. 41 For classification problems, this response takes the
form of a class membership, which associates, or classifies, a set of independent predictor values with one of
the categories present in the dependent variable. Alternatively, for regression problems, the tree response is an
estimate of the dependent variable given the predictors. The Random Forest algorithm was developed by
Breiman.

A Random Forest consists of an arbitrary number of simple trees that are used to determine the final outcome.
For classification problems, the ensemble of simple trees vote for the most popular class. In the regression
problem, their responses are averaged to obtain an estimate of the dependent variable. Using tree ensembles
can lead to significant improvement in prediction accuracy (i.e., better ability to predict new data cases).

Technical details
The response of each tree depends on a set of predictor values chosen independently (with replacement) and
with the same distribution for all trees in the forest, which is a subset of the predictor values of the original data
set. The optimal size of the subset of predictor variables is given by log2 M+1, where M is the number of inputs.

For classification problems, given a set of simple trees and a set of random predictor variables, the Random
Forest method defines a margin function that measures the extent to which the average number of votes for
the correct class exceeds the average vote for any other class present in the dependent variable. This measure
provides us not only with a convenient way of making predictions, but also with a way of associating a confidence
measure with those predictions.

For regression problems, Random Forests are formed by growing simple trees, each capable of producing a
numerical response value. Here, too, the predictor set is randomly selected from the same distribution and for
all trees. Given the above, the mean-square error for a Random Forest is given by:

mean error = (observed - tree response)2

The predictions of the Random Forest are taken to be the average of the predictions of the trees:




where the index k runs over the individual trees in the forest.

Typically, Random Forests can flexibly incorporate missing data in the predictor variables. When missing data
are encountered for a particular observation (case) during model building, the prediction made for that case is
based on the last preceding (nonterminal) node in the respective tree. So, for example, if at a particular point in
the sequence of trees a predictor variable is selected at the root (or other nonterminal) node for which some
cases have no valid data, then the prediction for those cases is simply based on the overall mean at the root (or
other nonterminal) node. Hence, there is no need to eliminate cases from the analysis if they have missing data
for some of the predictors, nor is it necessary to compute surrogate split statistics.




41   See documentation on Random Forest Algorithm at http://www.statsoft.com/Textbook/Random-Forest.

114        Smallholder Households in Tanzania
