WORLD BANK GROUP
YOUTH SUMMIT 2015
        Completion Report
    WORLD BANK GROUP YOUTH SUMMIT 2015

                  COMPLETION REPORT

If Not Us, Then Who? Crowd-Sourcing Solutions for Climate Change
                                                                     WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Youth Summit 2015 Organizing Committee extends its sincerest appreciation to the World Bank
Group (WBG) senior management who made possible the third annual World Bank Group Youth Summit
on November 16–17, 2015, in Washington, DC. The Committee is particularly grateful to Rachel Kyte,
former WBG Vice President and Special Envoy for Climate Change, who championed this year’s edition
and to Dr. Jim Yong Kim, the President of the WBG, who has wholeheartedly supported the Youth Summit
throughout the years.
This edition would not have been possible without the support of many WBG staff members, but
particularly, without the advice and financial support of John Roome, Senior Director of the Climate
Change Cross-Cutting Solutions Area; Stephanie von Friedeburg, Vice President and Chief Information
Officer; Gloria Grandolini, Senior Director of the Finance and Markets Global Practice; Christian
Grossmann, Director of the Climate Business Department for International Finance Corporation (IFC);
Anabel Gonzalez, Senior Director of the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice; Arunma Oteh, Vice
President and World Bank Treasurer; Yvonne Tsikata, Chief of Staff to the President; Jana Malinska, Global
Lead of the Climate Innovation Network; Benjamin Powel, Head of Funding at Treasury and Syndications
Department, IFC, the External and Corporate Affairs Global Practice, and the Leadership, Learning and
Innovation Country Client Services Team.

Furthermore, the Committee extends its gratitude to our panelists, speakers, moderators, and masters of
ceremony for their contribution of time, effort, and expertise in this regard. Specially, the Committee
thanks Kruskaia Sierra-Escalante, Head of IFC’s Blended Climate Finance Unit within the WBG’s Climate
Change Cross-Cutting Solutions Area and Head of IFC’s Blended Finance Unit, and her team, Gonzalo
Gutierrez, Operations Analyst, and Irina Bushueva, Investment Analyst, for their time and effort put into
the endless brainstorming sessions to make this third edition of the WBG Youth Summit a total success.

The Committee is also thankful to all the WBG country offices that supported their national competitors,
either by providing logistic support or by promoting them on social media; to all those country offices that
connected via video conference to the event; and to the managers and experts who contributed their
knowledge to highlight why supporting youth is supporting development.

In addition, the Committee is grateful for the support of our external partners, that is, the International
Council for Small Business, The Climate Reality Project, and 1776 — and for that of our contributors, that
is, African Leadership Academy, Athgo International, CF-Assist, Connect4Climate, Global Poverty Project,
IFC Young Professionals, IMF Young Professionals, Universia, and WBG Youth2Youth. Moreover, the
Committee extends its sincerest appreciation to Les Offices Jeunesse Internationaux du Québec , the
Lyceum of the Philippines University, HSBC, and Columbia University which sponsored travel and
accommodation expenses of participating youth. Furthermore, the Committee expresses its gratitude to
the Spanish Embassy in Washington, DC, whose interns volunteered in the organization of the event.

Finally, we applaud the global youth who followed and contributed to the WBG Youth Summit 2015. Thank
you for sharing your stories and thank you for collaborating with us by spreading the word in your
communities — so that youth remained engaged and participative toward global challenges. You are key
stakeholders in reaching the WBG twin goals of ending poverty and boosting shared prosperity.
2
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The World Bank Group (WBG) Youth Summit is the largest annual gathering of youth worldwide at the
WBG. It is managed by young WBG professionals on a voluntary basis and supported by senior
management. The Youth Summit’s motto teach, showcase, and inspire reflects its ultimate goal — that is,
to achieve that youth, equipped with the skills, networks, and motivation gained at the Summit, impact
the development of their local communities and contribute to the accomplishment of WBG’s twin goals.

In its third edition, the Youth Summit focused on a problem that deeply concerns our current young
generation: climate change. Knowing that youth are able to bring solutions, the WBG Youth Summit 2015
Organizing Committee decided to make a global call to crowd-source solutions for climate change on
November 16–17, right before the United Nations Conference on Climate Change (COP 21) in Paris.

Under the title “Crowd-Sourcing Solutions for Climate Change,” the Committee organized a worldwide
competition to crowd-source policy or business ideas on how to adapt to or mitigate climate change. Six
teams were selected among the 334 competition submissions that came from 79 different countries in
just one month. Their team captains were flown in to Washington to present before a jury of WBG and
external experts during the second day of the Summit.

The first day focused on building capacity and giving hands-on training to attendees through panel
discussions and group sessions. Calls for action and motivational speeches from Rachel Kyte, former WBG
Vice President and Special Envoy for Climate Change, and Kehkashan Basu, Youth Activist, started a day in
which youth learned useful skills and were put into the shoes of decision makers.

The two days of the Youth Summit hosted more than 200 attendees from 46 different nationalities that
were preselected from a total of 1,483 youth registered over one month. Youth came from Canada, China,
Germany, Nigeria, the Philippines, and South Africa to attend the Youth Summit and 12,309 others
followed the event online from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, and so
forth. In addition, several WBG country offices in Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America participated in
the event via video conference. Audience at the auditorium had diverse professional backgrounds (NGOs,
public and private sectors), and over half had a level of education of master’s degree or higher.
The hashtag #wbgyouthsummit reached 1,092,266 people and had over 4 million impressions over the
span of two days. Via Facebook, the Youth Summit reached 2,707,260 users and generated 58,963 website
clicks and 42,840 likes. Youth Summit blogs on the WBG site had over 20,000 blog posting reads in English,
Spanish, French, and Arabic, and the events page had 35,354 views. Around the world, numerous media
outlets, organizations, and universities picked up the Youth Summit announcements.

Foundations, universities, and private companies sponsored participants from overseas to attend the
Youth Summit. The Committee received thousands of collaboration proposals from youth organizations,
invited staff from government Youth Offices as attendees, and received entities such as the U.S. National
Park Service that staffed a booth at the event. WBG directors developed interest in the competitors, and
they were introduced to WBG managers to discuss their ideas further. Moreover, competitors were
contacted by venture capitalists and invited to speak to the United Nations Baku Forum.

Finally, the Youth Summit overcame more inclusion barriers than ever by being the first event at the WBG
to feature American Sign Language interpreters. The outcome? A true global, inclusive conversation of
youth around the world about climate change.

                                                                                                        3
                                                                                            WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. INTRODUCTION TO THE YOUTH SUMMIT .......................................................................................... 4
2. YOUTH SUMMIT 2015: THE EVENT ..................................................................................................... 6
    DAY 1: PLENARY AND GROUP SESSIONS ............................................................................................. 7
    DAY 2: COMPETITION DAY ................................................................................................................. 13
3. PARTNERS, CONTRIBUTORS, AND SPONSORS ................................................................................. 20
4. ATTENDANCE AND VIEWERSHIP....................................................................................................... 22
5. SUMMIT EXHIBITORS ........................................................................................................................ 25
6. COMMUNICATIONS .......................................................................................................................... 26
7. YOUTH ENGAGEMENT THROUGHOUT THE YEAR ............................................................................ 31
8. FUNDING............................................................................................................................................ 32
9. FEEDBACK AND EVALUATION ........................................................................................................... 33
10. NEXT STEPS....................................................................................................................................... 37
ANNEX 1: YOUTH SUMMIT PAST YEARS’ RESULTS ............................................................................... 38
ANNEX 2: YOUTH SUMMIT ORGANIZING COMMITTEE 2015 ............................................................... 39
ANNEX 3: AGENDA ................................................................................................................................. 40




     1. INTRODUCTION TO THE YOUTH SUMMIT

Youth is the largest demographic segment in the world. Half of the global population is age 25 years or
younger, and this percentage increases within emerging markets and developing economies. In this
context, linguistic analysis of the 2007 World Development Report Development and the Next Generation
recognizes that youth is part of the solution to development problems. However, the word that appears
the highest number of times next to the word youth in this report is clearly unemployment; however, a
deeper analysis of the data shows that words such as opportunities, leaders, participation, youth lenses,
human capital, and voice follow in the ranking, as shown below.




4
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




   Analysis carried out with Python programming language. The size of the words represents the frequency each word was
      mentioned near the word youth in the World Development Report 2007 Development and the Next Generation.


In 2012, younger staff created the Youth Summit to connect further the World Bank Group (WBG) with
the new generation. The ideation of the Youth Summit was encouraged by President Jim Yong Kim and
spurred by the realization that youth is a key stakeholder in achieving the twin goals of ending extreme
poverty and boosting shared prosperity. The idea garnered the support of senior management within the
institution and the interest from participants and external partners. Therefore, since then, the Youth
Summit became the largest annual global gathering of youth worldwide at the WBG.

The Youth Summit’s mission is aligned with the WBG’s twin goals and, as such, the Youth Summit
objectives have been defined accordingly. Under the motto Teach, Showcase, and Inspire, the Youth
Summit established its objectives as follows:
     x Teach global youth through skill-building activities led by WBG and external specialists
    x Showcase work from youth around the world while promoting self-initiative and innovation x Inspire
    the youth that attend or follow the Youth Summit online by making allowing them to interact with
    world class leaders such as the WBG President, WBG senior management and CEOs from different
    organizations.




                                                                                                                         5
                                                                        WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


The ultimate goal of the Youth Summit is to achieve that youth,1 equipped with the skills, networks, and
motivation gained at the Summit, impact the development of their local communities and contribute to
the accomplishment of WBG’s twin goals. Therefore, the Youth Summit puts effort in inviting yo uth from
around the world to come to Washington and in livestreaming the event to reach those are unable to
travel.

Mirroring one the most important annual publications of the WBG, the World Development Report, the
Youth Summit changes topics every year. The topics are selected according to three main criteria: global
relevance, timeliness of the topic, and the WBG agenda. The Committee then seeks the support of a
sponsor and a WBG Global Practice or Cross Cutting Solution Area to partner with and jointly define the
structure of the Summit.

The inaugural Youth Summit “Youth Entrepreneurship: Cultivating an Innovative Spirit to Alleviate Global
Youth Unemployment” was delivered in October 2013, and in 2014, the Youth Summit covered “The Need
for More Open and Responsive Governments.”2 For 2015, climate change was chosen as the topic of focus
and support was gathered from the Climate Change Cross-Cutting Solutions Area.

The WBG Youth Summit Organizing Committee 3 is the entity responsible and accountable for the
implementation of the Youth Summit. The Committee is formed by young WBG professionals that
volunteer their time. Volunteers are also engaged in different parts of the process.

The Youth Summit Organizing Committee 2015 is composed of Ines Gonzalez Del Mazo, Chair; Mora
Farhad, Treasurer; Jewel McFadden, Youth Engagement Lead; Alejandra Bustamante, Event Logistics
Lead; Meerim Shakirova, Event Content Lead; Vivian Klein, Communications Lead; and Victoria Flamant,
and Arezo Kohistany, Committee Advisors.4




    2. YOUTH SUMMIT 2015: THE EVENT

Climate change is recognized by global leaders, scientists, development practitioners, and many citizens
around the world as the greatest threat to the future of humankind and the planet. The effects of climate
change, which include unprecedented heat waves, severe drought, and major floods, will most acutely
impact the world’s poorest people of which a large percentage is below age 35 years. WBG studies reveal



1
  For the purposes of the Summit youth are defined as those up to age 35, inclusive. General attendance to the event in
Washington, DC, may be restricted to youth age 18 or older by the Youth Summit Organizing Committee.
2
  See Annex 1 for more information about Youth Summit past year’s resul ts.
3
  As of May 2016, the “WBG Youth Summit Organizing Committee” has changed its name to the “WBG Youth Summit
Steering Committee.”
4
  See Annex 2 for more information about the Youth Summit Organizing Committee 2015.
6
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


that climate impacts will greatly threaten agriculture, a key sector in the poorest countries, and hence
export earnings and national income, food security and nutrition, and finally, jobs and livelihoods.

Given the risk that climate change poses our collective wellbeing and future, and with the historic United
Nations Conference on Climate Change (COP 21) taking place in December 2015, the Youth Summit
Organizing Committee identified climate change as the focus of the third annual WBG Youth Summit. The
presentation “If Not Us, Then Who? Crowd-Sourcing Solutions for Climate Change” was designed to
engage young people in the fight against climate change and to give them an opportunity to share their
ideas on how to adapt and mitigate its hazardous effects.




                                      Youth Summit 2015 image


                DAY 1: PLENARY AND GROUP SESSIONS

Starting with an address from the Youth Summit Chair, Ines Gonzalez del Mazo, the Summit opened by
highlighting the importance of training global youth early in their lives. By comparing the achievement of
the WBG’s twin goals to a marathon that humankind must run, Ms. Gonzalez del Mazo, illustrated that
learning from failure while young is the only way to succeed while adults. As marathon runners need to
learn who their best coach is, what their best shoes are, and how to breathe properly, youth needs to
learn who the best people to gather support from are, what tools to use, and when to act in order to
achieve development goals that have never been achieved before — and to do it faster than previous
generations.

                                                                                                        7
                                                                              WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




                             Ines Gonzalez del Mazo, Chair of the WBG Youth Summit 2015



Plenary Sessions

The Youth Summit 2015 Plenary Sessions featured world-renown climate activists and thought leaders.
The first speaker, Kehkashan Basu, the Youth Ambassador for the World Future Council and Founder and
President of Green Hope UAE, spoke about her efforts as a young climate activist and her experience being
the youngest international delegate at Rio+20. In addition, she explained why she founded a nonprofit
organization called Green Hope UAE, which engages children and youth around the world in
environmental campaigns and equips them with the necessary skills to take action. Ms. Basu gave an
overview of her organization’s achievements to date, among them organizing youth conferences, beach
cleanups, and tree planting sessions not only in the United Arab Emirates but also in Indonesia, Kenya, and
the United States. Green Hope actively works with the Dubai municipality, and in 2014, conducted in Dubai
the first COP in [My City], a youth-led simulation of the climate negotiations. She concluded her remarks
with a call to action for all youth, stating “the time to act is now.”




             “We the youth need to be involved in all aspects of agenda setting, policy making, and implementation.”
                                         — Kehkashan Basu, WBG Youth Summit 2015
Afterward, Rachel Kyte, former WBG Vice President and Special Envoy for Climate Change, spoke about
her experience on the front line of advocacy for climate action and the expectations for the Paris COP in
December 2015. According to Ms. Kyte, over the past years, there has been a bottom-up attempt to put
the world into course despite the political freeze. People cannot wait any longer for global consensus;


8
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


thus, some groups of countries — together with the private sector, civil society organizations, and other
players — have created coalitions to move their agendas forward, she explained.

With encouraging statements such as “the global movement must include every one of you,” she
emphasized that we are the last generation that can realistically “wrestle” with climate change, to put it
under control. The agreement to cap the rise of temperature to 2 degrees will already be devastating for
many cultures; therefore, youth should not accept that governments and society does not put the
necessary measures to at least implement this agreement.

Ms. Kyte invited everyone to be involved, regardless of their socioeconomic position or geographical
location, by mentioning the example of how a young farmer in Tunisia can help avoid low crop productivity
by requesting resilient seeds. Therefore, whether working in finance, technology, energy, economics, or
politics, citizens need to envision a new society — and key to this journey is to find the way to support
both developed and developing countries in their quest and commitment to transition into low-carbon
growth and resilience development, she concluded.




          “Climate change will make this world more volatile if we don’t grapple with it, and it will make       the fight
against poverty more difficult unless we grapple with it. There is no better, [or] other, fight for your generation to
take on.”


                                               — Rachel Kyte, WBG Youth Summit 2015

The plenary sessions closed with a high-level panel of speakers comprised of James Close, Director of
Climate Change, WBG; Ken Berlin, President and CEO, The Climate Reality Project; Laura Clise, Director of
Sustainability, Plum Creek and Corporate Advisory Council Member, Net Impact; Yamide Dagnet, Senior
Associate, World Resources Institute; and Kathleen Rogers, President and CEO, Earth Day Network. The
panel was moderated by Neeraj Prasad, Manager of Climate Change, WBG.

The panelists spoke about what steps their organizations are taking in relation to climate change and the
opportunities and challenges facing future generations. Furthermore, they explained the initiatives for
young people that their organizations have developed or are developing, such as the Climate Change Angry
Birds Tournament from the Earth Day Network and the Climate Speakers Network from The Climate
Reality Project. Ms. Clise also surprised the audience with a rap song that called for youth to find their
voice as future leaders of the global community. The main conclusions of the discussion were the
importance of environmental education and the need to identify opportunities for youth engagement —
so that they can push for action and accountability.
                                                                                                                             9
                                                                                   WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




Breakout Sessions

     1) Carbon Finance

“Carbon Finance” presented an overview on how the WBG helps clients and partners put a price on carbon
and offered attendees hands-on training in this process. Therefore, the breakout session started with an
introduction to carbon markets, a description of the WBG key initiatives on climate finance, and an analysis
of the Paris COP 21 draft agreement on finance. Afterward, the participants played a mockup of the COP
21 negotiations.

Participants were very engaged and demonstrated a good understanding of global carbon finance
mechanisms. Questions arose on how to apply these mechanisms at the national and subnational levels.
One of the discussions’ main conclusions was the difficulty of negotiating a climate agreement between
multi-stakeholders with conflicting interests — and especially when there are financial flows between
developed and developing countries.

Delivered by: Isabel Hagbrink, WBG Senior Communications Officer; Nina Doetinchem, WBG Carbon Finance Specialist; and Tanguy
de Bienassis, WBG Finance Analyst



     2) 50 Shades of Green Bonds

“50 Shades of Green Bonds” was an interactive “Ted Talk” style event5 that focused on the current gap of
required funds for climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. The goal was to discuss
opportunities to attract private capital through innovation in environmental financing in the green credit
markets.

During the session, participants acquired knowledge in green bonds and other climate-related financial
products. They participated in a lively debate and exchange of opinions on how to create private sector
incentives to invest in climate change activities. Participants valued highly the session because they
learned the technicalities of green bonds, and discussed which projects or activities these innovative
instruments could finance.

Delivered by: Flora Hui-May Chao, IFC Senior Financial Officer, and Esohe Denise Odaro, IFC Financial Officer




5
 A Ted talk is a short, powerful talk of 18 minutes or less. This format became popular with TED, the nonprofit
devoted to spread ideas and gain a deeper understanding of the world. www.ted.com
10
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




                                Breakout session on carbon finance and green bonds



    3) Making the Connection: Climate Change and Landscapes

“Making the Connection: Climate Change and Landscapes” introduced a new, innovative WBG application
that contains all available data on landscapes and climate change (http://data.worldbank.org/apps). This
session was followed by a “foresight” game-changer experience that stimulated a world in which the
temperature had risen 4 degrees.

Participants were shown how to retrieve and use application data, which covered water systems, forest
coverage, land use, and other climate change-related statistics. Attendees displayed deep interest in the
usefulness of the application for their research and project-related activities. Furthermore, the “foresight”
game provided an opportunity for participants to see of the consequences of climate change in landscapes
through new lenses; this was so since they were presented with plausible very negative scenarios and
needed to jointly discuss ways to avoid them.
Delivered by: Nagaraja Rao Harshadeep, WBG Lead Environment Specialist, and Meerim Shakirova, WBG Consultant on Climate
Change



    4) Integrating Climate and Disaster Risk into Development

“Integrating Climate and Disaster Risk into Development” focused on why climate and disaster resiliency
is essential for eliminating extreme poverty and achieving shared prosperity. The session included an
inspiring presentation about what the WBG considers the three I’s of Climate Resilient Development —
Instruments, Incentives, and Institutions — a strategy game that puts participants in the role of disaster
risk managers. It also included a final speech by an American Red Cross representative, Aynur
Kadihasanoglu, that emphasized the power of games to create community action through experimental
learning.

Participants learned skills on how to integrate climate and disaster risk management into development
through the use of risk mapping, models of economic losses, and screening tools among other instruments
by addressing incentives and strengthening institutions. Through the strategic game, attendees also
learned how to identify vulnerabilities related to natural disasters and to develop an adaptation strategy.


                                                                                                                     11
                                                                             WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


However, they also experienced the difficulty of making decisions in situations when (a) disasters are
unpredictable and (b) there might not be consensus among stakeholders to implement the strategy.
Delivered by: Sofia Bettencourt, Lead Operations Officer, WBG; Aynur Kadihasanoglu, Senior Advisor, Urban Disaster
Management, American Red Cross; Laura Bonzanigo, WBG Young Professional; Julie Rozenberg, WBG Consultant on Sustainable
Development; and Borja Garcia Serna, WBG Consultant on Climate Change




                          Breakout sessions on landscapes and disaster risk management


Group Session: “From Apathy to Action: Leveraging Personal Stories and Social Media to Address the Climate
Crisis”

Delivered by The Climate Reality Project, this group session focused on how to strengthen everyone’s voice
to call for action as the urgency of the climate crisis continues to build. The session was structured in
presentations, discussions, and small working groups.

Participants learned about the power they had to make their voice heard through personal storytelling
and social media. Attendees from different backgrounds were asked to explain their personal story on why
climate change was important for them, and at the end of the session, they realized how many others in
the room shared a similar story regardless of their nationality. This experience taught them that
storytelling is powerful because it establishes emotional links and connections among people — even
when at first sight, it appears there are none. By combining storytelling with social media, many of the
efforts that attendees have currently undertaken could be multiplied.




12
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


              Group session on leveraging personal stories and social media by The Climate Reality Project




Masters of Ceremony

Serving as masters of ceremony on the first day of the Youth Summit were two WBG Independent
Evaluation Group staff members, Ayse Boybeyi, Senior Knowledge Management Professional, and Vivek
Raman, Knowledge Management Officer. Both excelled in pacing the event and engaging the youth
audience.




                Masters of Ceremony Ayse Boybeyi and Vivek Raman engaging with Youth Summit Audience



                  DAY 2: COMPETITION DAY

Competition

Using the popular American reality show "Shark Tank" as its muse, the WBG Youth Summit garnered the
attention of thousands of passionate youth with “Bank Tank.” This live competition was envisioned by the
Committee as one of the most important tools to crowd-source solutions for climate change from youth
around the world and to engage WBG directors and external experts as feedback providers. It was open
to teams of up to five persons, ages 18 to 35.

Youth from around the world were encouraged to propose business or policy solutions to adapt or mitigate
climate change in a specific WBG client country. The proposals, limited to no more than 3,000 words, had
to include specific means of implementation, outlining exactly how the plan would be funded and put into
place.




                                                                                                             13
                                                                     WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




                                            Youth Summit Audience

A total of 334 proposals were submitted from 79 countries, including Belarus, Bulgaria, Chile, Côte d'Ivoire,
Ethiopia, Haiti, Japan, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Pakistan, Sierra Leone, Spain, Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, and the Republic of Yemen. Once the application period had closed, the Committee, climate
change specialists, business professionals, and a team of WBG experts narrowed down the proposals to
those offered by six teams.

The six teams selected proposed the following entrepreneurial solutions:

     x Team AQGRI+ detailed a franchise model for urban and peri-urban agriculture in India. The model
        featured vermicomposting (a process that uses earthworms and microorganisms to help break
        down organic material to create nutrient-rich soil) and aquaponics (a system that uses waste
        produced by fish or other aquatic animals to supply nutrients for plants grown soilless, which in
        turn purifies water).
            o   Team captain: Priska Prasetya (Indonesian)

            o   Team members: Team members: Bharathwaj Sridhar (Indian) and Santtu Palokangas
                (Finnish)

     x Team TREE+PLY debuted a free mobile application that is geared toward increasing global awareness
        and inspiring action through gamification in the Philippines. Users enter a virtual world where
        everything is colored red, meaning environmentally hazardous. To gradually create a healthier
        green world, players have to complete simple “quests” such as tweeting about climate change or
        signing a global warming petition.

            o   Team captain: John Adam Pascual (Filipino)
            o   Team members: Rose Jade Eugenie Delgado (Filipino) and Edward Tyrel Tan (Filipino)

     x Team HELIOS wants Indian farmers to get away from diesel-powered irrigation pumps, which
        contribute to carbon emissions and high diesel fuel costs. Instead, the team proposes to allow
        farmers to rent solar irrigations systems and receive incentives for efficient water use.

            o   Team captain: Michael Eschmann (Swiss)



14
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


            o   Team members: Mallory Baxter (Canadian), Nicholas Luter (American) and Markus
                Wilthaner (Austrian)

    x Team KopaGas targets Tanzania with a pay-as-you-go model, using electric canisters to accelerate
        the use of liquefied petroleum gas rather than charcoal. The team has designed a leasable canister
        that can monitor the amount of gas remaining inside and charge customers for only what they
        use, allowing low-middle income households to access clean cooking and have more control over
        their budget and energy consumption.

            o   Team captain: Sebastian Rodriguez (Mexican)

            o   Team members: Andron Mendes (Tanzanian) and Qian Wang (Chinese)

   x Team Greenie Exchange has built a community complementary currency in China that asks users
       to actively reduce their carbon footprint to earn positive rewards. Users can take actions such as
       joining a carpool or carbon reduction program, carpool, or recycling to earn “Green coins,” which
       are credited to a user’s electronic wallet and can be spent at partnered businesses, used to make
       donations, or invested in sustainable infrastructure projects.

            o   Team captain: Paul Lam (Hong Kongese)

            o   Team members: Angela Yeh (Taiwanese), Douglas Drake (British), and Jingyi Wang
                (Chinese)

    x Team ECO-TECHNOLOGIES plans to educate and distribute to Ugandans stoves that use biogas and
        pumice stones. Currently, most use timber fuel, like charcoal and firewood, which contributes to
        carbon monoxide deaths and lung disease. The new stoves are affordable, adapted for long hours
        of cooking needs, and can be used for both domestic and commercial use in urban and rural
        settings.

            o   Team captain: Gloria Nakyejwe Kalyango (Ugandan)
            o   Team members: Steven Bukulu (Ugandan), James Kalango Ssenabulya (Ugandan), and
                Joseph Ssekono and Immaculate Nalubowa (Ugandan).

Team captains were invited to present their solutions during the second day of the Youth Summit before
a jury of WBG directors and external experts. Every competitor team captain had one minute to give a
short introduction, seven minutes to present their team’s proposal, and five minutes to respond to jury
questions and feedback.

The jury was composed of:

   x Dr. Angus Friday, Grenada’s Ambassador to the United States x Cecile Fruman,
   Director, Trade and Competitiveness, WBG x James Close, Director,
    Climate Change Group, WBG x         Dr. Jeffrey R. Alves, Vice President, International
    Council for Small Business.
“Bank Tank” was skillfully moderated by Monika Weber-Fahr, former Chief Knowledge Officer and Senior
Manager at the World Bank Group's Independent Evaluation Vice Presidency, WBG, who engaged not only
with the jury but also with the attendees, the online audience, and country offices.

                                                                                                      15
                                                                          WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




                                            Moderator Monika Weber-Fahr, former WBG Chief
Knowledge Officer and Senior Manager, and Youth Summit competitors

Jury comments and feedback to the competitors focused on aspects such as carefully defining the right
distribution channels for the entrepreneurial solutions, looking at potential competitors and existing
technology, attracting the attention of clients, and wisely reviewing the revenue streams to make the
solutions sustainable in the future. The jury judged the solutions based on four criteria: clarity, originality,
relevance to create a true impact, and feasibility for implementation and scaling-up.




16
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015



        “I think this could be enormously powerful. You are on to something. Stick with it.” — Dr.
                         Angus Friday, Grenada’s Ambassador to the United States

              “I think this meets a clear business need and environmental need.” — Cecile
                            Fruman, Director, Trade and Competitiveness, WBG

      “I really liked the way you engaged the community with a simple and effective technology.”
                           — James Close, Director, Climate Change Group, WBG

    “I only caution you to be persistent because you will hit some stumbles along the way, but it is
                        an idea than lands very nicely to local implementation.”
             — Dr. Jeffrey R. Alves, Vice President, International Council for Small Business



Nevertheless, the vote of the jury was not the only one that counted. The Committee envisioned two
awards: the jury award and the audience award. Therefore, an online platform was made available with
the audience viewing the event in Washington — and around the world — given the possibility to vote
digitally.

Competitors also commented on their approaches to angel investors and venture capitalists. Some had
already received government funds or seed capital from other competitions. Others had started their
conversations with venture capitalists specialized in climate change issues and green technology to benefit
from their experience.

At day’s end, and after counting all votes, the winners were announced: Michael Eschmann, captain of
Team Helios, won the jury vote, and Adam Pascual, captain of Team TREE+PLY, won the audience vote.

Both of the captains were offered the opportunity to attend the 2016 ICSB Academy in the New York
metropolitan area on June 12–18, 2016. The ICSB Academy provides a full immersion experience in the
making of a new entrepreneurial venture through a training program designed by successful
entrepreneurial experts (including entrepreneurs, venture capitalists, business experts, and faculty). In
June, the team captains will attend learning modules, be paired with mentors, and given the opportunity
to network with another 200 entrepreneurs from around the world.
The President of the WBG, Dr. Jim Yong Kim, expressed his support to the Youth Summit by signing
certificates that were distributed to the six team captains and their team members.




                                                                                                       17
                                                                                WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




               Competition winners with Dr. Jeffrey R. Alves, Vice President, International Council for Small
                        Business and Ines Gonzalez del Mazo, Chair of WBG Youth Summit 2015




Ideas Wall

The WBG Leadership, Learning, and Innovation Vice Presidency sponsored the creation of an Ideas Wall
for the Youth Summit. The wall served as a tool in which youth in the audience could write their ideas on
how to inspire youth to act upon and get knowledge and training about climate change issues. In addition,
youth in the audience could also share stories and examples of exceptional youth leaders around the world
that are currently contributing to climate action.
Some of these ideas included:

     x Develop interactive modules and embed knowledge about climate change into the curriculum of
         public education school systems, globally.
     x Stimulate crowd-funding and investing in emerging innovations (for example, clean tech,
         renewables).
     x Empower large numbers of unemployed youth globally to engage in the climate change movement.




                                      Ideas Wall filled with ideas from the audience




18
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


Call to Action and Closing

The day finished with a call to action from Connect4Climate and a motivational speech by Arunma Oteh,
Vice President and Treasurer of the World Bank.

Connect4Climate is a global partnership program of the WBG with the support of Germany and Italy. The
program goal is to communicate climate impacts and climate solutions and to encourage society to take a
stand on climate change. Max Edkins, a climate change expert on the WBG Connect4Climate Team,
launched a call to action during the Youth Summit by encouraging youth around the world to speak out
about climate change and to integrate solutions to climate change issues into their daily work. He
presented the Youth4Climate social media campaign and the upcoming Young and Future Generations
Day (December 3, 2015), in which a film was screened about the youth climate movement over the years,
“Inconvenient Youth.” Finally, he proposed a challenge to attendees and online viewers to send a video of
themselves engaging in climate action on November 29. These videos were compiled by his team and
presented at the COP in Paris.




                             Connect4Climate initiative: Film a #day4climate action


The World Bank’s Vice President and Treasurer Arunma Oteh closed the Youth Summit 2015 by
highlighting the energy she could feel in the Summit coming from motivated young people. She was
pleased to hear that youth were concerned about one of the most current pressing issues: climate change.
She encouraged attendees and online viewers to think about what they learned during the Summit — and
not to start another day in a “business as usual” mode but to shape the world in the way they believe it
should be shaped. She emphasized the importance of tackling climate change regardless of the sector they
work in. Finally, she encouraged attendees to maintain the network they created during the two days of
the Youth Summit — because, one day, they will all be the global leaders negotiating the COP and deciding
world policies.




                                                                                                      19
                                                                           WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




                              “Do not start a new day in a business as usual mode, but shape it
                              in the way you believe it should be shaped.”
                          — Arunma Oteh, Vice President and World Bank Treasurer, WBG




     3. PARTNERS, CONTRIBUTORS, AND SPONSORS

The Youth Summit Steering Committee collaborates with strong internal and external partners to ensure
the event’s technical quality and to guarantee the alignment of its results with the priorities of the WBG.
Key partners may change each year since the topic of the Youth Summit changes, but contact is maintained
with all of them throughout the years.

In 2015, the Committee partnered internally with the Climate Change Cross-Cutting Solution Area whose
expertise and ongoing work assured the high quality of the Summit. Direct contact was established with
Kruskaia Sierra-Escalante, Head of IFC’s Blended Climate Finance Unit within the WBG’s Climate Change
Cross-Cutting Solutions Area and Head of IFC’s Blended Finance Unit, and her team through Rachel Kyte,
former WBG Vice President and Special Envoy for Climate Change. Their inputs and recommendations
shaped the agenda, and their support was crucial to gather funds and wide backing across WBG global
practices and solutions areas.
Furthermore, the Committee received support and funds from other parts of the WBG — namely, the
Finance and Markets and the Trade and Competitiveness global practice areas; the External and Corporate
Relations, Leadership, Learning and Innovation Vice Presidency; the Climate Innovation Centers, a project
of the World Bank and its global entrepreneurship program infoDev; the Information and Technology
Solutions Vice Presidency; the International Financial Corporation Treasury and Syndications Vice
Presidency; the World Bank Treasury; and the Office of the President. Social media presence around the
world was enhanced by the World Bank’s Geneva office and country offices in China, Hong Kong, India,
Indonesia, Mexico, Philippines and Uganda — which supported the event via Twitter, Facebook, and
Weibo. Country offices also provided logistic support to be able to bring the competitors to Washington.

20
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


Externally, the Committee partnered with the following key organizations in the field of climate change
and entrepreneurship:


    x The International Council for Small Business (also known as “the ICSB”), founded in 1955, is the first
        and largest international membership organization to promote the growth and development of
        small businesses worldwide.

    x The Climate Reality Project, founded by Nobel Laureate and former U.S. Vice President Al Gore,
        works to catalyze a global solution to the climate crisis by making urgent action a necessity across
        every level of society.

    x 1776 is a global incubator and seed fund that helps engineer the success of the world’s most
       promising start-ups tackling important challenges in areas like education, health, energy and
       sustainability, and transportation and smart cities.
The International Council for Small Business provided the award for the two team captains that won the
“Crowd-Sourcing Solutions for Climate Change” competition. This award entailed the opportunity to
attend the 2016 ICSB Academy in the New York metropolitan area on June 12–18, 2016. Moreover, The
Climate Reality Project delivered a group session, during the afternoon of the first day of the event, on
leveraging personal stories and social media to address the climate crisis. Finally, 1776 delivered a private
coaching session for the competitors on how to present a business idea in order to gather support and
funding. In addition, 1776 assisted in the competitor preselection process.




           Six Youth Summit competitors at 1776 after their coaching session with a 1776 representative and
                        Meerim Shakirova, Youth Summit 2015 Event Content Lead

Moreover, the Committee received social media and promotion support from its contributors: African
Leadership Academy, Athgo International, CF-Assist, Connect4Climate, Global Poverty Project, IFC Young
Professionals, IMF Young Professionals, WBG Youth2Youth, and Universia.

Finally, Les Offices Jeunesse Internationaux du Québec, a Canadian foundation that seeks and supports
international enriching opportunities for youth from the Quebec region, sponsored five youths to attend
the WBG Youth Summit through a selection process that they undertook in Québec. The Youth Aide

                                                                                                              21
                                                                   WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


Department of the Presidential Office of Sierra Leone also contacted the Committee to sponsor the
attendance of four youths from its office. The Lyceum of the Philippines University sponsored the
attendance to the Youth Summit of the two team members of Team TREE+PLY, and HSBC sponsored the
attendance of one team members of Team GREENIE EXCHANGE, Jingyi Wang. Columbia University and
other organizations also paid travel and accommodation expenses for students to attend the event.



     4. ATTENDANCE AND VIEWERSHIP

Event participants were selected through an application process targeted at recruiting young people
working around the globe on climate change initiatives in government, private sector, civil society,
academia, and international development agencies, among other sectors. Registration was open for one
month, closing with 1,483 individuals completing the application process and 353 invited by the Organizing
Committee to attend the Youth Summit.

Initial data from registered participants taken one week before the Youth Summit shows that confirmed
attendees were 53 percent male and 44 percent female. They had varying backgrounds: among the 123
youth confirmed, 46 different nationalities were represented including Bangladesh, Canada, China, Gabon,
Jordan, Italy, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Spain, Sudan, and the United States, among others.
Most of the confirmed attendees lived in the United States (73 percent), mostly in Washington, DC,
Maryland, and Virginia. However, other youth lived in Canada, China, Germany, Nigeria, the Philippines,
and South Africa among other countries and came to Washington for the Youth Summit.




22
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


                                                            Regarding educational degrees, half of the
                                                            youth sample had a master’s degree; 37
                                                            percent, a bachelor’s degree; 9 percent, a
                                                            high school degree; and 4 percent, a
                                                            doctorate. More than 56 percent were full-
                                                            time students, while 30 percent were
                                                            working professionals and only 13 percent
                                                            were     both     students     and    working
                                                            professionals at the same time. Of those
Screenshot of the Youth Summit 2015 WBG Live Page           currently working, 39 percent worked in
                                                            NGOs, 23 percent in international
                                                            organizations, 21 percent in the public sector,
                                                            13 percent in the private sector (including
                                                            start-ups), and 4 percent in think tanks.

                                                            Conscious that travelling to Washington for
                                                            the Youth Summit is a privilege, the
                                                            Committee worked with the WBG External
                                                            and Corporate Relations Web Team to create
                                                            a World Bank Live webpage to livestream the
                                                            event. This streaming allowed individuals
                                                            unable to physically attend the event, to
                                                            watch it and participate online via the live
                                                            chat.
                                                             The Live page had 12,309 visitors during the
                                                             actual stream. The top 10 countries in order
                                                     of online viewership were: India, Indonesia,
                                                     Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, the United States, Bolivia,
                                                     Chile, Saudi Arabia, and the Philippines.

                                                      To maximize the event experience for both online
viewers and physical attendees, the Committee worked with WBG Printing and Multimedia Services to
create a Blippable postcard. Smartphone users were able to scan the postcard via the Blippar app to unlock
additional event content that highlighted ways to engage.

FOSTERING INCLUSION: AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE INTERPRETERS

The Youth Summit featured a first for the WBG. American Sign Language interpreters (from Capitol Sign
Interpreters, a female-owned small business) were on hand during Competition Day (Day 2). The goal of
the Committee was to reach the hearing-impaired community and to highlight that inclusion does not
mean only to include people with different nationalities or income levels but also to give the same
opportunities to those people with disabilities. So according to the Committee, these interpreters’
contribution to the Summit is a step toward creating a more inclusive conversation on development issues.

Personal invitations to attend the Youth Summit were extended to the Maryland School for the Deaf,


                                                                                                       23
                                                                            WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


World Federation of the Deaf, Maryland Governor's Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing, and Gallaudet
University, the world’s leader in liberal education and career development for deaf and hard of hearing
students.




             American Sign Language translator during live stream of Youth Summit with translation


WBG COUNTRY OFFICES




                        Youth Summit participants from the Cameroon Country Office
To make the Youth Summit experience more accessible to youth outside the Washington, DC,
metropolitan area and to maintain the importance of gathering and sharing experiences among summit
participants, WBG country offices were requested to host viewing parties for interested youth. Cameroon,
Ghana, Mexico, Morocco, Peru, and Uganda were among country offices that opened their doors and
tuned in for the event. During the Summit, the Committee took their questions and comments.




24
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




                              Youth Summit participants from the Cameroon Country Office

                                                                    5. SUMMIT EXHIBITORS
                                                                    To bring value-added conversation to the
                                                                    topic of climate change, the Committee
                                                                    invited accomplished climate change
                                                                    experts, organizations, and researchers to
                                                                    show their work to Youth
                                                                          Summit attendees. Attendees and
                                                                    exhibitors exchanged ideas and contact
                                                                    information for potential         future
                                                                    collaborations.

                                                                    Youth Summit exhibitors included:

                                                                    x U.S. National Park Service, the agency of
the federal government that manages all
       Youth Summit 2015 attendee chats with Estee                        U.S. national parks, many U.S. national
        Rivera Murdock from National Park Service     monuments, and other conservation and historical
                                                              properties.
   x Green Impact Campaign, a social start-up that provides cloud-based tools and training to university
       students to conduct free energy assessments for local, small businesses in their community.
   x Line Poulin-Lariviere from the Université du Québec (Canada), whose work focuses on climate
       change adaptation evaluation in coastal areas.



                                                                                                             25
                                                                   WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


     x WBG Connect4Climate, which advertised their youth and climate engagement activities such as the
        Day4Climate, Young and Future Generations Day, and the screening of images of wildlife and
        climate on the facade of St. Peter’s Basilica in the Vatican.

     x The World Bank’s CF-Assist activities and Open Learning Campus, including the Turn Down the Heat
     Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) and various climate change-related learning products through
     which the WBG provides free training around the world. x The WBG’s Shock Waves Group, presented
     to participants the WBG book Shock Waves: Managing the Impacts of Climate Change on Poverty and
     related policy notes.
     x The WBG Analyst Program and Young Professionals Program, the WBG preeminent programs
        preparing youth for global development leadership positions.


     6. COMMUNICATIONS

The communications strategy for Youth Summit 2015 centered on bringing together young people,
thought leaders, and global practitioners on the subject of youth involvement in the fight against climate
change. The Committee leveraged various WBG communications channels, and worked with internal and
external partners to widen global reach. To assist with event promotion, an information toolkit was
created, sent to all partners, and made available to the public via the Youth Summit 2015 website.



YOUTH SUMMIT 2015 WEB PAGE

Publicity for Youth Summit 2015 was disseminated via the Events section of the WBG website
(http://www.worldbank.org/en/events/2015/08/26/youth-summit-2015). The web page provided an
overview of the event, the agenda, a link to the registration form, and details for the competition, among
other information. Further, the page featured the information toolkit and a link to the Youth Summit
Online Community. Users were also able to view photos and videos from previous year’s Youth Summits
and the blogs written for this year’s event.

The web page had 35,354 views from the time it was launched in early September 2015 until February
2016.

BLOG POSTS: VOICES

The Committee used the WBG’s official blog platform, “Voices,” to create a series of blogs leading up to
and following the Youth Summit (https://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/youth-summit-2015crowdsourcing-
solutions-climate-change-0). To ensure that the word about the Youth Summit reaches a diverse audience,
the Committee collaborated with WBG External and Corporate Relations (ECR) to have the blog posts
translated into Spanish, French, and Arabic. The blogs landed on the WBG’s homepage numerous times.
To date, the combined viewership is over 20,000 reads, and the entries have been shared widely across
social media channels.




26
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




                           Youth Summit 2015 Blogs in different languages


TWITTER AND WEIBO

The 2015 Youth Summit carried over the hashtag from the previous two years. The hashtag
#wbgyouthsummit reached 1,092,266 viewers and had 4,405,548 impressions over the span of two days.
The event was promoted via several WBG corporate Twitter channels in multiple languages including




French, Spanish, and Arabic.
                                                                                               27
                                                                        WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




                                 Selected tweets about the Youth Summit 2015
WBG Country Offices also contributed to Twitter outreach, tweeting from China, India, Mexico, the
Philippines and other countries. The WBG Beijing Office assisted the Committee in spreading the word
about the Youth Summit on the popular Chinese social media platform Weibo. This social media promotion
increased awareness of youth in those countries and boosted online viewership of the Youth Summit.




                    Selected Tweets and Weibo messages from WBG Country Offices about
                                          the Youth Summit 2015
FACEBOOK

For the remaining two weeks leading up to the event, the Commitee ran two paid social media campaigns
on the WBG corporate Facebook channel. The first campaign was targeted to boost local registrations; the
boosted post reached 153,297 people, had 42,840 post likes, and was shared 52 times.

28
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




                                         Ad: Boosted Facebook Post


The second campaign focused on promoting online viewership of the event and linked to the WBG Live
page. During the two days of the event, the ad reached 2,553,963 Facebook users and generated 58,963
website clicks to the Youth Summit landing page on WB Live.




                                Ad: Facebook Clicks to Website during the event


TODAY’S STORY

The Today’s Story on the Youth Summit went live on November 30 and remained in the featured carousel
of the WBG intranet for a week. Connect4Climate cross-promoted the feature story with their networks.


                                                                                                  29
                                                                        WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


The Committee also collaborated with Global Climate Change Communications to have the Today’s Story
featured on the WBG Global Practices Climate Change portal.




                          Today Story’s featured on the WBG’s intranet homepage




EXTERNAL COVERAGE AND OUTREACH

The event was picked up by numerous youth outlets, organizations, and universities, including the
following: Office of the UN Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, Youth Opportunities, Young Professionals
for Agricultural Development, Association of Science Technology Centers, UN Climate Change Learning
Partnership, Georgetown University, Edu Active, World Agroforestry Centre, Global Citizen,
EmpowerWomen.org, YouthHubAfrica.org, and Youth Economic Opportunities. In addition, the Youth
Summit was featured on the Voice of America news site, Emirate 24/7 (a Dubai-based television news
program) and in LMD: The Voice of Business, a Sri Lankan business E-magazine.




30
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




          Youth Summit 2015 information featured on youth outlets and organizations and university websites

YOUTUBE VIDEO

After the event, the Committee published a video on the WBG’s official YouTube channel that highlighted
the preliminary results of the Youth Summit. This video can be found at
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S8yS5q_GjHQ.



   7. YOUTH ENGAGEMENT THROUGHOUT THE YEAR

An ongoing goal of the Youth Summit Steering Committee is to create impact beyond the physical event
in Washington, year round.
                                                                                                              31
                                                                       WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015



YOUTH SUMMIT NEWSLETTER

An official Youth Summit newsletter was developed to strengthen the Committee’s engagement with its
followers in between yearly events. The newsletter made its debut shortly after the event in November
2015 and distributed monthly, since February 2016. Along with the latest news on the Youth Summit and
its partners, the monthly newsletter recognizes exceptional youth leaders who are addressing
development challenges in their communities. Those interested in having their story featured in the
newsletter submit a video or blog entry showcasing their work.


COLLABORATION FOR DEVELOPMENT

During the 2014 Youth Summit a Collaboration for Development (C4D) platform was created to serve as
an online community for individuals working to share youth development initiatives and generate
discussions about challenges youth face around the world. This platform has been maintained during 2015
until other channels can be developed for the Youth Summit. The C4D platform was used to drive
discussions on the group forum, created polls, and housed the latest news stories and blog postings about
the Summit.



     8. FUNDING

The Youth Summit 2015 was made possible by a donation of USD 85,000 by different units of the WBG.
The chart below outlines the monetary contributions.




                                 6%
                                                                  Climate Change Cross-Cutting
                         12%                                      Solution Area
                                                                  Finance and Markets Global
                                                                  Practice
                                                    47%
                                                                  Trade and Competitiveness Global
                   18%                                            Practice
                                                                  infoDev Climate Technology
                                                                  Program
                                                                  IFC Treasury and Syndications
                               18%




                                     Youth Summit 2015 Funding by WBG Area
In addition, the Information and Technology Solutions Vice Presidency offered an in-kind contribution in
terms of live streaming, video recordings, onsite technicians, audio visual support, and computer laptops
and monitors. Finally, the Leadership, Learning and Innovation Vice Presidency sponsored the Ideas Wall.
32
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




   9. FEEDBACK AND EVALUATION

During the event, the feedback provided to the Youth Summit Steering Committee was very positive.
Attendees highly valued the effort put into delivering skills and knowledge to the attendees. They also
expressed their excitement to meet so many like-minded people with who they can maintain contact and
share interests beyond the event.

Moderators, speakers, and jury members congratulated the Committee for the completion of a successful
event and for the effort undertaken in highlighting very interesting youth ideas from around the world.
They recommended leveraging that enthusiasm and continuing engagement with youth. WBG directors
introduced to WBG staff several competitors whose ideas were related to the topic covered in their
climate change proposals.




                                  Youth Summit 2015 Feedbank and Comments
Official feedback on the event was collected through an online survey, which was sent to the participants
after the event. The responses showed an overall positive response, highlighting the appreciation of
participants to have the opportunity to engage with a diverse youth group — youth from around the world
with varying backgrounds.


       “2015 WBG Youth Summit was very inspiring. Because there was useful information and
     different approaches related to the world problems. The existence of different approaches in
     the 2015 WBG Youth Summit brought about various ideas that differed from the ones I
     previously had in my mind.” – Youth Summit attendee
         “Thank you. The WBG Youth Summit has put me on the map. I will not stop taking [on]
              challenges.” – Gloria Nakyejwe Kalyango, competitor, Youth Summit 2015




                                                                                                     33
                                                                           WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




     WBG Youth Summit Organizing Committee with the two winners of “Bank Tank,”   the Yo uth Summit
                                         2015 live competition



Respondents were asked to rate from “1” to “5” (1=strongly disagree; 5=strongly agree) several areas,
ranging from the overall organization to the usefulness of the skills gained during the event. The results,
considering responses equal or more than “3” as positive, show a high percentage of satisfaction. More
than 90 percent of the respondents considered the speakers and instructors as being “very
knowledgeable,” the information discussed as “very relevant and timely,” and the overall organization as
“well planned.” Moreover, more than 80 percent considered the event to be “very inspiring and
motivating,” and expressed that they gained technical skills and information that they will use in the
future. Finally, 72 percent liked the Youth Summit 2015 better than other similar conferences, and 92
percent considered that WBG Youth Summit as “improved” from previous editions.




34
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


                           Attendees responses to WBG Youth Summit post-event survey




The most popular parts of the event were the breakout sessions and the keynote speeches by Rachel Kyte,
former WBG Vice President and Special Envoy for Climate Change and by Kehkashan Basu, Youth
Ambassador World Future Council and Founder and President Green Hope UAE. Nevertheless, the social
media discussion and participation in Twitter multiplied during the competition with insightful questions,
comments, and cheers for the competitors.




                                  Youth Summit 2015 Feedbank and Comments



Registrants, whether they attended the Youth Summit or viewed online, were also asked what
improvements could be taken into account for the future. Their greatest concern was that invitations for
the attendance to the Youth Summit should be sent earlier, in advance, so that participants that live
abroad and need visitor visas to travel to the United States can plan ahead. They also mentioned that they
would have liked to attend more than one breakout session because the topics were very interesting.

The Committee learned that 14 percent of survey respondents attended Youth Summit 2014 and 80
percent expressed interested in attending again next year. These results prove the success of the Youth
Summit and the need to keep improving attendance from youth from around the world and not
necessarily those based in the Washington, DC, metropolitan area.

Overall, the goals that the Committee set up at the beginning of the preparation of the Youth Summit were
fulfilled. The overarching value of the Summit is to have local impact so that youth decide to make a change
in their communities and remain participative toward global challenges. Therefore, the Committee put
effort in two main activities: (1) advertising the event at the country level and in different languages
and (2) sponsoring competitors from around the world to come to Washington. With 334 competition
proposals from 79 different countries, about 46 nationalities represented in the audience and 12,309
online viewers worldwide, the Committee considers that it succeeded in its efforts.


                                                                                                        35
     WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




36
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


                                   Youth Summit 2015 Feedbank and Comments

    10. NEXT STEPS

The Youth Summit Steering Committee has been very satisfied with the outcomes of Youth Summit 2015.
Attendees, partners, speakers, and contributors congratulated the Committee and encouraged it to keep
the momentum and continue the engagement with youth around the world. Therefore, the Committee
has identified several steps to strengthen the Youth Summit concept, continue building the Youth Summit
Community, and facilitate engagement from different corners of the world.

The idea to implement this year’s “Bank Tank,” the live competition, had a two-fold goal. On the one hand,
the competition was a way of involving WBG directors and senior management at a deeper level than in
previous editions — by giving them the opportunity to surprise themselves and give very specific feedback
to youth ideas that could well develop into entrepreneurial ventures in the near future. On the other hand,
it was a way to highlight that youth from across the globe are able to come up with interesting solutions
— and thus, they should be considered as key stakeholders to achieve the WBG twin goals: ending extreme
poverty and boosting shared prosperity.

As a follow-up to the Youth Summit, the Committee has been in contact with the six teams that featured
their ideas during the competition; it will check the implementation status of their proposed solution and
their achievements since the Summit. In addition, the Committee has featured their ideas to current Youth
Summit partners and will continue to do so.

The Committee will continue to work together with WBG senior management to further strengthen the
Youth Summit concept and involve experts. One of the most important features of the Youth Summit is
that it trains youth around the world in leveraging WBG knowledge and experience; therefore, the Youth
Summit will continue to partner with WBG Global Practices or Cross-cutting Solution Areas to deliver a
high-quality event.

Furthermore, the Committee plans to increase its international reach through international and national
partners. The Committee will put special emphasis in reaching out to Youth Ministries and Offices around
the world as well as youth organizations. Therefore, for 2016, the Committee has created Regional
Coordination positions held by WBG staff in country offices that will assist in global outreach. In addition,
the Committee is exploring partnerships with global youth organizations, and in May 2016, the Committee
signed a partnership with the International Young Leaders Assembly, a premier leadership development
initiative that empowers promising young leaders to positively impact communities, nations, and the
world in general. It is crucial that the Youth Summit continues to be a global event that reaches youth in
local communities everywhere.

Finally, the Committee has plans to continue building up the Youth Summit Community. The Committee
would like for the Youth Summit Community members to interact more often with each other and with
the Committee. During the months before the Youth Summit, the Committee’s e-mail account was flooded
with thousands of e-mails from youth organizations around the world that explained their work and
offered detailed partnership proposals. The Youth Summit sees itself as a catalyst for youth action and
wants those stories to be heard to inspire youth in local communities around the world. Therefore, the


                                                                                                         37
                                                                      WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


Committee has created monthly newsletters. These newsletters will include news about the Youth Summit
and its partners and contributors, and it will also feature a section to showcase youth initiatives worldwide.




ANNEX 1: YOUTH SUMMIT PAST YEARS’ RESULTS

The inaugural Youth Summit “Youth Entrepreneurship: Cultivating an Innovative Spirit to Alleviate Global
Youth Unemployment” was delivered in October 2013. The theme of youth entrepreneurship was chosen
as a means to explore the cross-cutting role youth employment and job creation can play in addressing
multiple development challenges.

In 2014, the Youth Summit presented “The Need for More Open and Responsive Governments” after
reviewing the results of a survey to global youth carried out using WBG and UN social media called “My
World 2015 Survey.” This Summit looked into (1) exploring how youth can better contribute to the current
policy discussions and (2) providing tools to equip young leaders to help foster open and responsive
governments in their community.

Results of both Youth Summits, 2013 and 2014, are summarized in the table below.



                          WBG Youth Summit 2013:                     WBG Youth Summit 2014:
                      Youth Entrepreneurship, Cultivating           The Need for More Open and
                           an Innovative Spirit to Alleviate      Responsive Governments
                         Global Youth Unemployment

38
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015



 Presenters/ 40+ presenters and panelists from private      Partnered with WBG Governance Global
 Partners    sector, government, civil society, United      Practice, UN Secretary-General’s Envoy on
              Nations, and WBG                              Youth, Plan International, Restless Development,
                                                            Transparency
                                                            International, and Asian Development
                                                            Bank

 Attendees/ 400 attendees, 11 WBG Country Offices, 200+ 350 attendees, plus 50 from WBG country offices
 Viewers      connected via livestream and social media

 Strategies   Development case competition with             Included workshops to build youth leader’s
              500+ solutions received                       technical and soft skills (“4.1” out of “5” ratings)


 Results      Transition of Youth Summit to an annual     #wbgyouthsummit had 3,100+ mentions and 15
              forum after receiving overwhelmingly positive      million impressions over two weeks
              feedback

 YouTube      https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ajf0zXkPik https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PScg199aXs
 video



ANNEX 2: YOUTH SUMMIT ORGANIZING COMMITTEE 2015



The Youth Summit Organizing Committee 2015 was elected through an application process inside the WBG
during May 2015.




                                   Youth Summit 2015 Organizing Committee



   x       Chair: Ines Gonzalez Del Mazo, Finance and Markets Global Practice x Treasurer: Mora Pearl

                                                                                                               39
                                                                             WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


     Farhad, External and Corporate Affairs Global Practice x               Youth Engagement Lead: Jewel

     McFadden, External and Corporate Affairs Global Practice x Event Logistics Lead: Alejandra
     Bustamante, Budget, Performance Review and Strategic Planning
        Vice-Presidency x Event Content Lead: Meerim Shakirova, Climate Change Cross-Cutting
     Solutions Area x     Communications Lead: Vivian Klein, External and Corporate Affairs Global
     Practice x Committee Advisor: Victoria Flamant, External and Corporate Affairs Global Practice x
         Committee Advisor: Arezo Kohistany (not pictured), Treasury and Syndications Department,
     IFC



ANNEX 3: AGENDA


DAY 1 - Plenary Discussion and Sessions

                                  Check-in/ Registration and Booth Visiting
IFC Lobby        8:30 - 9:30
                                  A continental breakfast will be available


                                  Introduction to the Youth Summit 2015
                 9:30 - 9:50
                                  Welcoming Remarks by Ines Gonzalez del Mazo, Youth Summit 2015 Chair


IFC                               “Climate Change Calling: A task for everyone”
                 9:55 - 10:15     by Rachel Kyte, Special Envoy for Climate Change, WBG
Auditorium

                                  Master of Ceremony: Ayse Boybeyi, Senior Knowledge Management Professional, Independent
                                  Evaluation Group WBG; and Vivek Raman, Knowledge Management Officer, Independent
                                  Evaluation Group WBG


IFC                               “And What is Stopping YOU” by Kehkashan Basu, Youth Ambassador World
                 10:20 - 10:55
Auditorium                        Future Council, Founder and President Green Hope UAE

                                  “Youth in Action on Climate Change: The Mission of the Next Generation”

                                    Ken Berlin, President and CEO, The Climate Reality Project
                                    Laura Clise, Director of Sustainability at Plum Creek, Corporate Advisory
                                     Council
IFC
                 11:00 - 12:30      Yamide Dagnet, Senior Associate, World Resource Institute Member, Net
Auditorium
                                     Impact
                                    Kathleen Rogers, President and CEO, Earth Day Network
                                    John Roome, Senior Director for Climate Change CCSA

                                  Moderated by Neeraj Prasad, Manager, Climate Change CCSA


IFC Lobby        12:30 - 13:30
40
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015


                              Lunch and Booth Visiting




        13:30 - 15:00         Breakout Sessions
                              Breakout Session:
                              Carbon Finance

                              The session will focus on the state of carbon markets and carbon offsets as
                              key instruments to reduce emissions. In particular, the session will discuss
           Room               “The Price on Carbon” and a mock-up of COP21 UNFCCC Negotiations.
           4-900              Participants will play the role of negotiators from another country in a Carbon
                              Pricing negotiation.

                              Breakout Session:
                              50 Shades of Green Bonds

                              An interactive “Ted Talk” style session that will focus on the current gap of
                              required funds for climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. The
         Room 7900            session will also discuss opportunities on how to attract private capital
                              through innovation in environmental financing in the green credit markets.
                              Breakout Session:
                              Making the Connection: Climate Change and Landscapes

                              The session will focus on a new innovative World Bank Group application
                              which contains all available data on landscapes and climate change.
           Room
                              Participants will experience a “Foresight” game-changer to stimulate a
           L-103
                              4-degree world with plausible scenarios and solutions for landscapes.

                              Breakout Session:
                              Integrating Climate and Disaster Risk into Development

                              The session will focus on climate and disaster resilient development and why
          Room L-             it is essential for eliminating extreme poverty and achieving shared
            109               prosperity. The session will feature a hands on activity called “To Row or Not
                              to Row” in which participant’s form teams and take on the role of disaster
                              managers and decide between investing in taking early action for flood
                              preparedness, or in planning and capacity building, while hoping for no
                              floods.




              15:00 – 15:30   Coffee Break and Transition to IFC Auditorium




                                                                                                              41
                                                                        WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015



                                 Group Session by The Climate Reality Project

                                 From Apathy to Action: Leveraging Personal Stories and Social Media to
                                 Address the Climate Crisis

                                 As the urgency of the climate crisis continues to build, the need for a diverse
                                 chorus of voices calling for action is more important than ever. In this session,
                                 participants will learn how to strengthen their voice through personal
                                 storytelling and leverage social media as an effective tool for inspiring change.
 IFC                             Speakers will include young Climate Reality Leaders who make a difference in
 Auditorium      15:30 - 17:30   their own community every day.



 IFC Cafeteria   17:30 - 19:00   Networking Reception




DAY 2 – Competition Day

                                 Check-in/ Registration and Booth Visiting
IFC Lobby        8:30 - 9:30
                                 A continental breakfast will be available




                                 Opening of the Summit (Day 2)
                                 Introduction of Competition and Jury Members
                                 Establishment of Competition Order
 IFC                             *Finalists will randomly select a number which will determine the
 Auditorium      9:30 - 10:00    order in which they pitch their proposals




42
WORLD BANK YOUTH SUMMIT ǀ 2015




                              Live Competition

                                 Team AQGRI+ for India
                                 Team ECO-TECHNOLOGIES for Uganda
                                 Team GREENIE EXCHANGE for China
                                 Team HELIOS for India
                                 Team KOPAGAS for Tanzania
                                 Team TREE+PLY for Philippines
                              Moderated by Monika Weber-Fahr, Senior Manager,
                              Communications, Learning and Strategy

                              Jury:

                                 Dr. Jeffrey R. Alves, Vice President, International Council for
                                  Small Business
                                 James Close, Director, Climate Change Group, WBG
                                 Marianne Faye, Chief Economist, Climate Change, WBG
                                 Dr. Angus Friday, Grenada’s Ambassador to the US
                                 Cecile Fruman, Director, Trade & Competitiveness, WBG

                              Rules:

                                 Every competitor will have 1 minute to give a short intro, 7
                                  minutes to present their proposal and 5 minutes for Q&A and
                                  feedback from the Jury.
                                 The jury and audience will vote after each pitch. The audience
                                  will be voting via an online platform using their cell phones.
                                 People from the audience who are unable to vote from their
 IFC                              cell phones, will have the opportunity to vote from a computer
 Auditorium   10:00 - 12:00       which will be stationed at the entrance of the auditorium.



 IFC
 Auditorium   12:00 - 13:00   Lunch



 IFC
 Auditorium   13:00 - 13:15   #Day4Climate Call to Action by Connect4Climate



                              Awards and Closing Ceremony by Dr. Jeffrey R. Alves, Vice President,
 IFC                          International Council for Small Business (ICSB), and Arunma O. Oteh,
 Auditorium   13:15 - 14:15   Vice President and Treasurer, World Bank



                                                                                                     43
