                           Approach Paper
                         Data for Development
An IEG Evaluation of World Bank-Support for Data and Statistical Capacity

                                            June 24, 2016

Background and Context

1.      Data and evidence are the foundation of development policy and the effective
implementation of programs. Countries need data to formulate policy and assess progress, and
the World Bank needs data to frame policies and assess the outcomes of its efforts to help end
extreme poverty, promote shared prosperity, and meet the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). Yet, half of all member countries lack the data necessary to measure progress against
the Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity (Serajuddin et
al, 2015). Monitoring the 169 targets under the SDGs compared to the 21 targets under the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) is also likely to heighten the need for data.

2.      The Bank has been an early and strong supporter of development data, providing an
important public good (IEG, 2015). Development data, used synonymously with data for
development, is defined here as data pertaining to countries’ social, economic, and
environmental issues produced by country systems, the Bank, or third parties. (This definition is
broader than the Data Council’s definition in that it also includes data produced by the Bank and
third parties irrespective of the involvement of country systems.1) Development data may be
sourced from national statistical offices, ministries, and other agencies, or may be sourced from
censuses, household surveys, and agricultural surveys. It also includes administrative data, civil
registration and vital statistics, economic statistics such as labor force and establishment surveys
and trade statistics, geospatial data, other environmental data such as real-time monitoring, and
mobile and IT-user data.

3.      The Bank is involved in development data in various capacities and through many
different types of activities, complicating the identification of the portfolio for this evaluation.

1
  The Data Council was established on July 28, 2014 to: (i) provide a governance framework for
managing the WBG’s data assets and (ii) to make strategic decisions about support for data activities in
WBG client countries and for allocation of financial and human resources for data activities within the
institution. The Council is co-chaired by the WBG’s Managing Director/Chief Operating Officer and the
WBG’s Chief Economist. The Council has two pillars, one for corporate data assets and another for
development data assets. The Data Council defines development data as data “that are produced by
country systems around social, economic, and environment issues, such as data from censuses, household
surveys, administrative records and civil registration.”

                                                   1
Box 1 summarizes the forms of Bank support to development data and Attachment 2 provides
details of the portfolio.

 Box 1. Forms of World Bank Support to Development Data
 IDA/IBRD financing. Bank financing for development data has typically aimed at improving the
 economic and social information for policy making and poverty reduction. Activities in support of this
 objective have included: strengthening statistical planning and legislation, data infrastructure, human
 resources, data collection, data processing and analysis, data archiving, and data dissemination;
 preparing national strategies for the development of statistics; supporting statistical capacity building;
 and conducting censuses and surveys.
  Contribution to or execution of trust funds. The Bank has contributed financing to or executed trust
 funds, the major Multi-Donor Trust Funds being the Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building
 (TFSCB), Statistical Capacity Building Program (STATCAP), and the Statistics for Results (SFR)
 program.
 Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA). The Bank has supported ASA related to data, including the
 development of statistical master plans and country statistical assessments. The Bank has also provided
 training and non-lending technical assistance for strengthening statistical capacity.
  Production of datasets and administration of surveys. The Bank has itself produced datasets such as
 Country Policy and Institutional Assessments and Atlas GNI per capita, and administered surveys such
 as the World Bank Enterprise surveys, Doing Business surveys, and the Living Standards Measurement
 Study (LSMS) surveys.
 Standard setting. The Bank has worked with other organizations on standard setting for new statistical
 methods, data collection activities, and statistical capacity-building programs, for example: (i) the
 Bank’s work with the IMF on the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) which provides
 guidelines to countries on the dissemination of economic, financial and socio-demographic data to the
 public and establishes a broad framework for countries seeking improvements in their statistical
 systems, (ii) the development of guidelines for the preparation of metadata covering the following
 areas: population, education, health, poverty assessment and monitoring (iii) participation in the
 governing body of the International Household Survey Network (IHSN), and coordinating the IHSN
 secretariat.
 Compilation of indicators. The Bank undertakes the collection of development indicators, compiled
 from officially-recognized international sources, and produces indicators such as the World
 Development Indicators.
 Innovation and research. The Bank launched the Open Data Initiative (ODI) to provide free, open and
 easy access to over 5,000 indicators. It gives “anyone the freedom to use, re-use, or redistribute data.”
 The ODI website allows individuals, groups, and organizations to create applications, programs,
 visualizations, and other tools that will help monitor and measure progress of various development
 initiatives and projects. With partners, the Bank also supports client countries with open data. There is
 also a program on “Innovations in Big Data & Analytics for Development” and research on survey
 methodology and other topics.
 Source: IEG.




                                                     2
4.      The World Bank’s Articles of Agreement do not explicitly define a role for the Bank in
data. There is also no Bank-wide policy on data, although Bank Procedure 14.10 does mandate
that the Development Economics Vice-Presidency Data Group (DECDG) undertakes specific
data tasks such as those related to external debt reporting, and Operational Policy 3.10 assigns to
DECDG responsibility for per capita income estimates.

5.      Furthermore, Bank presidents have emphasized the importance of data in their statements
from time to time. For example, James Wolfensohn said in 2004 about the Marrakech Action
Plans for Statistics (MAPS): “This is more than a detail. This is at the center of our ability to
demonstrate progress and we have been too long in giving this the appropriate weighting.” And
Robert Zoellick said in 2010: “We need more core data across countries and time periods on
health, education, infrastructure, and gender. We need more and better data on public finance,
especially at sub-national levels, which is critical for better governance. We need more hands
and minds to confront theory with evidence on major policy issues…This is the direction that I
want the World Bank to take. This is democratizing development economics. This will forever
change how we conduct development research.”

6.     In addition, the Bank’s role in development data is implicit in its launch of the Country
Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) scores in 1977, the World Development Indicators
(WDIs) in 1997, and the Doing Business Indicators in 2004.

7.      The Bank’s leadership or participation in a number of partnerships for data also reveals
the Bank’s de facto role in development data. The Bank was a founding member of PARIS21 in
1999 to help build and strengthen national statistical systems in developing countries. To
complement PARIS21 activities, the Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building (TFSCB) was
set up in 1999 as a World Bank-administered, multi-donor trust fund to provide financial
resources to developing countries for statistical capacity building activities. The Bank was also a
founding member of the Marrakech Action Plan for Statistics (MAPS) in 2004 which aimed to
broaden the efforts at both national and international levels to help developing countries achieve
stronger capacities in statistics. The Bank hosts the International Comparison Program for global
price statistics.

8.     More recently, the Bank’s role in development data is evident in the establishment of the
Data Council in July 2014 and in the World Bank Group Strategic Actions Program for
Addressing Development Data Gaps: 2016 - 2030 (World Bank, 2016). The latter aims to reduce
the gaps in the quantity and quality of development data in Bank client countries, and to
encourage Bank clients to adopt data innovations that are scalable and proven to reduce the cost
and time of data production, while preserving data quality. Box 2 summarizes statements on the
Bank’s role in development data.



                                                 3
9.     The Bank’s strategic approach to development data for 2016-2030 forward has been
informed by the challenges facing the Bank’s work on development data. Several recent external,
Bank, and IEG documents provide overviews and diagnostics of these challenges, which are
discussed below.

 Box 2. Statements on the Bank’s Role in Development Data
 Development Committee (2015)
 “We encourage the WBG [World Bank Group] to ensure the technical robustness of the [SDG] goals and
 targets and to strengthen countries’ data capacity, to enable development and to monitor progress towards
 the WBG’s goals and the SDGs.”
 Role of the Data Council (excerpts, 2015)
  Establish the strategic data priorities for the WBG and agree on the annual action plans for development
    data and corporate data
  Make recommendations to senior management regarding the appropriate institutional arrangements as
    well as proper allocation of financial and human resources
  Consider and endorse relevant data policies/standards/protocols for data management and oversee their
    effective implementation
  Ensure that country clients and WBG teams can use data for evidence-based systematic diagnostics to
    identify the most critical challenges and opportunities for meeting the twin goals, and for effectively
    monitoring progress towards the goals.
 Role of the Data Council’s Development Data Directors Groups (excerpts, 2015)
  Play a visible leadership role in the Data Revolution for Sustainable Development
  Support client countries in building statistical capacity
  Foster partnership and innovation for production and effective use of relevant, reliable, open and timely
    development data
  Ensure a coherent WBG Development Data agenda in support of the WBG Strategy and its twin goals
  Strengthen statistical capacity in client countries
  Improve the quality and consistency of WBG-produced development indicators
  Maximize the accessibility and effective use of WBG-held development data by staff
  Gain recognition as a leader in customized client services for data production, management and analysis
    to unlock revenue sources
  Foster data skills and professional growth within the WBG.
 Three Pillars of the Development Data Framework Endorsed by the Data Council (2015)
  Increase country capacity to produce, disseminate, and use data
  Improve WBG capacity to access, manage, and disseminate data
  Produce high quality statistical indicators and data products to improve development outcomes.
 The Data Council has put forward a World Bank Group Strategic Actions Program for Addressing
 Development Data Gaps 2016 - 2030 aiming to operationalize a long-term WBG development data
 strategy in support of the SDGs and the twin goals. Its primary development objectives are: (a) to reduce the
 gaps in the quantity and quality of development data in Bank client countries, which are critical for the core
 business of the WBG; and (b) to encourage Bank clients to adopt data innovations that are scalable and
 proven to reduce the costs and time of data production, while preserving data quality.
 Source: Development Committee Communiqué, April 2015; Terms of Reference, World Bank Group Data Council, World
 Bank, September 29, 2015; World Bank Group Strategic Actions Program for Addressing Development Data Gaps 2016 –
 2030, World Bank, 2016; Terms of Reference, World Bank Group Data Directors Group; World Bank, September 2015.




                                                         4
10.     According to the terms of reference for the Data Council: “Development Data assets held
across the World Bank Group (WBG) are fragmented, incomplete and often difficult to find. The
existing model of data production and data use does not serve the WBG well any more. It is
costly and inefficient, hampering our ability to make full use of these increasingly valuable
assets to generate new, transformative solutions to the world’s most difficult development
challenges…Relevant, timely and open data are central to operationalizing the WBG Strategy
through a new approach to country engagement. Significant data gaps undermine effective
policy-making and program design, and prevent measuring progress against development goals,
including the WBG’s overarching twin goals. Key Executive Directors have expressed concerns
over these development data gaps.”

11.     The recent external review of the Bank’s Development Economics Vice-Presidency
(DEC) found that the World Bank is seen as a leader in open data, data access, and presentation,
but also that the role of data collection was under-appreciated (Besley et al, 2015). Led by three
eminent statistical leaders, the data portion of the recent DEC evaluation concluded that the role
of the DEC Data Group is not a Bank priority, a complete central data repository is lacking, there
are only policy guidelines for data quality, there is no mandate to collect standardized data, and
there is no professional track for data management and statistics. DEC has proposed a plan to
adopt several of the recommendations from this evaluation, including the creation of a new
position of a Chief Statistician.

12.    In addition, two reports by the Bank’s Internal Audit Department (IAD) found
weaknesses in governance, coordination, and quality management of the various data initiatives
(IAD 2012 and 2013). Furthermore, some reviews found that even as data availability had
improved, data literacy was an issue and the uptake, understanding, and demand for data was low
in some countries (Thomson, Eele, Schmieding, 2013; Ngo, 2015). Finally, IEG’s report on the
poverty focus of country programs concluded that the World Bank provides an important public
good in supporting and reporting global poverty data and diagnostics, and that its work on
poverty data is generally robust. It also found some fragmentation and lack of standardization,
and urged the Bank to invest more in sustainable data collection and to adopt data reporting
standards (IEG, 2015).

13.      Much statistical capacity building has been conducted or financed through partnership
programs (Box 3) and has aimed to strengthen the capacity of developing countries’ national
statistical systems through the design and implementation of National Statistics Development
Strategies (NSDS). IEG’s global program review of the Partnership in Statistics for Development
in the 21st Century (PARIS21), the Marrakech Action Plan for Statistics (MAPS), and the Trust
Fund for Statistical Capacity Building (TFSCB) found that these programs are generally working
well and that the Bank has a comparative advantage in statistical capacity building (IEG, 2011).

                                                5
Bank support to these partnerships has increased the number of countries with NSDSs, improved
access to data, coordination of survey instruments, and expanded the number of countries
conducting censuses (IEG, 2011; IEG, 2015). A recent external evaluation found that the
International Household Survey Network (IHSN) had only limited success in coordinating the
collection of survey data and improving survey quality at the country level (Ngo, 2015).

 Box 3. Partnerships for Data
 The World Bank collaborates closely on data and statistics with numerous agencies and national statistical
 offices. There is a partnership with the IMF, UN, and Multilateral Development Banks under a
 Memorandum of Understanding on statistics, signed in April 2013. The Bank also participates in several
 partnership programs and benefits from dedicated trust funds, including:
 International Comparison Program (1968): A partnership of various statistical administrations of up to
 199 countries housed at the World Bank. The Program produces internationally comparable price and
 volume measures for gross domestic product (GDP).
 Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building (1999): A multi-donor trust fund that aims to improve the
 capacity of developing countries to produce and use statistics with an overall objective of supporting
 effective decision-making for development. The TFSCB supports projects aiming at strengthening national
 statistical systems in priority areas and developing statistical capacity in a sustainable manner, including
 openness and accessibility of data in line with the Open Data Initiative and innovative approaches to
 improve data collection.
 Marrakech Action Plan for Statistics (2004): A global plan for improving development statistics, agreed
 at the Second International Roundtable on Managing for Development Results in Morocco in 2004. Eight
 programs have been developed with the UN and other international agencies to take the identified actions
 into practice.
 Partnership in Statistics for Development in the 21st Century (PARIS21, 1999): A partnership to
 promote better use and production of statistics throughout the developing world. A worldwide network,
 PARIS21 is committed to evidence-based decision making through the improvement of institutional and
 technical capacity, stimulating, meeting, and improving national demand through comprehensive national
 plans for improvement.
 Statistics for Results Facility (2009): A multi-donor initiative, managed by the World Bank, to support
 statistical development in developing countries. Along with its Catalytic Fund, this initiative promotes
 statistical capacity building and supports better policy formulation and decision-making through
 improvements in the production, availability, and use of official statistics.
 Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS) Program (1980): A household survey program focused
 on generating high-quality data, improving survey methods, building capacity, and facilitating the use of
 household survey data.
 The Global Financial Inclusion (Global Findex) database (2011): A comprehensive database on financial
 inclusion. It provides in-depth data on how individuals save, borrow, make payments, and manage risks.
 The first Global Findex database was launched in 2011 in partnership with Gallup and with funding from
 the Bill & Melinda Gates foundation. A second edition was launched in 2014.
 Partnership for Open Data (2014): A tool designed to help developing countries use open data standards
 and understand and exploit the benefits of open data. Its objectives are to support developing countries to
 plan, execute, and run open data initiatives; increase the use of open data in developing countries; and grow
 the evidence-base on the impact of open data for development.




                                                       6
 Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data (2015): A network of governments, civil society,
 and businesses working together to strengthen the inclusivity, trust, and innovation in the way that data are
 used to address the world’s sustainable development efforts.
 Source: IEG.

14.     The Independent Audit of Data Collection and Production at the World Bank found that
the Bank had made significant progress at collecting and producing data and establishing a
governance framework, but there was still room to improve the capacity of some countries to
produce timely and quality data. The weak link in the work has been in implementing NSDSs
and using data for evidence-based policy making and planning (IEG, 2015; Open Data Watch,
2015). Open Data Watch’s review of 27 evaluations found that the more successful statistical
capacity building programs focused on the users of statistics and their needs; ensured flexibility
in the design of programs; adapted to changing country priorities and maintained country
ownership; and coordinated the activities of donors (Open Data Watch, 2015).

Objectives and Audience

15.     The objective of this evaluation is to inform the Board and the Data Council on the
effectiveness of Bank support to country clients in producing, sharing, and using development
data, and to offer recommendations on how to strengthen it. Accordingly, the evaluation will
focus outward on client countries and assess the Bank’s own data-related work in so far as it is a
means to support client countries. Data production, sharing, and use are the three focus areas
within the first block of WBG’s Development Data Framework.

16.     This evaluation will take stock of the Bank’s experience relating to the production,
sharing, and use of development data since the Marrakech Action Plan for Statistics (MAPS) in
2004, and its evolution over the period of the Paris Declaration (2005), Accra Agenda for Action
(2008), and SDGs. It will also provide early reflections on the extent to which the establishment
of the Data Council in 2014 and the launch of the Strategic Actions Program for Addressing
Development Data Gaps 2016 – 2030 are beginning to, or are likely to, help address the gaps and
challenges surrounding development data highlighted in external, Bank, and IEG documents.

17.    This is a corporate evaluation that responds to the second objective of IEG’s Work
Program – it will generate evidence and learning regarding the early implementation experience
of the WBG strategy (specifically, that of the Data Council) to enable course corrections.

18.    The nature of development data makes for a diverse group of stakeholders for this
evaluation. Besides CODE, the main stakeholders are the members of the Data Council and its
Data Directors Groups (comprising Directors from DEC and select Global Practices) and all
Bank Regional and other units working with country clients on the production, sharing, and use
of development data. Other stakeholder groups comprise staff of donor agencies, partnership


                                                       7
programs, national statistical offices, and sector ministries collaborating with the Bank on
development data.

Evaluation Questions and Coverage/Scope

19.     The scope and questions for this evaluation were identified in an independent manner
following consultations with key counterparts from DEC, Global Practices with a major role in
data, and thought leaders in the field. Reflecting its objective, this evaluation will focus on the
following evaluation question: How effectively has the Bank supported country clients in
producing, sharing, and using development data? Country data capacity is an issue that pervades
data production, dissemination, and use and the coherence of Bank support to fostering country
capacity to produce, share and use data will be part and parcel of the evaluation question. Also
addressed will be the institutionalization of data production, dissemination, and use through a
review of the Bank’s work in promoting institutional, financial, and legal frameworks for
national statistical systems.

20.      Development data are an essential global public good that may be under-produced if left
to individual countries. Accordingly, this evaluation will also ask the question: What roles has
the Bank played in supporting data as a global public good and how effectively has it performed
those roles? The adoption of the SDGs has catalyzed numerous initiatives to improve data
availability with the Bank leading in some areas and contributing in others, often in partnership
with other agencies. The evaluation will assess the Bank’s role as a provider of data for the
global community and for SDG monitoring, and its role as a partner in various data initiatives.
This part of the assessment will include sub-questions on the Bank’s contributions and funding
modalities, and on the relevance and effectiveness of select partnerships with Bank participation
(especially those listed in Box 3; the team will not be able to inventory and assess all data-related
initiatives and partnerships because of their large number). The assessment will also attempt to
review whether there is a tension between support for data for MDG and SDG monitoring and
support for data for domestic uses for policy design, targeting, and monitoring.

21.     The assessment of data production will cover sub-questions such as what kinds of data
has the Bank supported country clients to produce, how has the Bank helped clients to identify
their data needs, how has it identified data gaps, how has it helped country clients bridge those
gaps, to what extent the Bank has fostered ownership of data among clients through involving
them in choosing what kinds of data to produce or in other ways, and what steps has the Bank
taken to ensure data quality?2

22.     The assessment of data sharing and dissemination will cover Open Data issues (public
access, frequency, and user-friendliness of data sharing); and access by the Bank to data it

2
 The idea of ‘fit for purpose,’ i.e., that some quality dimensions are more important for particular types of
data use, will be explored. For example, data used to inform cross-country comparison needs to be


                                                     8
finances. It will look at data sharing and dissemination both by clients and the Bank itself,
internally and externally.

23.    The assessment of use will cover sub-questions such as which types of Bank-supported
data have the various country clients (i.e., government officials, NGO staff, civil society, and
researchers) used, what purposes (e.g., policy making, targeting benefits to the poor, holding
governments or donors accountable, conducting research and innovation, and monitoring and
evaluation of programs and policies) have they used it for, and what are the key supply- and
demand-side drivers of usage, including political economy factors? The evaluation will be
mindful of the possibility that data may be used selectively without taking a balanced view of the
evidence, or that it may not be used sufficiently or at all for reasons unrelated to the quality of
Bank support. The evaluation will seek to establish a typology of use of development data and
make headway toward measuring use.

24.     Given recent internal reviews of governance issues relating to the Bank’s data work,
limited new primary work will be done on Bank internal organizational issues. The findings of
existing reviews including the evaluation of DEC and recent Internal Audit reports will inform
the evaluation, complemented by interview findings.

25.    IEG’s 2015 evaluation of the poverty focus of country programs found that the lack of
good-quality, timely poverty data and the issues of data accessibility remain major constraints to
carrying out robust poverty diagnostics and policy dialogue. Building on that finding, this
evaluation will seek to identify ways in which the Bank can strengthen the effectiveness of its
support for closing such major data gaps.

26.      The evaluation will cover Bank financial support, trust funds, Advisory Services and
Analytics, production of datasets and administration of surveys, standard setting, compilation of
indicators, and innovation and research. In terms of Bank lending for development data, the
initially identified portfolio consists of 291 projects approved since FY06 for which the data
components amount to US $1.03 billion.

27.     The Bank supports many different types of data; not all can be covered here. Different
case studies will cover the types of data that have received most of the Bank’s attention and
support—something that varies across countries, initiatives, and partnerships. Gender data will
be covered given its corporate priority. Certain aspects of the Living Standards Measurement
Study (LSMS) will be covered given its long history (since 1980).



comparable. Conversely, comparability is less important for data used in domestic policy design and
planning, where consistency and comparability over time is often more important. The requirements for
frequency of data collection, level of disaggregation, accessibility, and so on are all dimensions that vary
with intended use.

                                                      9
28.     While issues of the relevance and effectiveness of data use will be covered in-depth and
through primary analysis, issues of efficiency or value for money will be addressed through
existing studies, as available.

29.     Regarding whether the Bank is keeping abreast of, or is involved in, innovations in the
fields of ICT, mobile data, big data, and so on, and how these initiatives are influencing data use,
this evaluation will conduct a rapid rather than in-depth assessment.

30.     The focus of this evaluation will be on reviewing the Bank’s efforts to help countries
produce, share, and use development data. To keep the scope manageable, the evaluation will not
cover: how the Bank itself produces, shares, and uses data (for research, for example) except as a
means to support countries to do so; IFC and MIGA; corporate data pertaining to the Bank
Group itself such as data relating to Human Resources or Treasury, and so on; qualitative data;
and project monitoring and evaluation.3

Evaluation Design and Evaluability Assessment

31.     As noted earlier, this evaluation will assess Bank support to client countries for the
production, sharing, and use of development data. While the Bank has only recently formally
articulated a plan for doing so, it has promoted the production, sharing, and use of development
data for decades.

32.     The conceptual framework for the evaluation will be a theory of change. This theory of
change will be developed in consultation with counterparts and will serve to guide the team’s
work. It will cover the entire chain from statistical capacity building to data production, sharing
and dissemination, to data use by country decision-makers. It will spell out the underlying
assumptions and enabling factors for each link in the chain from data production, sharing, and
use. It will cover the following steps:

         Bank inputs such as internal administrative resources, organizational structure and
          governance arrangements, and management signals and incentives as they each relate to
          supporting country clients in the production, sharing, and use of development data will
          be assessed mainly using existing sources.
         Bank outputs such as the projects and programs financed through IBRD/IDA financing
          and trust fund support, advisory services and analytics, datasets and surveys, standard
          setting initiatives, compilation of indicators, and innovation and research (as described
          in Box 1) will be assessed, and the links between these outputs and Bank inputs will be
          examined.

3
 Data purely or mainly for project M&E will not form part of the scope of this evaluation, in contrast to
sector data with a broader statistical scope and coverage which will.


                                                    10
        The intended outcome in terms of the effectiveness of Bank support to country clients
         in producing, sharing, and using development data will be assessed, and the links
         between this outcome and Bank outputs will be examined.
        Factors that can enable—or potentially derail—the successful production, sharing, and
         use of data will also be examined. On the supply-side such factors would include the
         institutional context and state of the statistical legal and governance systems,
         management of national statistical systems, level of resources, and the infrastructure for
         statistics. On the demand-side such factors would include the political economy
         surrounding data, the government’s results focus, influence of other donors, and level
         of engagement by citizens and researchers.

33.    Adopting a mixed methods approach, this evaluation will combine various quantitative
and qualitative approaches, instruments, and sources:

        Assessing the theory of change.
        Analysis of ICRs and ICR Reviews for closed data projects, in collaboration with the
         team conducting the RAP 2016, combined with a stocktaking of the active portfolio.
        About six country case studies of the Bank’s development data work, combined with at
         least two Project Performance Assessment Reports for statistical capacity strengthening
         projects in Ghana and Kenya. The case study countries will be sampled purposefully
         based on the following criteria: (i) at least one Bank-funded statistical capacity-building
         initiative that is active or recently closed (e.g., STATCAP program); (ii) multiple other
         data-related projects and Advisory Services and Analytics as identified in the
         preliminary portfolio; and (iii) diversity of regions and of large and small countries,
         with deliberate oversampling of IDA countries. The team will conduct interviews and
         roundtable discussions with data users and producers, including country client officials,
         staff in partner agencies, and researchers. The suitability of applying “process tracing”
         for determining the use of data in decision making will be considered for a few of the
         country case studies.
        A comprehensive literature review of academic and grey literature, evaluations, and
         donor reports will be undertaken to establish what is already known about the key
         evaluation questions.
        The evaluation team will explore the feasibility of a quantitative analysis to identify
         patterns of associations between the World Bank’s contribution to data for development
         and existing measures of data capacity, access, and use at the country level.
        An electronic survey of Bank staff representing key groups of data users and producers
         will be undertaken relating to both lending and analytical work.
        Interviews of Bank staff and managers sampled purposefully will be conducted to
         represent key groups of data users and producers.


                                                11
        An electronic survey of country client officials, staff in partner agencies, and
         researchers is under consideration and will be undertaken if existing surveys do not
         provide the necessary information.
        Background papers or desk reviews exploring key topics (e.g., the Bank’s Statistical
         Capacity Indicator, trade-off between data needed for global monitoring purposes
         versus for national policymaking, gender data, and Bank policies and practices for data
         sharing) will be undertaken.

34.     This evaluation will provide a broad perspective on the roles the World Bank plays in
fostering data for development through partnerships. Review of partnerships in data for
development will be mainstreamed as part of the evaluation. Some of these have been
instrumental in statistical strengthening, setting data standards, and providing critical information
for development-related purposes (e.g., the International Comparison Program and the Living
Standards Measurement Study). The evaluation will assess what roles the Bank plays in data for
development in partnership with other agencies and institutions, how aligned those roles are with
the expectations articulated by the Data Council, how partnership programs and trust funds with
Bank participation address the different elements of the theory of change leading to clients’ and
partners’ use of data, the effectiveness of programs, and how and why partners and stakeholders
value the Bank’s role and contribution. The methodology for the partnership review will follow a
nested approach and provide an overview of existing partnerships, conduct a deeper document-
based review of multi-country programs, and conduct a full assessment of the largest funded
programs hosted by the World Bank. The review will be based on existing evaluations of the
major programs, surveys of partners, clients, and program staff, and interviews.

Design Strengths and Limitations

35.     The strength of this evaluation lies in its ability to draw evaluative lessons from country
engagements and corporate initiatives to inform strategic directions on development data. The
main limitation is that this is a rapidly evolving field and too little time may have lapsed to
conclusively assess the outcomes of some recent initiatives such as the establishment of the Data
Council. The team will, therefore, attempt to inform the work of the Data Council going forward,
but does not expect to make a summative assessment of the Data Council’s effectiveness.
Furthermore, capacity building and data use can be difficult to evaluate in a manner that
establishes causal relationships and attribution.

Quality Assurance Process

36.     This evaluation will be quality controlled in various ways. First, it will go through IEG’s
normal process with IEG management providing oversight at each stage, including at IEG’s
internal One-Stop meetings. Second, peer reviewers will comment on draft. The Peer Reviewers


                                                 12
are Elizabeth King (Nonresident Senior Fellow, The Brookings Institution), Pali Lehohla
(Statistician-General, South Africa), Martin Ravallion (Professor, Georgetown University),
Stefan Schweinfest (Director, UN Statistics Division), and Michael Woolcock (Lead Social
Development Specialist, The World Bank). Third, the evaluation will receive additional quality
review through participatory engagement with World Bank staff and managers, including via
informal participatory workshops to discuss the draft Approach Paper (which has already taken
place) and, if feasible, the draft evaluation report. There will also be engagement with the
partners involved in the partnership programs being evaluated in order to seek their feedback.


Expected Outputs, Outreach and Tracking

37.     The output of this task will be a report of 40 pages plus Appendixes and an Overview.
Engagement and consultation for this evaluation will be conducted on an ongoing basis, and the
task of creating awareness and buy-in around it will hence start well before the dissemination
phase. Dynamic methods for stakeholder outreach will be used during and after the evaluation. A
complete dissemination and outreach strategy will be presented at the One-Stop review meeting
for the full report, and will include a session that discusses the disclosed report with the Data
Council’s Development Data Directors Groups, a launch event at Bank headquarters, blogs, and
presentations at relevant events/conferences through which external stakeholders can also be
reached.

Resources

38.    The team will be led by Soniya Carvalho and Rasmus Heltberg, co-team leaders and lead
authors, complemented by Javier Bronfman, Sankalpa Dashrath, Ann Flanagan, Nidhi Khattri,
Chad Leechor, Eduardo Maldonado, Estelle Raimondo, Vivek Raman, Swizen Rubbani, and
Bahar Salimova, all IEG. External consultants Andrew Flatt, Morten Jerven, Joan Nelson, and
Brian Ngo will advise and/or prepare background papers. The proposed net budget of this
evaluation is $991,905.




                                               13
Attachment 1

References
Banerjee, Abhijit, Deaton, Angus, Lustig, Nora, Rogoff, Ken and Edward Hsu. 2006. An Evaluation of World Bank
        Research, 1998-2005. World Bank, Washington, DC.
        https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/17896 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
Besley, T., Paxson, C., Peter, H., and C. Udry. 2015. Evaluation Panel Review of DEC. A Report to the Chief
         Economist and Senior Vice President. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
Ferreira, Francisco H. G., Lustig, Nora, and Daniel Chaim Teles. 2015. “Appraising cross-national income
          inequality databases: an introduction.” Policy Research Working Paper No. WPS 7489, World Bank Group,
          Washington, DC. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/11/25384034/appraising-cross-national-
          income-inequality-databases-introduction
Ngo, Brian T., and Andrew J. Flatt. 2014. Statistics for results facility - catalytic fund (SRF-CF): evaluation report
         of the pilot phase. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
         http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/02/19586528/statistics-results-facility-catalytic-fund-srf-
         cf-evaluation-report-pilot-phase
Open Data Watch. 2015. “Partnerships and Financing for Statistics: Lessons Learned from Recent Evaluation.”
       Open Data Watch Study, Washington, DC.
PARIS21 Secretariat. 2004. “A Guide to Designing a National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS).”
       The Partnership in Statistics for Development in the Twenty-first Century (PARIS21), Paris, France.
Roberts, Richard, and Claudine Voyadzis. 2009. “Evaluation of Paris21: Final Report.” Paris21, Paris, France.
Salop, Joanne, et al. 2006. Independent Evaluation of DECDG Final Report (the World Bank’s Development Data
         Group). Washington, DC: World Bank.
Serajuddin, Umar, Uematsu, Hiroki, Wieser, Christina, Yoshida, Nobuo, and Andrew L. Dabalen. 2015. “Data
        deprivation: another deprivation to end.” Policy Research Working Paper No. WPS 7252, World Bank
        Group, Washington, DC. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/04/24426058/data-deprivation-
        another-deprivation-end
Snorrason, Hallgrimur, et al. 2010. World Bank Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building Evaluation Report.
        Washington, DC: World Bank.
Soromenho-Ramos, Sofia. 2015. “Light Evaluation of Paris21: Final Report: Improving lives through better
       statistics.” Paris21, Paris, France.
Sustainable Development Network. 2015. “Data for Development: a Needs Assessment for SDG Monitoring and
        Statistical Capacity Development.” United Nations.
Thomson, Anne, Graham Eele, and Felix Schmieding. 2013. “Independent Evaluation of the International
       Household Survey Network (IHSN) and Accelerated Data Program (ADP) Final Report.” Oxford Policy
       Management, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Willoughby, Christopher; Crook, Philip. 2008. Marrakech action plan for statistics: report of an independent
        evaluation. Washington DC: World Bank Group.
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2008/12/19132167/marrakech-action-plan-statistics-report-
        independent-evaluation
World Bank. 2011. Marrakech action plan for statistics: partnership in statistics for development in the 21st century
       - trust fund for statistical capacity building. Global Program Review; volume 5, no. 3. Washington, DC:
       World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2011/06/15456111/marrakech-action-plan-
       statistics-partnership-statistics-development-21st-century-trust-fund-statistical-capacity-building




                                                          14
______. 2015. “The poverty focus of country programs: lessons from World Bank experience.” Working Paper.
        World Bank Group: Washington, DC.
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/07/24846931/poverty-focus-country-programs-lessons-
        world-bank-experience
______. 2016. “World Bank Group Strategic Actions Program for Addressing Development Data Gaps: 2016-
        2030.” World Bank: Washington, DC.




                                                     15
Attachment 2

Preliminary Portfolio Review
World Bank Support for Development Data, FY06-16

The IEG project identification exercise aimed at selecting a portfolio of World Bank
interventions that have involved support for development data activities using the criteria
identified in the paragraphs below. The identification of a relevant portfolio focused exclusively
on IDA/IBRD lending (including DPLs), recipient executed trust fund grants and World Bank
analytic work approved between fiscal year 2006 and fiscal year 2015.The review did not
include Bank executed grants, projects that were terminated, dropped, or are still in the pipeline.

Methodology and data sources

Given the absence of a harmonized system for tracking World Bank support for development
data activities, the portfolio was constructed through a process of triangulating data from the
different sources listed below

Statistical Capacity Building Programs/Trust Funds: The first step involved selecting all
projects approved under the World Bank’s different statistical capacity building programs/trust
funds. A partial list of the Bank’s statistical capacity building programs was retrieved from the
World Bank website.4 Accordingly, a list of projects was identified based on data available on
the World Bank websites of the respective initiatives including, STATCAP, ECASTAT, and the
Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund (SRF-CF). The commitments approved under the
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building were obtained separately from the World Bank’s
Business Intelligence database.

Project lists from World Bank teams: The above project lists were supplemented with project
data compiled and provided by the Development Data Group (DECDG) of the World Bank.
DECDG maintains a list of all development data Bank activities led by DECDG project staff.5

World Bank thematic codes: Also included into the portfolio were all the Bank activities (loans,
grants & AAA) assigned theme code 22 (Economic Statistics, Modeling and Forecasting).



4
  This partial list of World Bank statistical capacity programs only included the programs managed by the
Statistical Development and Partnership Team of the Development Data Group. Other existing programs
in other Bank departments were not included. This list is available at
http://www.worldbank.org/en/data/statistical-capacity-building/trust-fund-for-statistical-capacity-building
5
  The IEG team requested for similar lists from other World Bank departments/global practices but was
informed that there is no systematic tracking of this data in other GPs.


                                                    16
Although the Bank does not have a theme/sector flag to identify data related activities, it was felt
that this particular code is a close approximation.

Keyword search of project titles: A keyword search of project titles was used to identify projects
whose names indicated support for development data activities. The keywords used included;
statistical capacity building, devstat, stats, survey, and census.

Keyword search of relevant databases: The final step in the portfolio selection process involved
conducting keyword searches of the prior actions database and components database.6 The
keywords used in the search included among others; data, statistical, open government, statistics,
websites, and open data, civil registry, living standards measurement, census, survey.

The identification of relevant AAA activities was done on the basis of only theme codes and
project title searches.

Results

Based on the selection criteria above, a portfolio of 610 World Bank interventions was identified.
This portfolio consisted mainly of AAA interventions which comprised 52 percent of the overall
number of development data interventions.

Table 1. Number of WB Interventions by Nature of Support, FY06-15

   Type of WB support                            Number of interventions   Percent of overall total
 AAA                                                      319                        52
 Financing                                                  291                      48
                Total                                       610                      100
Source: Business Intelligence Database, IEG calculations.


The AAA support for data was delivered primarily through Non-Lending Technical Assistance
(NLTA) which accounted for 60 percent of the number of delivered AAA activities.

In terms of the number of commitments IDA/IBRD financing accounted for about half of the
commitments with data related content. By value, IBRD/IDA accounted for a greater share (77

6
  The World Bank prior actions database is a consolidated database on all prior actions associated with
development policy operations approved since 1980. The database is maintained by the Operations Policy
and Country Services (OPCS) Vice-Presidency of the World Bank. The project components database has
information on the projects components of investment loans approved since 1997. The database was
created and is maintained by IEG.




                                                              17
percent) of the volume of financing commitments. This is mostly due to the fact that trust fund
grants, though numerous, tend to be of very small sizes usually amounting to less than US$ 0.5
million (Table 2).

Table 2. World Bank Financing Support by Product Line, FY06-15
                                                                            Percent of                            Size of data
      Product                                     Number of               commitments by                          component7           Percent by
        line                                     commitments                 number                                 US$ M                value
    IDA/IBRD                                        146                        50                                    797.0                 77
    Trust funds                                      145                             50                              236.4                   23
    Total                                            291                             100                            1033.4                  100
Source: Business Intelligence Database, IEG calculations.

World Bank support by Fiscal Year

The number of World Bank interventions did not fluctuate much during the period but there has
been a dramatic rise in interventions since 2014. A possible explanation for this increase could
be the renewed focus on support for building country statistical capacity under IDA 17.

Figure 1. Number of WB Interventions by Fiscal Year

                                                                                                                                       78
                                      80
            Number of interventions




                                      60                                                                                     51
                                                          39                                                                      43
                                                33                                                                                          37
                                      40                       30 26   28 26     28 24             28
                                                     26                                                 24
                                                                                             20              19      20 16
                                      20   14

                                       0
                                           2006      2007      2008    2009      2010        2011       2012         2013    2014       2015
                                                                                     Fiscal Year


                                                                               AAA     Financing


Source: World Bank Database.


The volume of financing commitments displayed more fluctuation during the period but has also
risen greatly since 2014.



7
 The size of the data component in the identified portfolio is understated because it does not include the
commitment amounts for several Development Policy Operations whose data component amount could
not be established.


                                                                                     18
Figure 2. Volume of WB Financing by Fiscal Year

                                                                                                                   212
                      200
                                      156
                      160                                                                                   142
       US$ millions



                                                                               137
                                                                    118
                      120
                            73                                                                        64
                       80
                                              42            43                          46
                       40

                        0
                            2006     2007    2008           2009   2010        2011    2012          2013   2014   2015

                                                                        Fiscal year

Source: World Bank Database.

World Bank Support by Global Practice

Three WB global practices account for more than half of the value of Bank interventions
supporting data for development. The Governance, HNP, and Poverty & equity global practice
together constitute about 68 percent of the total value of interventions.

Table 3. WB Support by Global Practice
                                 WB Global Practice                            US$ value of data component         %
Governance                                                                                   238.7                 23
Health, Nutrition & Population                                                               228.9                 22
Poverty and Equity                                                                           218.4                 21
Macro Economics & Fiscal Management                                                          121.5                 12
Social Protection & Labor                                                                    103.3                 10
Education                                                                                    60.0                  6
Transport & ICT                                                                              28.2                  3
Environment & Natural Resources                                                               9.3                  1
Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice                                           7.4                   1
Water                                                                                         6.4                   1
Other                                                                                         6.0                  1
Finance & Markets                                                                             3.8                  0
Agriculture                                                                                   1.5                  0
Total                                                                                    1033.4                    100
Source: Business Intelligence Database, IEG calculations.


                                                                   19
World Bank Support by Region

The bulk of the Bank support for development data was concentrated in the Africa region which
accounted for about 33 percent of the number and 49 percent of the value of financing
interventions.

Figure 3. World Bank Interventions by Region

                 60%
                       49%
                 50%

                 40%
                             33%
       Percent




                 30%
                                     23%

                 20%                                                          16%         15%
                                                            11%                                         12%
                                           9%          9%                9%
                 10%                                                                 7%
                                                                                                   3%                4%
                                                                                                                0%
                 0%
                        AFR            SAR                 EAP            ECA         LCR          MNA           OTH
                                                                         Region
                                                      By value                      By number


Source: World Bank Database.

Performance of Bank supported data for development projects

Out of the 291 financing projects in the data for development portfolio, only 65 projects have
already been rated by IEG. The IEG rated projects represent about 22 percent of the data
portfolio by number of projects and about 34 percent by commitment value (Table 4).

Table 4. Number and Value of Development Data Portfolio
                                                                                    Value of data
     Data for development                     # of               Percent by                                   Percent by
                                                                                    component8
           portfolio                        projects                no.                                         value
                                                                                      (US$ M)
    IEG rated                                   65                  22                    347.1                  34
    Unrated                                     226                 78                    686.3                  66
    Total                                       291                100.0                  1033.4                 100
Source: Business Intelligence Database, IEG calculations


8
 The value of the data component is understated and excludes the commitment amounts for several DPL
projects for which the size of the data component could not be determined.


                                                                    20
About 62 percent of the rated projects received a moderately satisfactory development outcome
rating or better while 39 percent of rated commitments received a high or significant risk to
development outcome rating (Table 5).

Table 5. IEG Ratings of Development Data Portfolio

                                                                                      Percent in terms
 IEG Outcome Rating                                              Number of projects
                                                                                        of numbers
 HIGHLY SATISFACTORY                                                     2                   3
 SATISFACTORY                                                           16                  25
 MODERATELY SATISFACTORY                                                22                  34
 MODERATELY UNSATISFACTORY                                              18                  28
 UNSATISFACTORY                                                          5                   8
 HIGHLY UNSATISFACTORY                                                   1                   2
 NOT APPLICABLE                                                          1                   2
                                  Total                                 65                  100
Source: Business Intelligence Database, IEG calculations.




                                                            21
