Series of technical reports of The World Bank in Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay   Nº 7, 2016




THE INCIDENCE OF SUBSIDIES TO RESIDENTIAL
PUBLIC SERVICES IN ARGENTINA:
THE SUBSIDY SYSTEM IN 2014 AND SOME ALTERNATIVES




Chr istoph Lakner, Mar ia Ana Lugo, Jor ge Puig,
Leandro Salinardi and Mar tha Viveros
       The Incidence of Subsidies to Residential Public Services in Argentina:
                    The Subsidy System in 2014 and Some Alternatives

                      By CHRISTOPH LAKNER*, MARIA ANA LUGO*, JORGE PUIG#,
                             LEANDRO SALINARDI# and MARTHA VIVEROS*1

                                             I. Introduction

More than a decade of energy and transport subsidies have weakened Argentina’s fiscal
capacity. Following the 2001 crisis, public services tariffs were frozen in an attempt to offset
the negative effects on households’ real purchasing power. However, these subsidies steadily
increased over the years, particularly since 2006, becoming a significant fiscal burden.2

Though subsidies can be a tool to protect the poor, in Argentina they led to distortions and
a large share have been absorbed by upper classes and non-residential consumers. In 2015,
electricity bills reflected less than 10% of production costs (Bidegaray, 2015), and lower tariffs
have led to an increased demand of public services. Not only have energy and transport
subsidies distorted both demand and supply, they have also not been efficiently targeted to
the poor; instead, they have been distributed across all income groups, with the non-poor
receiving the largest shares (Castro and Barafani, 2015; Lombardi et al., 2014; Marchionni et
al., 2008; Navajas, 2015; Puig and Salinardi, 2015). For a recent discussion of the distortionary
aspects of subsidies in Argentina, see Coppola et al. (2016).

This report starts by analyzing the incidence of the 2014 system of residential federal subsidies
to residential public services (defined as electricity, gas, water and transport) building on the
work by Puig and Salinardi (2015).3 Figure 1 is a summary of the main results that will be
explained in more detail in Section II. The left panel of Figure 1 shows the share of each
subsidy going to the various quintiles of the income distribution. The public subsidies are in
decreasing order of the share received by the poorest quintile which we have used here to
describe targeting. It is clear that the subsidies to trains, piped gas and airlines benefit the
richer segments disproportionally more. Electricity appears relatively neutral which still means
that it could be targeted better. Programa Hogar is included in our incidence analysis, even if
it was not introduced until 2015, since it will be used for the baseline of the simulation.




1 *
   Poverty and Equity Global Practice, World Bank; #CEDLAS, Universidad de La Plata. The authors are indebted
to Leonardo Gasparini and Fernando Navajas for many useful discussions and for sharing data. We would also
like to thank Andrea Coppola, Bernardo Díaz de Astarloa and Jeronimo Montalvo. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors, and do not necessarily represent the
views of the World Bank and its affiliated organizations.
2
  Between 2006 and 2014, energy and transport subsidies grew from less than 1% of GDP to about 5% of GDP.
According to Argentina’s Association for Public Finance Administration and Budgeting (ASAP) 61% of the total
government subsidies in 2013 (135,000 million pesos) were directed to the energy sector.
3
  This no longer includes subsidies to the Buenos Aires subway. The subway accounted for a significant share of
federal transport subsidies in 2010 (Castro and Szenkman, 2012) but was since transferred from the federal
government to the City of Buenos Aires. Since 2013 there were no more federal subsidies to the subway. In
general, subsidies by sub-national governments are excluded from the analysis because they are not reported by
ASAP.

                                                      1
                                           Figure 1. Incidence of federal subsidies and public spending in 2014
                                    (a) Beneficiaries of subsidies by quintile                                       (b) Public spending as a percent of GDP
                                                (residential only)
                                      More                                  Less                                                                  Expenditure is higher
                                    targeted                              targeted                                                                 in not well-targeted
                                                                                                                                                          sectors
Share of total sector subsidies




                            100%                                                                                    1.6%

                                  80%




                                                                                         Total cost as a % of GDP
                                                                                                                    1.2%
                                  60%

                                  40%                                                                               0.8%

                                  20%
                                                                                                                    0.4%
                                  0%

                                                                                                                    0.0%



                                        Q1 (poorest)   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q5 (richest)                        Q1 (poorest)       Q2   Q3   Q4   Q5 (richest)   Non-residential

          Source: 2012/13 ENGHo & ASAP. Note: Left: “targeting” is defined according to the share of the subsidy
          received by the poorest quintile of the distribution of per capita household income. Right: GDP, fiscal costs and
          non-residential share from Coppola et al. (2016) and Navajas (2015). Subsidy to electricity is defined as transfers
          to CAMMESA, while piped gas subsidies are the transfers to ENARSA. Fiscal cost for Programa Hogar (subsidy
          to bottled gas) is not available for 2014.

The right panel of Figure 1 shows two main aspects of subsidies to public services. First, it
shows the large fiscal costs of subsidies. For instance, the subsidies to electricity accounted
for around 1.6% of GDP in 2014. While airline subsidies almost exclusively go to the top 40%
of the income distribution, they represent only a small share of GDP. Second, the figure shows
that an overwhelming majority of the subsidies to electricity and piped gas are absorbed by
non-residential consumers. For instance, just over half of electricity subsidies go to non-
residential consumers. It is important to clarify that in this report we only analyze residential
subsidies – for a brief discussion of non-residential subsidies see Coppola et al. (2016).
Residential federal subsidies are only a small part of the overall subsidies to public services,
but nevertheless these subsidies tend to be more important for the poor.

In Section III, we simulate the distributional effects of some alternative subsidy systems using
the incidence of 2014 system as a baseline. First, for residential electricity subsidies, a simple
lifeline tariff does not improve targeting of subsidies much. Targeting can be improved using
beneficiaries of social programs, although around 30% of households in the poorest quintile
might remain uncovered if the main flagship programs are used. Second, we consider a very
similar scenario for piped gas. The subsidy is almost completely eliminated under the targeted
lifeline tariff because few households that have access to piped gas also benefit from flagship
social programs. Third, our transport simulations focus on the Tarifas Diferenciales of the SUBE
smart card used to pay for buses, subway and trains in Greater Buenos Aires. We show that
the Tarifas Diferenciales (as existing in early 2016) are not well targeted to the poorest
households. Our simulations indicate that the coverage of the poor can be improved markedly
by including a broader set of social programs to define eligibility.

The paper consists of six main sections. Section II presents the results on the incidence of
subsidies to public services. Section III simulates the distributional impacts of alternative


                                                                                     2
systems for electricity, gas and transport subsidies. Section IV concludes. The methodological
Appendix provides full details of the methods and data used in this paper.


                                 II. The System of Subsidies in 2014

We refine the methodology of Puig and Salinardi (2015) to estimate the incidence of the
residential subsidies structure in 2014. Like Puig and Salinardi, this study uses data from the
2012/13 Argentina household expenditure survey (ENGHo) for the whole country and on
subsidies from national fiscal accounts (ASAP).4 While the methodological Appendix offers a
detailed description of each sector and how each subsidy was allocated to households, we
briefly summarize the main differences with Puig and Salinardi here.

First, we use a newer set of public service tariff schedules paid by consumers (by regions) to
estimate the incidence as of 2014.5 Second, in the cases of electricity and piped gas, we do
not use the consumed quantities as reported by households in the survey because the total
quantities in the survey underreport quite substantially when compared with administrative
data.6 Instead, quantities are imputed from the reported expenditures (after deducting taxes)
and using the companies’ tariff charts by region. The incidence analysis is then performed by
taking the distribution of consumed quantities and calculating the amounts paid by households
with and without subsidy. Third, given that tariff structures differ by region, the amount of
subsidy per quantity consumed will vary across households depending on their location; for
instance, households in Cordoba pay more than twice for electricity than those in Greater
Buenos Aires. For each region, we select a representative tariff chart among the provinces.7
Fourth, Programa Hogar (the subsidy to bottled gas) was imputed to households based on the
official program description and targeting mechanism. The program is an unconditional direct
transfer which replaced the producer subsidies on gas cylinders in 2015.8 Fifth, in the case of
train subsidies, only few observations in the ENGHo report expenditures in this category, so
the results should be interpreted with caution.9

Figure 2 reports the budget shares obtained from the household survey for each component.
Poorer households spend a significantly higher share of their total household incomes on
public services. Therefore, a reduction in subsidies without compensatory measures would
tend to affect them disproportionately.10 Additionally, richer households spend a higher share
of their expenditure on electricity and flights. On the other hand, poorer household spend a
higher share on bus transportation and Programa Hogar.

4
  By contrast, Castro and Barafani (2015) concentrate on the Metropolitan Area of Buenos Aires.
5
  We use the 2012/13 expenditure survey together with fiscal data for 2014 and recent tariff schedules.
6
  Note that the survey reports both expenditures and quantities consumed.
7
   Our results are very similar to other papers that make alternative assumptions about the within-region
variability of the tariff charts. For example, Puig and Salinardi (2015) use tariff charts by province, while Lombardi
et al. (2014) use only one tariff chart for the entire country.
8
   In April 2015 the government launched Programa Hogar in an effort to reform the subsidy structure of LPG
(Liquefied petroleum gas, or bottled gas). Traditionally, like with most public services, LPG subsidies were
channeled to the producer. Programa Hogar is a direct transfer to households with incomes below two minimum
salaries and no access to piped gas. It is paid as part of the social assistance benefits by the National Social
Security Administration (ANSES). The level of the transfer per household depends on household size and the
province of residence and includes a seasonal adjustment.
9
  We also cleaned up a few outliers to produce a stable set of results.
10
    The main exception is the subsidy to airline transportation, which represents a negligible share of income for
the two poorest deciles, and a relatively small share for households in deciles 3 to 5.

                                                          3
   Figure 2. Level and composition of household expenditure on public services
a) Expenditure on public services by decile b) Composition of expenditure by decile




Source: Based on 2012/13 ENGHo. Public services include electricity, pipeline gas, Programa Hogar, water and
transport. Expenditures on subway transportation are included with train expenditures, but since subways do
not receive a federal subsidy, we exclude them in the rest of the analysis. Deciles based on per capita household
income.


In 2014, subsidies to public services with the exception of bus transportation, tend to be
concentrated amongst the richer deciles of the income distribution (see Figure 3). This is
most visible for the subsidies to Aerolineas Argentinas, which almost exclusively go to the top
20%. For piped gas, about 37% of the (residential) subsidies go to households in the highest
quintile, while the poorest quintile receives only 8%. This is not surprising because poorer
households tend to live in areas that are not connected to the gas network. Electricity, train
and water subsidies are mildly pro-rich in the sense that the upper income groups receive a
higher share of the subsidies than the lower income groups.11 For example, the richest quintile
received about 23% of electricity subsidies, compared with 16.8% for the poorest quintile.
Although these subsidies were only mildly pro-rich, the need for targeting public expenditures
more effectively remained.




11
  Lindert et al. (2006) (p. 10) distinguish between absolute and relative progressivity. We use the terms
progressive/regressive in the relative sense, i.e. whether the concentration curve is above or below the Lorenz
curve for income (see below). We follow Wagstaff (2012) and use pro-poor/pro-rich to refer to the absolute
meaning of the terms.

                                                       4
                               Figure 3: Incidence of federal subsidies to residential public services in 2014
                                                                              (by income decile)
                                               Electricity                                                                                                         Bus
                             14%                                                                                              14%
                             12%                                                                                              12%
Share of total subsidy (%)




                                                                                                Share of total subsidy
                             10%                                                                                              10%

                              8%                                                                                                        8%

                              6%                                                                                                        6%

                              4%                                                                                                        4%

                              2%                                                                                                        2%

                              0%                                                                                                        0%
                                   1   2   3   4      5       6       7       8       9    10                                                 1       2   3   4     5     6   7   8   9   10
                                                   Income decile                                                                                              Income decile

                                                   Piped gas                                                                                                      Train
                             25%                                                                                                        20%
                                                                                                                                        18%
                             20%
Share of total subsidy




                                                                                                Share of total subsidy
                                                                                                                                        16%
                                                                                                                                        14%
                             15%                                                                                                        12%
                                                                                                                                        10%
                             10%                                                                                                         8%
                                                                                                                                         6%
                              5%                                                                                                         4%
                                                                                                                                         2%
                              0%                                                                                                         0%
                                   1   2   3   4      5   6       7       8       9       10                                                  1       2   3   4     5     6   7   8   9   10
                                               Income decile                                                                                                  Income decile

                                                    Water                                                                                                         Airline
                             14%                                                                                                        70%
Share of the total subsidy




                             12%                                                                                                        60%
                                                                                                           Share of the total subsidy




                             10%                                                                                                        50%
                             8%                                                                                                         40%
                             6%                                                                                                         30%
                             4%                                                                                                         20%
                             2%                                                                                                         10%
                             0%                                                                                                          0%
                                   1   2   3   4     5    6       7       8       9       10                                                      1   2   3   4     5     6   7   8   9   10
                                               Income decile                                                                                                  Income decile

                                                              Source: Based on 2012/13 ENGHo and ASAP.




                                                                                           5
Programa Hogar displays a very different incidence (Figure 4) with 50.5% of subsidies going to
the poorest quintile compared with 2.2% for the top quintile. This is not surprising given its
targeting criteria, which include only households without access to piped gas and below an
income threshold (see Appendix).12

               Figure 4: Incidence of benefits of Programa Hogar (bottled gas)
                                    30%

                                    25%
           Share of total subsidy




                                    20%

                                    15%

                                    10%

                                    5%

                                    0%
                                          1   2     3     4      5     6      7     8    9   10
                                                              Income decile
                                              Source: Based on 2012/13 ENGHo and ASAP.



Figure 5 shows the concentration curves for each subsidy together with the Lorenz curve for
household income and the 45° line. The concentration curve shows the share of the subsidy
going to each share of the population, where the population is sorted by their household per
capita income. Airline subsidies are the only instance of a regressive subsidy, in the sense that
these subsidies are distributed more unequally than income. All other subsidies are
progressive since their concentration curves lie above the Lorenz curve. From least to most
progressive these are: piped gas, train, water, electricity, bus, and Programa Hogar. The
concentration curves for Programa Hogar and for bus subsidies lie above the 45° line, which
means that they are progressive in an absolute sense. In other words, the share of the subsidy
received by the poorest deciles exceeds their population share.




12
  Because the threshold is applied to total household income, a single household with the Programa Hogar
threshold income would be in the top decile of household per capita income (as shown by Figure 4). This is
because the 2013 threshold exceeds the minimum (per capita) income of the 10 th decile in the distribution of
household per capita income. Therefore, any single household that receives this minimum income would both
be eligible for Programa Hogar and in the richest decile of our distribution.

                                                                 6
                                              Figure 5: Concentration curves, by subsidy
                                      100%

                                      90%                                                                        45°

                                      80%                                                                        Income
               Share of the subsidy
                                      70%                                                                        Electricity
                                      60%                                                                        Piped gas
                                      50%
                                                                                                                 Programa Hogar
                                      40%
                                                                                                                 Bus
                                      30%
                                                                                                                 Train
                                      20%
                                                                                                                 Air
                                      10%
                                                                                                                 Water
                                       0%
                                             0%   10%     20%   30%   40%   50%   60%     70%   80%   90% 100%
                                                                  Share of the population

                                                           Source: Based on 2012/13 and ASAP.


                                                   III.         Alternative Subsidy Systems

This section presents results from simulating three alternative subsidy structures using the
results presented in the previous section as a baseline. The scenarios consider replacing the
general price subsidy with a social tariff targeted at specific groups. While such policies are
often used, they are not necessarily first-best. As argued by Ruggeri-Laderchi et al. (2013), a
targeted, non-earmarked cash transfer, such as Programa Hogar, is potentially the least
distortionary mechanism. The main issue with a social tariff is that it distorts the consumption
decision and could lead to over-consumption.13

In all simulations we use a social tariff for which eligibility is defined according to receipt of
social programs. From the survey we can identify beneficiaries only for some programs, but
not all, given the absence of specific questions in the questionnaire. Furthermore, for some
programs, such as the Asignación Universal por Hijo (AUH), the number of beneficiaries we
observe in the survey is much smaller than what administrative records suggest. Therefore,
we have assumed perfect implementation and take-up, and imputed beneficiary status based
on official eligibility criteria and observed characteristics.


                                                                         A. Electricity

We consider three alternative subsidy structures for the electricity sector:

        Scenario 1: A complete elimination of federal subsidies (i.e. transfers to CAMMESA)
        without any mitigating measure.

13
  Targeted, earmarked lump-sum transfers, such as discounts on utility bills, are an intermediate case. Compared
with a non-earmarked transfer they might face less resistance as poor households see smaller increases in their
effective utility bills.

                                                                            7
           Scenario 2: A lifeline tariff14 consisting of granting the first 150kWh (per month) free
           of charge for all households, while charging cost-recovery prices for any consumption
           above that level.

           Scenario 3: A targeted lifeline tariff: granting the first 150kWh (per month) free of
           charge but only to the poorest households (defined as the current eligible beneficiaries
           of social programs (AUH, Progresar, and Programa Hogar)15, while everyone else would
           pay cost-recovery prices (on their entire consumption).

Throughout our simulations, we assume that households do not adjust their consumption in
response to the price changes, i.e. the price elasticity of electricity consumption is zero. We
would argue that this is a reasonable approximation especially for the poorest parts of the
distribution that have limited capacity to respond to price hikes in the short term. For
instance, these households may not be able to afford energy-efficient appliances. However, it
is clearly an upper bound on the welfare loss. Furthermore, our simulations only capture the
first-order effects on household consumption. For instance, it is highly plausible that an
elimination of non-residential subsidies (not considered here) would impact households’
incomes through the employment channel. We consider the distributional implications of
some of these general equilibrium effects in a forthcoming micro-macro simulation paper.

The simulations indicate that the targeting element is crucial for achieving fiscal savings while
mitigating the effects on the poorest households. The untargeted lifeline tariff (scenario 2)
reduces the fiscal cost only marginally, from 0.74% to 0.65% (Table 1). On the other hand, the
targeted lifeline tariff (scenario 3) cuts the fiscal cost to one third (0.18% of GDP).16

                      Table 1: Fiscal cost of electricity subsidy scenarios
                                                                   Scenario                         Scenario
                                                    Scenario 1          2                                3
                                      Baseline*                                                     targeted
                                                     complete       lifeline
                                                                                                     lifeline
                                                   elimination       tariff
                                                                                                      tariff
     Fiscal cost (% of GDP)                    0.74%                0%              0.65%             0.18%
     Note: Fiscal costs and GDP for 2014. * As described in Section II, the baseline corresponds to the
     distributional incidence in 2014.



14
   Lifeline tariffs are subsidized rates for a first block of consumed quantities (enough to cover basic needs). We
simulate a special case where the first block of consumed quantities is given for free. They have been used in
many countries, and could be an important part of a reform in the short-term, though they lead to substantial
leakages. Given the relatively low correlation between electricity consumption and income in Argentina (e.g.
Figure A.3), the leakage of this type of subsidy to higher-income households could be substantial.
15
   Eligibility for AUH is imputed because the number of beneficiaries is underestimated in the survey. Eligibility
for Progresar is defined as individuals of ages 18-24 that are enrolled in school and are either not working, working
informally or earning less than three minimum wages. Finally, eligibility for Programa Hogar is determined based
on not having piped gas in the dwelling, and having household incomes totaling less than 2 minimum salaries. The
program also includes households with at least one disabled member (and less than three minimum wages) but
the ENGHo does not allow us to distinguish these households in the data, so they are excluded from this
exercise.
16
   Using a distribution-neutral scaling factor to match total subsidies from administrative records, as discussed in
the Appendix.

                                                         8
Under the untargeted lifeline tariff (scenario 2) the electricity subsidy would be distributed
very evenly across the income distribution, i.e. it is somewhat better targeted than the 2014
subsidy structure (see Figure 6). This is because households that consume less than 150kWh
on a monthly basis are relatively evenly distributed across the distribution. 52% of household
in the poorest decile, compared with 40% in the richest decile consume 150kWh or less per
month.

On the other hand, the targeted lifeline tariff (scenario 3) is substantially more pro-poor. The
amount of subsidy a household receives under this scenario depends on their amount of
consumption and the participation in social programs (in their current form). To improve
coverage at the bottom and reduce leakage it is thus important that these social programs are
well-targeted and inclusive. Although the targeted tariff is substantially more pro-poor, the
targeting formula as defined here excludes around 30% of households in the poorest quintile
(Figure 6b). Households that are not covered by the lifeline tariff would see a strong increase
in their electricity bill.

The lifeline tariff (scenario 2) leads to consumption gains, which is the result of making the
first 150kWh of electricity per month free of charge. Figure 7a shows the change in welfare
as a percent of expenditures.17 On average, households across all deciles are better off with
the untargeted lifeline tariff, i.e. the price reduction on the first 150kWh compensates for the
price increase for consumption above this threshold. Targeting the lifeline tariff to
beneficiaries of social programs leads to a dramatic change with welfare losses in all deciles
except the first two.

                                                 Figure 6: Electricity subsidy scenarios
                         a. Incidence of subsidies by scenario                                      b. Share of beneficiaries in scenario 3
                                    Baseline       Scenario 2          Scenario 3                                             Covered        Not-covered
                   25%                                                                                  100%

                   20%                                                                                         80%
                                                                                         Share of households
Share of subsidy




                   15%                                                                                         60%

                   10%                                                                                         40%

                   5%                                                                                          20%

                   0%                                                                                          0%
                            1   2      3       4      5     6      7     8    9     10                               1   2     3     4     5   6    7     8    9   10
                                      Deciles of the income distribution                                                     Decile of the income distribution

 Source: Based on 2012/13 ENGHo and ASAP. Note: Simulations assume a zero price elasticity of consumption.

Although the bottom quintile is better off on average as a result of the targeted lifeline tariff,
a substantial share of the poorest quintile sees a reduction in welfare. Figure 7b shows the
distribution of welfare changes for the poorest quintile. It is clear that a substantial share of
households in the poorest quintile is worse off even under the targeted lifeline tariff. For
example, in the first three deciles, the share of households that spend more than 10% of their
income on electricity more than doubles from 1.8% in the baseline to 4.3% with the targeted




17
           See the methodological Appendix B of Ruggeri-Laderchi et al. (2013) for the formula.

                                                                               9
lifeline tariff, assuming that there is no change in their consumption pattern given the tariff
increase.18


                                                               Figure 7: Changes in welfare relative to baseline
                                                                                                           b. Distribution of welfare changes from
                                         a. Average change in welfare (by decile)
                                                                                                          baseline to Scenario 3 for the poorest 20%
                                                                                                                         of households
                                                  Scenario 1        Scenario 2       Scenario 3
                                        3%
Change in welfare (% of expenditures)




                                        2%

                                        1%

                                        0%

                                        -1%

                                        -2%

                                        -3%
                                              1    2    3       4     5    6     7      8    9     10
                                                        Deciles of the income distribution

             Source: World Bank (2015). Figure 7b: Showing only values between -10% and +10%. Red line shows the average
             welfare change.




                                                                                                  B. Piped gas

We also provide a brief simulation for the piped gas tariff along very similar lines as the
preceding electricity scenario. Given that access to piped gas is far from universal, we might
expect somewhat different distributional consequences than in electricity. As before, we
assume a zero elasticity. We use the following three scenarios: (i) complete elimination of
subsidies; (ii) lifeline tariff which provides the first 100m3 for free (average consumption is
156m3 per month); (iii) a targeted lifeline tariff which provides the first 100m3 for free but
only to households that receive AUH or Progresar, or both. Note that the set of beneficiaries
for the social tariff is different from the electricity simulations because the latter also included
Programa Hogar. Given that households are eligible for Programa Hogar only if they do not
have access to piped gas, it would be superfluous to include them in the simulation for piped
gas.

As with electricity, the targeting component is crucial for both fiscal saving and the pro-poor
incidence. While the simple lifeline tariff would cut subsidies by around 40%, restricting it to
beneficiaries of social programs virtually eliminates the subsidy (see table 2). This suggests that
among the households that consume piped gas, very few receive AUH or Progresar.




18
  Ruggeri-Laderchi et al. (2013) refer to households that spend more than 10% of their expenditure on total
energy (i.e. not only electricity) as “energy poor”.

                                                                                                    10
                                   Table 2: Fiscal cost of piped gas scenarios
                                                                                       Scenario         Scenario
                                                                       Scenario 1         2                  3
                                                     Baseline                                           targeted
                                                                       complete          lifeline
                                                                                                         lifeline
                                                                      elimination         tariff
                                                                                                          tariff
 Fiscal cost (% of GDP)                                0.37%                 0%           0.14%          0.01%

Note: Fiscal costs and GDP for 2014.

The lifeline tariff (scenario 2) by itself somewhat improves the incidence relative to the
baseline with the share of subsidies going to the top two deciles declining (figure 8). This is
because average consumption is substantially greater than the lifeline cut-off for the top two
deciles – for instance average consumption in the top decile exceeds 200m3 per month
compared with less than 150m3 for the bottom quintile. As with the electricity simulations,
using beneficiaries of social programs (scenario 3) further reduces the share of subsidies going
to the top. However, in contrast to the electricity case, the poorest decile does not appear
to benefit very much, which is probably explained by the fact that they do not have access to
piped gas.



                             Figure 8: Incidence of piped gas subsidies, by scenario
                                        Baseline                Scenario 2            Scenario 3
                       25%

                       20%
    Share of subsidy




                       15%

                       10%

                       5%

                       0%
                             1      2        3          4        5          6     7        8        9      10
                                            Deciles of the income distribution
         Source: 2012/13 ENGHo and ASAP. Note: Simulations assume a zero price elasticity of consumption.




                                             C. Tarifas Diferenciales in Transport

All fares paid by users of buses, subway and train are subsidized to some extent, especially in
the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area (AMBA). In AMBA, most residents have access to an
integrated transport system card (SUBE), that provide a subsidized fare, relative to separate
tickets. In addition, some individuals (potentially, the most vulnerable) have access to the SUBE
Tarifas Diferenciales, which allow them to pay even lower fares (at 40% of the SUBE fare). Six
groups are currently eligible for this special tariff: Pensioners, domestic workers, AUH

                                                               11
recipients, recipients of Progresar, recipients of the pregnancy benefit and Malvinas veterans.19
As explained above, we impute eligibility for the special tariff using the information available
in the ENGHo. We are unable to identify recipients of the pregnancy benefit or Malvinas
veterans. The beneficiary status is defined slightly differently depending on whether the
program is individual- or household-based.20

In this section of the paper, we analyze the distributive incidence of Tarifas Diferenciales under
the assumption that everyone who qualifies is enrolled. We also explore whether the
coverage of the poorest households could be improved by including additional social
programs. The existing SUBE Tarifas Diferenciales are underused, which might be explained by
low incentives to enroll due to a relatively low standard price level. As in the case of social
programs, our results assume that everyone who is eligible would obtain the Tarifas
Diferenciales. Throughout the analysis we present results for both Buenos Aires Metropolitan
Area (AMBA) and the country as a whole. Of course, the SUBE card only exists in AMBA.
Therefore, the national results show what would happen if the system of SUBE cards were to
be extended nationally.

Figure 9 shows where the (potential) beneficiaries of the SUBE Tarifas Diferenciales are in the
national distribution of income – for AMBA (panel a) and nationally (panel b). Throughout,
households are ranked according to their position in the per capita national household income
distribution.21 It is clear that the SUBE Tarifas Diferenciales are not particularly pro-poor.
Furthermore, 54% of the poorest decile are uncovered in AMBA, suggesting that coverage of
the poor is lacking. This may be, in part, because targeting to all retirees is not a good tool in
a country like Argentina.




19
   These simulations reflect the eligibility criteria and discounts in early 2016. For example, Progresar was only
included in the SUBE Tarifas Diferenciales in early 2015. Similarly, Programa de Jefes de Hogar was included at the
time of ENGHo, but has since been discontinued and absorbed by other programs. Note that the eligibility
criteria given on the official website are not necessarily updated to reflect official resolutions (e.g.
https://www.sube.gob.ar/TarifaDiferencial.aspx, accessed January 14, 2016). The discounted program is currently
named “Tarifas Sociales”, which gives beneficiaries a higher discount than in early 2016 (55% of the SUBE fare)
for bus trips, and expands the eligibility criteria to include other programs such as (Argentina Trabajan y Ellas
Hacen, Monotributo Social, non-contributory pensions) –see https://www.sube.gob.ar/tarifa-social.aspx on May
26, 2016.
20
   AUH, Progresar, and Programa Hogar are treated as household-based programs, although only one person is
the beneficiary of the additional subsidy (for AUH it is the parent). Therefore, if any household member receives
any of these three programs, all household members are counted as beneficiaries for the Tarifas Diferenciales.
This is to allow for leakage of the Tarifas Diferenciales within the household, e.g. SUBE cards are often shared
amongst household members. For pensioners and domestic workers, we treat them as individual-based
programs. That is, the Tarifa Diferencial goes only to pensioners and not to everyone who is living in a household
with a pensioner.
21
   In other words, even if the Tarifas Diferenciales were targeted towards the poorest households within AMBA,
these might not be poorest in the national distribution. Our figures attempt to reflect this.

                                                       12
       Figure 9. Potential coverage of SUBE Tarifas Diferenciales beneficiaries
                   a. AMBA                                b. Nationally




                                        Source: 2012/13 ENGHo



Expanding the set of beneficiaries by including Programa Hogar, markedly improves the
targeting of the Tarifas Diferenciales and its coverage of the poor, although 25% of the poorest
quintile remain uncovered in AMBA. Figure 10 replicates Figure 9 for the Tarifa Diferencial
“expandida”. The incidence of this extended social tariff is clearly more pro-poor.


                  Figure 10. Coverage of Tarifa Diferencial expandida
                   a. AMBA                                 b. Nationally




                                     Source: 2012/13 ENGHo



The expanded social tariff is more pro-poor, with 50% of the beneficiaries in AMBA coming
from the bottom 40% (a similar figure nationally) (Figure 11). However, there continues to be
substantial “leakage” to the richer parts of the distribution, if the purpose were only to protect
the poorest individuals.




                                               13
                           Figure 11.b Incidence of beneficiaries
                  a. AMBA                                          b. Nationally




                                       Source: 2012/13 ENGHo

Increasing coverage among the poorest quintile could be achieved if additional eligibility
criteria are added. An analysis of those households that are poor (poorest quintile) but remain
uncovered by the Tarifa Diferencial expandida, shows that the uncovered poor households tend
to have older household heads, are less likely to have an unemployed member, but more likely
to be self-employed or informal wage employees, but much less likely to have young children
(hence, do not qualify for the AUH).



  Table 3. Comparison of household characteristics between coverage groups
         (among the poorest quintile of household per capita income)
                                                               AMBA                 National
                                                                  Not             Not
 Household characteristic                               Covered covered Covered covered
 Age of household head                                     40      52     41       53
 At least one informal wage employee (%)                  38%     44%    42%      45%
 At least one self-employed (%)                           26%     34%    27%      32%
 At least one unemployment (%)                           100%     78%    99%      76%
 At least one child (under age 18) (%)                    94%     40%    94%      33%
 At least one NiNi (not in school, not in work) (%)       24%     30%    21%      25%
Source: 2012/13 ENGHo




                                      IV.     Conclusion

The simulation of alternative electricity subsidy structures suggests that targeting
consumption levels through a simple lifeline tariff is not sufficient to achieve a pro-poor
incidence of subsidies. Instead, explicit targeting is necessary (though not sufficient) and needs
to ensure comprehensive coverage of the poorest households. Similarly, the analysis of the
SUBE Tarifas Diferenciales shows that the existing tariffs are not well-targeted, but that an

                                               14
expanded set of social programs could improve coverage of the poorest. The gas subsidy
simulations showed that a social tariff would virtually eliminate the subsidy, suggesting that
there is little overlap between the receipt of social programs and access to piped gas.

More generally, our simulations have shown that for a social tariff to be effective at protecting
the poorest, it requires a targeting mechanism that is carefully designed. To improve the
targeting it is critically important to use the appropriate criteria or reasonable proxies to
reach the most vulnerable groups, and consider challenges in implementation. For instance,
the SUBE Tarifas Diferenciales (as defined in early 2016) can be improved markedly by including
the beneficiaries of some social programs. Part of this was done in the newly defined system
of Tarifas Sociales. However, even in this case coverage of the poorest quintile remains
incomplete. This is because social programs such as the AUH or those from the Ministry of
Labor, exclude some groups such as the self-employed/monotributistas, or informal and/or
low-income workers who do not have school-aged children. In the short-term and in the
absence of an expanded set of social programs, it is necessary to find alternative proxies and
mechanisms to improve coverage of the poorest.




                                               15
                                        V. References

Bidegaray, M. (2015). “Subsidios Eléctricos: Habrá Dos Tipos De Tarifas Sociales.” Clarín,
   December 30, 2015, Economía sec.
Campoy, D. (2015). “Análisis distributivo del subsidio al consumo eléctrico residencial. Caso
   Argentino           2005-        2012”,        University         of       Buenos        Aires,
   http://www.ceare.org/tesis/2015/tes09.pdf.
Castro, L. and M. Barafani. (2015). “Buscando la diagonal. Cómo reducir los subsidios
   protegiendo a los sectores vulnerables.” Documento de Políticas Públicas/Análisis N°153.
   Buenos Aires: CIPPEC.
Castro, L. and P. Szenkman (2012). “El ABC de los subsidios al transporte.” Documento de
   Políticas Públicas/Análisis N°102. Buenos Aires: CIPPEC.
Cont, W. (2007). “Estructuras tarifarias en el servicio de electricidad para usuarios
   residenciales. El caso de las provincias argentinas.” Fundación de Investigaciones
   Economicas Latinoamericanas (FIEL). Documento de trabajo N95.
Coppola, A., C. Lakner, B. Díaz de Astarloa, V. Raffo, C. Rodríguez, L. Spinelli and M. Viveros
   (2016), “The Future of Subsidies in Argentina: Reaching the Poor in a More Efficient and
   Less Costly Way,” World Bank, Argentina Development Discussion Note.
Galetovic, A. and C. Muñoz (2009). “Estimating deficit probabilities with price-responsive
   demand in contract-based electricity markets.” Energy Policy 37, 560–569.
Lindert, K., E. Skoufias and J. Shapiro. (2006). ‘‘Redistributing Income to the Poor and the
   Rich: Public Transfers in Latin America and the Caribbean.’’ The World Bank, Washington,
   DC.
Lombardi M., J. Mongan, J. Puig and L. Salim. (2014). “Una aproximación a la focalización de
   los subsidies a los servicios públicos en Argentina.” Documento de Trabajo DPEPE N
   09/2014. Ministerio de Economía de la Provincia de Buenos Aires.
Marchionni M., D. Battistón, F. Crosta and J. Alejo. (2008). “Sostener precios con subsidies.
   Cuánto cuesta y cuál es su incidencia distributiva en la Argentina.” CEDLAS mimeo.
Navajas, F. (2015). “Subsidios a la energía, devaluación y precios,” FIEL Working Paper 122
Puig, J. and L. Salinardi. (2015). “Argentina y los Subsidios a los Servicios Públicos: Un estudio
   de Incidencia Distributiva.” CEDLAS Working Paper 183.
Ruggeri-Laderchi, C., A. Olivier and C. Trimble. (2013). “Balancing Act: cutting energy
   subsidies while protecting affordability.” World Bank.
Wagstaff, A.. (2012). ‘‘Benefit-Incidence Analysis: Are Government Health Expenditures More
   Pro-rich Than We Think?’’ Health Economics 21:351-66.




                                               16
                                   VI.     Methodological Appendix

                              A. 2012/13 household expenditure survey (ENGHo)

The 2012/13 National Survey of Household Expenditure (ENGHo, by its Spanish acronym) is
representative of urban Argentina.22 It provides detailed information of household
expenditures on public services, as well as several demographic and socio-economic
characteristics, including income. The welfare aggregate used throughout is per capita
household income as constructed by the national statistics office (INDEC). Throughout, the
household is used as the reference unit and person expansion factors are used. Puig and
Salinardi (2015) find very similar results whether they use income or expenditure, so the
results appear to be robust for alternative welfare aggregates.

The analysis of subsidy incidence, and particularly the simulation of alternative subsidy
structures, requires information not only on household expenditure, which is readily available
in the survey, but also on the quantities (or volumes) being consumed. For many public
services, the ENGHo contains a variable that reports households’ consumed quantities.
However, the total quantities in the household survey are much smaller than those reported
in administrative data. Therefore we need to make a number of adjustments to these
quantities as described in the remainder of the Appendix. In the case of electricity and piped
gas, we back out the quantities from household expenditure in combination with the tariff
schedule, following Marchionni et al. (2008). Our approach implicitly assumes that the ENGHo
collects reliable information about expenditures, while quantities are more problematic, which
we would argue is plausible.


                                                    B. Electricity

Since 1992 the electricity sector in Argentina operates under an institutional arrangement
known as the Wholesale Electricity Market (MEM, by its Spanish acronym), in which electric
power is exchanged in wholesale transactions. The main actors in this market are the
generation companies (the suppliers) and the distribution companies (the demand side). The
intermediary responsible for managing the operation of this market is the Administrator
Company of the Wholesale Electricity Market (CAMMESA, by its Spanish acronym).
CAMMESA is owned by a number of minority shareholders – the Federal Government, and
the MEM actors (generators, transmitters, distributors and large consumers) represented
through civil associations. Figure A.1 summarizes the structure of the MEM in Argentina.

Originally, the creation of the MEM was intended to lead to efficiency gains and support the
electricity sector by strengthening the market mechanism. For example, the hourly electricity
price (spot price) reflects the generators’ marginal cost of production, such that demand
(composed of large industrial users and distributors) can respond in an efficient manner. Over
the years, the distribution sector’s rigidities and the strong variability of electricity demand
led to the creation of a Stabilization Fund (SF) operated by CAMMESA. A seasonal price for
distributors was established which was less volatile than the spot price. When during periods
of strong demand generation cost exceeded the seasonal price, the SF covered the difference.
On the other hand, the SF recovered in periods when the generation cost was lower.
22
     Urban towns with 5,000 or more inhabitants. Representative of about 87% of the population.

                                                       17
 Figure A.1: Wholesale structure of electricity market in Argentina (as of 2014)




                                    Note: Prices are in ARG pesos of 2014.


The SF and its mechanism for setting prices was abandoned in 2002. At the time, generation
costs were increasing due to rising oil prices, while political actors decided to maintain
electricity tariffs for final (especially residential) consumption. This led to a systematic gap
between the energy price paid by distributors (the demand price) and the generation cost.
The latter, also called the monomic price, is calculated by CAMMESA and published on its
website.23 This gap between the supply and demand prices of the MEM is covered by a transfer
from the federal government, and it is this subsidy that we include in our electricity analysis
(similar to Campoy, 2015 and Lombardi et al., 2014). We do not include other subsidies, for
example by sub-national governments.

As shown in Figure A.1, the monomic price was ARS 663/MWh while the price faced by
distributors (for residential consumers) was ARS 31/MWh in 2014 on average.24 Table A.1
summarizes the subsidies in 2014 using administrative data.25 In 2014, residential demand
totaled 51,637,000 MWh. The administrative data on fiscal transfers do not differentiate
between residential and non-residential consumption. However, it is straightforward to

23
   The monomic price is an average cost that includes a charge for the power reserve, i.e. the generation capacity
(Galetovic and Muñoz, 2009).
24
    CAMMESA’s annual report only publishes the average price of residential, commercial and industrial
consumers which is ARS 100/MWh. We thank Fernando Navajas for sharing his estimates of residential prices
based on administrative data from CAMMESA and the MEM.
25
   The sources of the particular numbers are as follows: Residential demand: Association of Electric Energy
Distributors of Argentina (ADEERA, by its Spanish acronym) “Informe Annual 2014”; supply price: CAMMESA’s
annual report; demand price: correspondence with Fernando Navajas; total transfers to CAMMESA: Argentine
Association of Budget and Public Financial Administration (ASAP, by its Spanish acronym) “Informe de Ejecución
Presupuestaria de la Administración Pública Nacional”, December 2014, p. 17.

                                                       18
calculate from the per-unit subsidy (i.e. the difference between the monomic and demand
prices) and total residential demand. Hence the total subsidy to residential electricity
consumption was ARS 32,635 Mio. Meanwhile, CAMMESA received over ARS 70,000 Mio
from the federal government in 2014, so residential consumers received 46% of total
transfers. Figure A.2 shows the evolution of the federal transfers to CAMMESA. They
increased in the last years and especially strongly in 2014.

                                                Table A.1. Average electricity subsidies in 2014
                                                                    Year 2014
               Residential demand                                         51,637,000                           MWh
          Supply price (monomic price)                                        663                          ARS/MWh
            Residential demand price                                           31                          ARS/MWh
              Residential subsidies                                         32,635                         Millions ARS
          Total transfers to CAMMESA                                        71,333                         Millions ARS
 Source: own calculations based on data from ADEERA, ASAP, CAMMESA and F. Navajas (see footnote)



           Figure A.2. Transfers from the federal government to CAMMESA 2011-2014
                                       80,000                                                               1.8%

                                       70,000                                                               1.6%

                                       60,000                                                               1.4%
                 Million current ARS




                                                                                                                   Percentage of GDP
                                                                                                            1.2%
                                       50,000
                                                                                                            1.0%
                                       40,000
                                                                                                            0.8%
                                       30,000
                                                                                                            0.6%
                                       20,000                                                               0.4%
                                       10,000                                                               0.2%
                                           -                                                                0.0%
                                                    2011          2012             2013             2014

                                                                ARS Mio            % GDP

                                                              Source: ASAP and INDEC


As explained above, we need to impute the consumed quantities from the expenditures
observed in the household survey. Following Marchionni et al. (2008), this proceeds in three
distinct steps. First, we need to derive the before-tax expenditure from the after-tax amounts
reported in the survey. For each household ℎ, the survey reports after-tax expenditures, ℎ :
                                                      ℎ = ℎ (1 + )        for ℎ = 1, … , 
where ℎ are before-tax expenditures and t is the sum of taxes and fees corresponding to the
area of residence. This equation is easily rearranged to obtain ℎ . The burden of federal taxes
is estimated using VAT at a rate of 21%, and the Santa Cruz Provincial Fund at a rate of 0.6%,
while we do not account for other taxes at the provincial or municipal level.26

26
     Cont (2007) explains in detail the configuration of the regional taxes.

                                                                           19
Second, we split up the before-tax expenditures into fixed and variable tariffs (before taxes):
                                      ℎ = (ℎ) + (ℎ), ℎ
where (ℎ) is the fixed charge in region (ℎ) where household ℎ is residing; (ℎ), is the
corresponding average tariff per unit of electricity consumed; and ℎ is the total quantity
consumed. Therefore, we can define total before-tax expenditure excluding fixed costs as
̂
ℎ = ℎ −  =  ℎ . The tariff’s fixed charge  is supposed to cover the generation capacity
and the fixed distribution costs. The variable charge  pays for the fuel and the variable
distribution costs.

Third, using information on the variable charge, we can back out the quantities consumed.
However, there is an added complication because households face different charges depending
on their level of consumption. The structure is as follows:
                                                               ̃
                                                 1 if ℎ ≤ 
                                         = {
                                                               ̃
                                                 2 if ℎ > 
where 1 < 2 and   ̃ is the cut-off level for region . Note that once a household passes
the cut-off level it faces the higher charge 2 on its entire consumption. Of course we do not
know the unit charge each household faces precisely because we do not know ℎ . Using the
                                                        ̂
                                                       
region-specific value for 1 we calculate      ̂ℎ
                                                   1
                                                     = ℎ and similarly estimate  ̂ℎ
                                                                                    2
                                                                                      . Finally, the
                                                         1
consumed quantity for every household is obtained as
                                        ̂ℎ
                                           2                            ̂ℎ
                                                                    if  2    ̃
                                                                            ≥ 
                               ℎ = { ̂ℎ1          ̂ℎ
                                                  if  2    ̃  and 
                                                          <           ̂ℎ1    ̃
                                                                            ≤ 
                                        .             ̂ℎ
                                                  if  2    ̃  and 
                                                          <           ̂ℎ1    ̃
                                                                            > 
                    ̂ℎ
In the final case ( 2    ̃ and 
                        <         ̂ℎ1
                                        >  ̃ ) we have to exclude households from the analysis.
Figure A.3 shows the distribution of electricity consumption obtained from the household
survey in this way.

Figure A.4 compares the quantities obtained from the household survey in this way with those
from administrative records. While the situation is better than when we use the quantities
directly reported in the household survey (not shown in the chart), it is clear that even the
imputed quantities continue to underreport relative to administrative records. This
discrepancy appears to be greatest in AMBA.

We have decided to ignore this discrepancy. An alternative approach would have been to
scale up all quantities, and hence also expenditures, to the levels observed in the administrative
data. However, this could have led to quite substantial shifts in the expenditure shares relative
to what is reported in the household survey. Given that the (unadjusted) expenditure shares
are used for example in the CPI or setting poverty lines, we did not feel comfortable making
such an adjustment. Furthermore, the incidence results are unaffected by such an across-the-
board scalar adjustment.27 The only part of the analysis where we use a (distribution-neutral)
scaling factor is the calculation of fiscal savings in the simulation of alternative subsidy
structures for electricity (Table 1) (and gas, see Table 2).

27
 Of course the true discrepancy need not be distribution-neutral. But we are not aware of any model that
would produce distributional variation in the adjustment factor.

                                                    20
 Figure A.3. Average electricity consumption (in kWh per month per household) by decile
                                               400
                Average consumption (in Kwh)
                                               350
                                               300
                                               250
                                               200
                                               150
                                               100
                                               50
                                                0
                                                          1           2    3      4        5     6      7       8          9     10
                                                                                       Income deciles

                                                              Note: deciles imputed into ENGHo as explained in the text.



            Figure A.4. Amount of residential electricity demand (MWh) by region

                      60,000,000
                                                                                                                ENGHo
                      50,000,000
                                                                                                                ADEERA 2012
                      40,000,000
          MWh




                      30,000,000

                      20,000,000

                      10,000,000

                                                     -
                                                              Total       AMBA   Pampeana      NOA       NEA        Cuyo       Patagonia

                                                         Note: Quantities imputed into ENGHo as explained in the text.


The final step in the analysis involves the calculation of the subsidy per household. As explained
above, the intervention by the federal government in the MEM generates an implicit subsidy
to consumers. Figure A.1 showed the average supply (ARS 663/MWh) and demand (ARS
31/MWh) prices in the residential wholesale market, and the average per unit subsidy is the
difference between the two. However, the subsidy is not assigned directly to users, but instead
it is channeled through distributors. There are different distributors by province (see Box
A.1) and they use different tariff schedules. Furthermore, in these tariff schedules, final
consumers face different prices depending on their level of consumption. As a result, the
subsidy each household receives will depend on their province of residence and their level of
consumption.28

28
   The incidence is very similar when we use the average per unit subsidy or equivalently subsidies are assigned
in proportion to consumption. Compared with the results presented in Figure 3, the incidence becomes slightly

                                                                                      21
 Box A.1: Regional aspects

 It is important to highlight that there exist differences across the various regions of
 Argentina, both in terms of the specific tariffs and the tax treatment. The map below shows
 the distributor in each province. Furthermore, provinces differ in whether they are subject
 to federal or provincial regulation: In the areas served by companies Edenor, Edesur and
 Edelap the regulation is federal through the National Electricity Regulatory Authority for
 Electricity (ENRE, by its Spanish acronym). In the rest of the country regulation is controlled
 by the respective provincial electricity regulatory entities (EPREs).

                                    Distribution company by province




                                   Source: Secretaria de Energía de la Nación



Specifically, subsidies are allocated to households in the following way. First, we take the
distribution of consumed quantities that have been imputed into the ENGHo as explained
above. Second, we use the applicable tariff schedule depending on the region of residence (see
Box A.1). We use a representative tariff chart for each region, given that the tariff amounts
do not vary significantly across bordering provinces.29 These tariff charts provide the tariff
with and without the subsidy, so the subsidy amount for each household is simply the
difference between the two. Table A.2 gives an example of such a tariff chart from EDELAP,
a distribution company serving the Province of Buenos Aires.30



less pro-poor with the subsidy share of the bottom decile falling and the share of the top decile increasing. This
suggests that the distributors’ tariff schedules actually have a pro -poor effect.
29
   The tariff charts of EDEN, EDESUR, Formosa, La Pampa, Mendoza, Rio Negro and Tucuman were used.
30
   The tariff charts used to allocate subsidies are different from the tariff schedules used above in the imputation
of consumed quantities. The former are more detailed and it was not possible to use them to impute the
quantities. Therefore, in the imputation step we followed Marchionni et al (2008) and used the simpler tariff
charts.

                                                        22
               Table A.2. Example of tariff chart with and without subsidies (in 2014)
                                                                    Variable charge (per kWh)
          Range of total household
                                                 Fixed          Actual (with
             consumption (ℎ )                                                      Without subsidy
                                                charge           subsidy)
              ℎ ≤ 150kWh                        9.01             0.107                  0.435
     ℎ > 150kWh & ℎ ≤ 325kWh                 22.53             0.058                  0.389
     ℎ > 325kWh & ℎ ≤ 400kWh                 26.04             0.066                  0.399
     ℎ > 400kWh & ℎ ≤ 450kWh                 37.89             0.070                  0.405
     ℎ > 450kWh & ℎ ≤ 500kWh                 43.55             0.079                  0.416
     ℎ > 500kWh & ℎ ≤ 600kWh                 76.72             0.171                  0.440
     ℎ > 600kWh & ℎ ≤ 700kWh                 93.10             0.192                  0.456
        ℎ > 700kWh & ℎ                      160.23
                      ≤ 1400kWh                                     0.293                       0.469
             ℎ > 1400kWh                      184.47              0.471                       0.470
Note: The example refers to the 2014 tariff chart for EDELAP (Cuadros Tarifarios, Resolución SSP No. 4/2014).
The values are per month and in current 2014 ARS.



                                                     C. Piped gas

In Argentina, after extraction or import, gas is transported by two large companies,
Transportadora de Gas del Norte SA and Transportadora de Gas del Sur SA, which divide the
country between themselves.31 As shown by Figure A. 5, these two companies (shown by blue
and red lines) transport the gas to nine licensed distribution companies.

Figure A.6 shows the strong increase in transfers from the federal government to Energia
Argentina S.A. (ENARSA, by its Spanish acronym). Gas subsidies are allocated through three
trusts (fideicomisos) that are regulated by the National Gas Regulatory Body (ENARGAS, by
its Spanish acronym). These trusts are dedicated to the import of gas (the largest amounts),
the residential consumption in Patagonia and Malargüe, and the consumption of bottled gas
(which is covered as part of Programa Hogar below). Subsidies to gas imports are intended
to finance the purchase of imported gas so as to meet the domestic needs and in order to
ensure domestic supply. The difference between the import cost paid by ENARSA and the
price paid by the distributors is financed with funds from the federal government. While part
of that cost is met by consumers through a fee for gas imports, the bulk comes from state
coffers. The subsidy for residential consumption in Patagonia and in the Malargüe Department
is financed by a surcharge on the price of natural gas levied at the entry point to the
transportation system. It is collected by gas producers (Lombardi et al., 2014).




31
     The dividing line runs along the Northern boundaries of the provinces of Buenos Aires, La Pampa and Neuquen.

                                                         23
                                          Figure A.5. Gas distribution companies




                                                     Source: ENARGAS



        Figure A.6. Transfers from the federal government to ENARSA 2011-2014
                                 60,000                                             1.4%

                                 50,000                                             1.2%
           Million current ARS




                                                                                    1.0%   Percentage of GDP
                                 40,000
                                                                                    0.8%
                                 30,000
                                                                                    0.6%
                                 20,000
                                                                                    0.4%
                                 10,000                                             0.2%

                                     -                                              0.0%
                                          2011        2012        2013       2014

                                                    Million ARS     % GDP

                                                  Source: ASAP and INDEC



As with the other parts of this paper, we use the microdata from the ENGHo on the access,
consumption and spending on residential piped gas. To obtain the consumed quantities of
piped gas, we adopt a similar approach to that used for electricity described above. From the
ENGHo we use the reported expenditure on piped gas but ignore the variable that reports
consumption (in cubic meters) given the same issues as with the quantity variable for
electricity.




                                                             24
Similarly to electricity, the gas tariff is composed of a number of components (see Box A.2).
The structure of this tariff differs from electricity because the gas subsidies primarily happen
directly on the gas imports (i.e. the generation costs) instead of the wholesale market for
electricity. As in the case for electricity, we first take out the tax and fixed components in
order to isolate the variable part of the tariff (  ). Then we use the tariff structure to obtain
the quantity consumed for each household. The gas tariff recognizes eight categories of
consumption for residential customers, depending on the range of consumption.32 An added
complication is that in the determination of the relevant range of consumption, not only the
consumption of the current period (i.e. the latest invoice) but also the five periods
immediately before that are considered. Since we can only observe current consumption, we
have to ignore this issue and basically assume that consumption remained stable since the past
five periods. The resulting distribution of piped gas consumption across deciles of household
income is given in Figure A.7.


     Box A.2: Composition of gas tariff

               Tariff =   + Transport + Distribution + Taxes + Fees

      : Total production cost:  is the volume of gas consumed.  is the average cost per
     unit which differs by region and level of consumption. The distributor passes on this
     component fully to the gas producer (generator).
     Transport: Fixed charge imposed by carriers (Transportadora de Gas del Sur and North) to
     transport gas from the wellhead (in each producing basin) to the concession areas of
     each distributor. The distributor passes this on to the carrier.
     Distribution: Fixed charge imposed for the gas distribution service.

     Fees: Fixed charges (such as the Patagonian subsidy) imposed by the regulatory authority
     to be used for specific purposes. These charges are collected and passed on by the
     distributor.


Using the quantities we can calculate the subsidy per household using the provincial tariff
schedules with and without subsidy.33 The distributors have three different tariff charts, which
are based on the households’ savings relative to the same two–month period (bimestre) in the
previous year: a) consumption with savings higher than 20%, b) consumption with savings of
5% to 20%, and c) consumption with savings of less than 5%. Given that we have no
information on gas consumption in the previous year, we randomly allocate one third of
households to each group.34




32
   These are specified in ENARGAS Resolution I409.
33
   Source: ENARGAS Resolution I409. For each province, we use the tariff chart for the appropriate distributor
(see Figure A.5).
34
   This structure of benefit receipt was also suggested here: http://www.ieco.clarin.com/economia/Gas-ahorro-
20-por-ciento-sentir-impacto-suba-tarifas_0_1350465005.html

                                                     25
                                                Figure A.7. Distribution of piped gas consumption (by decile)


                                                20%
           Share of total consumed quantities   18%
                                                16%
                                                14%
                                                12%
                                                10%
                                                 8%
                                                 6%
                                                 4%
                                                 2%
                                                 0%
                                                       1     2     3     4     5      6     7      8   9   10
                                                                   Decile of the income distribution



                                                                       D. Programa Hogar

As explained in the main text, producer subsidies on gas cylinders were replaced with an
unconditional direct transfer in 2015. Since the household survey does not report beneficiary
status for Programa Hogar (one reason being that the program did not exist at the time of the
survey), we impute the benefit according to the official program description.35 If poor
households are less likely to sign up for the program (e.g. due to information barriers), then
this would overstate coverage of the poor. For example, Programa Hogar is deposited through
ANSES accounts, which might not cover the very poorest.

The eligible population includes households that reside in low-income areas without piped gas
service or that are not connected to the residential gas distribution network. Furthermore,
household income must not exceed two minimum wages (ARS 11,176 at present), or three
minimum wages (ARS 16,764 at present) when a disabled family member resides in the
household or the family resides in social housing.

The benefit level is calculated as the cost for the required number of gas cylinders (at ARS 77
per 10kg cylinder in 2014). This number of cylinders varies depending on (1) the number of
household members (additional cylinders for households of more than five members); (2) the
geographic location (additional cylinders for households residing in Tierra del Fuego, Santa
Cruz, Chubut, Rio Negro and Neuquén); and (3) time of year (additional subsidies during the
winter months). For instance, a household residing in the province of Buenos Aires or AMBA
would receive the number of cylinders according to the following table.




35
  We estimate 2.9 million beneficiary households, which is quite similar to the 2.5 million households the
program aims to cover (http://www.telam.com.ar/notas/201504/100362-programa-hogar-hogares-garrafa-pago-
beneficiarios.html, accessed May 25, 2016).

                                                                             26
Using the ENGHo, we can identify households that (1) do not have a connection to piped gas
networks and (2) are below the corresponding income threshold in 2013.36 We then simply
assign the annual benefit level depending on household size and geographic location. We use
the cost per 10kg cylinder in 2014 which is the year we have used in the rest of the analysis.


        Example of number of cylinders per month (e.g. for AMBA) (by household size)
                                            Household size ≤ 5
                                                                                                       Total
JAN   FEB   MAR     APR    MAY     JUN    JUL    AUG     SEP    OCT    NOV     DEC     TOTAL         amount
                                                                                                     (annual)
1      1      1       2      2       2     2   2     2     1             1       1        18        ARS 1,386
                                           Household size > 5
                                                                                                       Total
JAN   FEB   MAR     APR    MAY     JUN    JUL    AUG     SEP    OCT    NOV     DEC     TOTAL         amount
                                                                                                     (annual)
1      1      2       2      2       2     2       2        2    2       1       1        20        ARS 1,540



                                         E. Transport: Bus, trains, airline

According to data from ASAP, government transfers to the transport sector were about ARS
46,000 million or 1% of GDP in 2014 (including subsidies for capital expenditures). 54% of
these subsidies go to bus transportation, followed by rail (35%) and airline (11%). Bus
transportation subsidies are mainly channeled through the Transport and Infrastructure
System Trust Fund, which is responsible for the compensation of buses and microbuses of
mid- and long-distance. Allocations to rail transport are mainly channeled through two public
companies – Administradora RRHH Ferroviarios and Operador Ferroviario SE. The companies are
intended to meet the staff expenses of five of the seven rail lines, as well as the transfers to
new concessionaires of the same five lines. We also take into account transfers to two private
companies, Ferrovías and Metrovías, which are the concessionaires of the other two rail lines
(Belgrano Norte and Urquiza, respectively). Finally, transfers to commercial air transport are
mainly concentrated in Aerolineas Argentinas SA.

The ENGHo reports the expenditure for each means of transportation. For train and bus
transportation, we obtain the total number of trips (quantities) by dividing the expenditures
by the average fare of each mode of transport in 2012. These quantities, however, are very
low when compared with the figures reported by the National Commission of Transport
Regulation (CNRT). Therefore, instead of using the per-unit subsidy we take the observed
distribution of quantities and distribute the total subsidies reported by ASAP according to this
distribution. In other words, while we are concerned over the level of quantities reported in
the survey, we are reasonably confident with their distribution.37



36
   The use of cylinder gas is identified by question CH09 (“Which energy source do you mainly use for cooking?”).
Because we cannot identify households with a disabled member or those living in social housing, we would tend
to understate the number of beneficiaries.
37
   It is also important to note that the budget shares (e.g. Figure 2) are unaffected by our approach.

                                                       27
                                            F. Water

Water is charged according to two types of schemes: (1) A system which charges a variable
cost per m3 together with a fixed charge that depends on housing characteristics; (2) a system
which charges a fixed cost (irrespective of consumption) that is assessed according the size
of the property and also uses the cadastral value. We adopt the same approach as in Lombardi
et al. (2014), which distributes subsidies proportionally with expenditure.




                                             28
