Id ntiﬁc tion for D v lopm nt (ID4D)
      Id ntiﬁc tion S st ms An l sis




             Countr
             Ass ssm nt




                                       MOROCCO
identification for development (id4d)
       Id ntific tion S st m An l sis




                 July 2014
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org


This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part
of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.


Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Cover photos: Top left: A boy holds his birth certificate, outside African Development Bank Zanzan II Primary
School, in Bondoukou, Côte d’Ivoire. © UNICEF/NYHQ2011-2489/Asselin; Center: Identification cards for
women in a local finance cooperative. © Simone D. McCourtie / World Bank, SDM-IN-046 World Bank; Bottom
left: A refugee filling an application at the UNHCR registration center in Tripoli, Lebanon. © Mohamed Azakir /
World Bank, _ZAK6881F; Top right: Fingerprint. © Jose Luis Gutierrez; Right center: Man guiding another in
using a fingerprint scanner. © leezsnow; Bottom center: Using smartphone. © mihailomilovanovic.
Table of Contents1



 List of Acronyms1 .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . v

 1 Background .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1

 2 The Identity Ecosystem in Morocco  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5
         The National Electronic Identity (The CNIE System) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6
         The Civil Register  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 9
         A National Register of Children (MASSAR) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12
         RAMED (Régime d’Assistance Medicale) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
         Social Security (Caisse nationale de Sécurité Sociale—CNSS) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  15
 3 Analysis  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 19
         STRENGTHS  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 19
         A Number of Highly Developed and Extensible Registers  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 19
         A Number of Important Points of Contact with the Population .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 20
         A Well Developed Privacy and Data Protection Legal Framework .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  21
         WEAKNESSES  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 22
         Lack of Digitization and Complete Decentralization of Identity Information: The Civil Register .  .  .  .  .  . 22
         Proliferation of Identity Numbers .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 22
         Strong Online Presence but Non-Transactional .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 22
         No Authentication Infrastructure  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 23
         Vendor Lock-in: Use of Proprietary Biometric Template  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 23
         Biometric Enrollment Is Not Done According to Best Practice .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 24
         Absence of a National Identity Strategy  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 24
         Cost of Main Credential Is Relatively High . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .24




 This report was drafted by Joseph J. Atick (Identity Counsel International, World Bank Consultant) and Robert Palacios with input from Diego Angel-Urdinola,
 1

 Dorothée Chen, and Fatima El Kadiri (World Bank), and Ariel Pino (from the ILO).


                                                                                                                                                                             iii
4 Options for Consideration .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 27
       Establishing a National Organization for Identity Management .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 27
       Establishing a Unique Identity Number (UIN) for Individuals  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 27
       Securing the UIN with a PIN  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 30
       Conducting a Legal and a Privacy Impact Assessment  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 30
       Modernizing the Civil Register  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 31
       Anchoring Household Registers on Unified Individual Registers  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 32
       Creating a Unique Digital Identity .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 34
       Upgrading the CNIE Enrollment Process .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 35
       Improving Openness and Interoperability of the CNIE  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 35
       Conducting a Technical Review of the Identity Assets .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 36
Annex 1: Color-Coded Matrix of Practices  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 37

Annex 2: Methodology and Raw Data Collected  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 39

Annex 3: Population Data by Age Group and Gender .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  77




iv
List of Acronyms


 AFIS 	     Automatic Fingerprint Identification System
 AMO 	      Assurance Maladie Obligatoire
 CEDI 	     Centre d’Enregistrement des Données Identitaires
 CNDP 	     Commission Nationale de Contrôle de la Protection des Données à Caractère Personnel
 CIN 	      Carte d’Identité Nationale
 CNIE	      Carte Nationale d’Identité Electronique
 CNSS 	     Caisse Nationale de Securité Sociale
 DAHIR	     Moroccan King’s decree
 Décret 	   An executive order or decree issued by the head of the government in Morocco, the prime
            minister
 DGCL 	     Direction Generale des Collectivités Locales
 DGSN 	     Direction Generale de la Sureté Nationale
 DSIC 	     Direction des Systèmes Informatiques et de la Communication au ministère de l’intérieur
 HCP 	      Haut-Commissariat au Plan
 ID1 	      Common ID card size as codified by ISO 7810 (same size as bank cards)
 MAGG 	     Ministère des Affaires Générales et de la Gouvernance
 MASSAR 	   Système de gestion scolaire
 MENFP 	    Ministère de l’Education nationale et de la formation professionnelle
 NIA	       National Identity Authority
 RAMED 	    Régime d’Assistance medicale
 SPA 	      Social Protection Assessment
 UIN 	      Unique Identifying Number




                                                                                                      v
1                        Background


This report presents the context and findings emerging from the application of the identity assessment tool,
which was developed as part of the Social Protection Assessment (SPA) multiagency platform, including dedi-
cated reference and technical working groups.2 In particular, the tool was applied to the case of Morocco where
there have been major advances over the last decade in the country’s identification landscape. The report
examines the key challenges in identification as described in the “What Matters” section of the assessment tool
and attempts to highlight areas where further progress could be made (see summary box on What Matters in
Identity below). It draws from field visits, interviews with practitioners and secondary material (see Annex II for
methodology).

While the identity ecosystem in the Kingdom of Morocco is highly developed with multiple identity programs
operating for many years, recently there has been a recognition on the part of the Moroccan Government that
this existing myriad of programs does not fully meet the identification needs of the country. This is partly because
there is no single identity program that has 100% coverage of the entire population, or that can cover the popu-
lation across all age groups. Government agencies continue to operate under different identity programs that
are not harmonized. In addition, the information that accumulated over the years in the various identification
databases has not been assessed for reliability and quality. As a result all programs that depend on identification
of the individual or the household, including social protection programs, suffer from an increased administrative
burden arising from the lack of a reliable unified registry.

At a more granular level, it was recognized that this fragmentation in the identity landscape was the result of
the absence of established mechanisms for linking the same identity across the different repositories. One such
mechanism would be the implementation of a Unique Identifying Number (UIN) that would be attributed to each
citizen and resident on the Kingdom’s territory. The UIN would be the tool to link the disparate databases and
hence unify the interaction of the individual across multiple agencies, thus presenting a unique and coherent view
of the individual to the public facing governmental agencies. The objective of having a robust UIN is to improve
administrative efficiency and to eliminate leakages and losses due to identity fraud that invariably results when
the multitude of identity programs in operation do not dispose of the means to cross-check and link identities.
This is particularly true for social protection programs which need to go beyond the individual and establish
unique households which can be targeted for social assistance. The UIN was also recognized as an important
tool that would ease the Kingdom’s entry into the era of electronic service delivery, as one of the elements of a
national electronic government strategy.

While the desire for a unified register on the part of government agencies seems to be clear in Morocco, the
path how to achieve it is not. That is why the World Bank, as part of a technical assistance mission, proposed
the use of the SPA identification module to conduct an assessment of the identity landscape in Morocco. The
objective of the assessment is then twofold: (i) to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the identity assets
of the country, and (ii) identify those assets that could contribute to a national strategy for establishing the



 The Social Protection Assessment (SPA) is an interagency initiative to support countries in building social protection systems. SPA activities help develop com-
2

mon instruments to assessing systems, supporting their application, and fostering knowledge sharing. SPA serves as a platform for collaboration across partners
to support a common vision and approach to social protection systems, applies a common set of core tools and metrics, and facilitates dialogue and cross-country
learning. SPA was formerly known as SPARCS (Social Protection Assessment for Results and Country Systems).


                                                                                                                                                               1
    What Matters in Identity

    As discussed in detail in the What Matters section of the SPA identity evaluation tool, there are four ele-
    ments that are critical for assessing the health of an identification system. These are:

    Accessibility
    Evaluates the extent of coverage of the ID of the entire population, how accessible it is to the individual,
    how costly and what barriers may be encountered by any individuals or groups. In this regard, the best ID
    system is one that is universally available to every individual at a negligible cost.

    Robustness
    Assesses how resilient the system is to fraud (uniqueness of identity), duplication of credentials and secu-
    rity breaches; and whether the ID is a system within a framework of trust to verify or authenticate identity
    once it is issued.

    Integration
    Assesses the interoperability of the identity across multiple applications and the extensiveness of the links
    between identity registers.

    Legal Framework
    Evaluates how developed the country’s laws are regarding privacy, data protection and protection of indi-
    vidual rights. It also takes into account capacity of responsible organizations and compliance with pertinent
    international standards.

    In the evaluation, each factor is color-coded according to the criteria shown in the reference matrix in Annex I.



unified register and for improving the tools available for household identification for the delivery of social protec-
tion and other programs.

Finally, a word on terminology. Identity registers are often integrated into functional programs and as such, the
databases of information contained in these programs go beyond just identifying information. The data often is
captured over time as the individual continues to interact with the functions of the agency, and may include socio-
economic, scholastic, health and other private data. For our purposes when we use the term identity register,
we refer to the portion of the database that contains information solely related to identification. This may be bio-
graphic information such as name, date of birth, address, family links, as well as biometric information including,
but not limited to fingerprints and facial images.

For additional background about best practices for identity systems, we refer the reader to the following two
publications, both available at http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/socialprotectionlabor/brief/inter-agency-social-
protection-assessment-tools:

    1.	   “What Matters” section of the SPA identification module.
    2.	   Digital Identity Toolkit: A guide for stakeholders in Africa, June 2014. World Bank publication.

The report is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the identity ecosystem in Morocco. The section discusses
in detail five identification programs that seem to have complementary strengths and that can be considered as
assets. These are the national identity (CNIE), the civil register, the children school register (MASSAR), the reg-
ister of health assistance (RAMED), and the social security register (CNSS). Section 3, provides a global analysis




2
of the data collected and highlights the findings within a holistic view. Section 4 presents some options that may
be explored to improve the identification systems in the country. In Annex I, the color coded performance matrix
for the What Matters factors is given for reference. The methodology of the research is briefly presented in
Annex II along with the raw data collected through the SPA ID Questionnaire tool, and in Annex III some popula-
tion data from HCP that is used in this report is provided for convenience.

It is important to emphasize that in developing options for consideration we worked within the constraint of lever-
aging existing assets and avoided strategies that would result in activities that overlap with what has been done
in the past. This is particularly true for enrollment of the population, which is a costly process. This approach
recognizes the need to leverage the existing enrollment databases and procedures.




                                                                                                                 3
2                 The Identity Ecosystem
                  in Morocco



This Section examines the identity ecosystem in Morocco. It provides a rapid assessment of the principal identity
programs in operation, which can be classified as foundational (general purpose identity programs) or functional
systems (identity modules specific to a given application). Each register or identity system is assessed as a
stand-alone system, leaving the discussion of coordination and harmonization for Section 3.


                         COMPARING THE TWO TYPES OF IDENTITY SYSTEMS
                       Foundational                                                 Functional
 A general purpose identity platform, designed to            A system that addresses the needs of a very
 support all identity use cases expected in a country        specific application of identity (e.g., identification of
 for the foreseeable future. The system focuses on           vulnerable populations or healthcare recipients or
 the enrollment of the population under the frame-           school children).
 work of “enroll once and be identified for life.” The
                                                             Advantages: Easier to launch without major multi-
 expectation is that, once identity becomes a sup-
                                                             stakeholder coordination, lower initial cost, faster
 plied commodity, an entire ecosystem of applica-
                                                             adoption.
 tions, not imagined initially will emerge.
                                                             Disadvantages: Difficult to evolve to multisector
 Advantages: True infrastructure for country, avoids
                                                             foundational identity in the long run; prone to creat-
 multiple registration & redundancy, supports many
                                                             ing fragmented identity space with multiple overlap-
 uses and provides economy of scale.
                                                             ping and incompatible systems, inconvenient for the
 Disadvantage: Requires multi-stakeholder coor-              public since they may be required to enroll multiple
 dination, sustained political will; slower to launch,       times in multiple programs; more costly to add addi-
 could be more costly initially.                             tional applications.


As mentioned previously, the identity ecosystem in the Kingdom of Morocco is highly developed with multiple
identity programs or registers operating already for many years and serving different purposes. These programs
were developed independently by different ministries without benefit of a national strategy for coordinated identity
systems in the country. In many ways these systems necessarily overlap but more importantly, absent a national
coordination strategy, they lead to significant gaps in the coverage of the population and hence are far from being
universal, as will be seen in the discussion below.

The choice of the registers included in this study was made based on their potential to participate in a national
or universal identity register. As such, the study pays more attention to those with higher coverage, reliability and
extensibility, as well as those with coverage of a unique segment of the population not covered by other programs
(e.g., children). In other words, it privileges registers which could be used strategically, along with other registers,
to create a harmonized and unified system for individual identity verification. These considerations are key since
the ultimate aim of the study is to propose a roadmap for the development of a unified register for individuals or
families covering the entire population. As we discuss in Section 3, while the initial objective of this study was to
address the question of household registration, it is our informed opinion that household registers are best built
by basing them on identity registers of unique individuals. Within this context, household registration becomes a

                                                                                                                         5
dynamic association of unique, registered people, which can be easily formed, amended and dissolved over time
as necessary given a unique identity at its foundation.

Results presented here reflect the analysis of the raw data reproduced in Annex II. In addition, throughout this
report, the population data segmented by age group by HCP (Haut-Commissariat au Plan), the official organiza-
tion tasked with socioeconomic reporting in the country, as reproduced in Annex III, is used. This data is useful
because many identity programs target specific age groups and hence, for assessing population coverage, it is
important to know the a priori size of the targeted segment.



The National Electronic Identity (The CNIE System)
The national identity program has existed in Morocco since the late 1970s. It was instituted under law 1-73-560
of 1977, and it relied on an issued identity card called the CIN (Carte d’Identité Nationale) as well as an identity
register. This initial system operated for more than 25 years until it was replaced by a more modern electronic
identity system which involves enrollment with biometrics to ensure the uniqueness of enrolled individuals (using
an Automatic Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS) for de-duplication) and it issues a smart ID card with
state-of-the-art security features called the CNIE (Carte Nationale d’Identité Electronique)—see Figure 1 for an
example of the current CNIE.

The new national identity system with its identity card CNIE was instituted by law no. 35-06 as promulgated by a
Dahir (Royal Decree No. 1-07-149 of Nov. 30, 2007) and an executive order (Prime Minister Decree No. 2-06-478
of Dec. 25, 2007). In this report the term CNIE is used interchangeably to refer to the identity program/register



Figure 1	 Example of a Real CNIE Card, Front (top) and Back (bottom)




6
and to the smart card, unless the context is ambiguous. Implementation of the CNIE system is the responsibility
of the DGSN (Direction Generale de La Sureté Nationale), a direction that enjoys a great level of autonomy within
the structure of the Ministry of Interior.

Implementation of the national electronic identity program including the back-end IT systems necessary to man-
age the enrolled identities and the issuance of cards began in 2008. Since then, the CNIE steadily replaced
the CIN, with acceleration in enrollment and issuance of smart cards seen in recent years partly because the
acceptance of the CIN as a valid form of identification expired in 2014. Today, there are 20M CNIE issued accord-
ing to the information provided by the DGSN at the time of data collection. Given the size of the CNIE program
database, the CNIE can be considered a key foundational identity program in the country.


Accessibility
The program covers the adult population starting from 18 years of age. It also includes a small population of
children between the age of 12 to 18 who are required to enroll in order to receive the electronic passport. While
the program to date has issued 20 million identity cards, which is impressive in itself, it is not universal, for the
following reasons:

     1.	   Children under the age of 18 are generally not covered.
     2.	   Cost of enrollment for an adult is relatively expensive (75 Dirhams), which for poor families could discour-
           age participation.
     3.	   The number of unique identities registered in the database is less than 20 M because some of these
           cards have been issued as replacements for lost or stolen cards or as a result of change of address and
           name. The precise number of unique identities was not communicated to us during our inquiry but we
           estimate it to be between 17–20 million.
     4.	   There are currently about 100 enrollment centers around the country known as the CEDI (Centre
           d’Enregistrement des Données Identitaires), and another 20 are in the original plan for a total of 120 to
           cover the entire area of about 446,550 sq. km., or at a density of one center per 4465 sq. km. This means
           that individuals in certain remote and inaccessible areas would have to travel significant distances to
           enroll. Mobile enrollment brigades were deployed in the past to alleviate this issue, but this was done on
           an ad-hoc basis and not as part of a policy for systematic enrollment of individuals in remote areas. As a
           result the participation of those segments of the population continues to be a challenge. Another way to
           look at this is to note that each center serves on average 330,000 people, an enormous number.3

Apart from the cost and the lack of sufficient enrollment coverage, which could discourage the poor and those
in remote rural areas from seeking a CNIE, there is no evidence that there are barriers to any specific minority
groups.

The coverage of the CNIE is about 60% of the total population (assuming a population of about 33.3 M in
2014 according to HCP census projections), however the coverage within the intended sector of the population,
namely the adult group above the age of 18, could be as high as 75–80% (assuming the number of duplicates is
2–3 million in total, and using 22.8 M as the total potential adult population above 18 years of age according to
HCP statistics reproduced in Annex III.)


Robustness
To assess the robustness of the CNIE program we examined the enrollment process, the identity validation pro-
cess, the security of the credential issued and the authentication process, which are the sub-dimensions recog-
nized by the SPA as a prerequisite for a robust identity system. The assessment is shown in Table 1.




 Compare this to the corresponding number for the civil registration bureaus, where on average one bureau serves about 15,000.
3




                                                                                                                                 7
Table 1	       Assessing Robustness of the CNIE Registered Identity

            Process                                                   Performance
 Enrollment Process                      Robust. In person application at the CEDI centers. Applicants provide
                                         fingerprints and bring documentary evidence, which is examined by the
                                         enrollment agent.
 Validation Process                      Robust. Uses state-of-the-art AFIS technology to de-duplicate enrollment
                                         and ensure that a person cannot enroll under multiple identities. Requires
                                         birth evidence as documented by a copy of the birth registration act, or
                                         an extract thereof or a family booklet. The AFIS will be upgraded in the
                                         near future to include face recognition matching, which will enhance the
                                         robustness and add more flexibility by allowing de-duplication of enrollees
                                         who today cannot provide good quality fingerprints (amputees, manual
                                         laborers, etc.).
 Credential and Data Security            Robust. State of the art identity card which contains a myriad of physical
                                         security features but more importantly (when activated down the line) it
                                         is based on an electronic credential carried in the contactless smart chip.
                                         This credential is cryptographically signed by the issuing agency, hence
                                         the authenticity of the card could be established with a very high degree of
                                         confidence. Repositories of identity data are stored and protected subject to
                                         internationally recognized best practices for IT security.
 Authentication                          Non-robust. Authentication that the card belongs to its holder is done manu-
                                         ally, hence a person who resembles the photo on the card could in principle
                                         pass as the legitimate holder of the card, since no strong authentication
                                         mechanism is in place and no cross-checking of the CNIE identity database
                                         is done (except for the ePassport, see below). Thus the CNIE is currently
                                         used as a flash badge and does not participate in identity verification of any
                                         transaction, online or at points of service.




Integration
The CNIE enjoys a unique position in the country. It essentially replaces four documents:

    1.	   Birth certificate
    2.	   Certificate of residence
    3.	   Proof of life
    4.	   Certification of nationality

The CNIE is used and requested in almost every aspect of transactional life in Morocco, from opening a bank
account to obtaining a passport to getting a driver’s license. The list includes every application process that
requires identification. As such the CNIE has achieved significant integration. Unfortunately, with the exception of
the integration with the passport issuance process, the link to other programs is not electronic. It is made simply
by requesting that the individual present a copy of their CNIE card, which is kept in the enrollment files for the
functional identity programs that rely on the CNIE. These include the identity programs associated with RAMED,
MASSAR, the CNSS, and just about all other programs governmental and private (banking and enterprise ID).
Manual verification of identity without access to the identity register database through electronic means has sig-
nificant limitations. First of all it diminishes robustness since it is susceptible to fraud, as discussed above. Sec-
ond it continues to perpetrate the development of independent databases where each identity is not linked and
which could promote the emergence of variability in the way an individual may appear in entries across different

8
databases (slight variations in name, spellings, address, etc.). In the long run lack of electronic integration con-
tributes to loss of coherence of identity in the identity ecosystem of the country.


Legal Framework
The Kingdom of Morocco has an overarching legal framework related to privacy and data protection (see Sec-
tion 3 for a more detailed discussion). This is commendable and puts all identity related activities of the country
in a point of distinction. However, we have been unable to ascertain from our interviews with officials if the DGSN
is bound by this legal framework, since there is an ambiguous provision in the law which provides a national
security exemption (recall that DGSN is the body in charge of National Security in the country). Since the legal
framework covers all programs, we will not repeat the discussion for each of the other identity programs that fol-
low, instead we defer the reader to Section 3, where a more detailed analysis of the legal framework that governs
privacy and data protection in Morocco is presented.



     The ePassport in Morocco

     The electronic passport represents a case study of a successful integration between a functional program
     (passports) and a foundational program (CNIE).

     Applicants for the electronic passport are required to supply their CNIE number along with their full name
     and date of birth. That information is electronically checked against the database of the CNIE (see sche-
     matic below). If the match is exact, then the CNIE provides the passport office with the fingerprints which
     are subsequently securely uploaded onto the smart chip of the electronic passport. If there is a discrep-
     ancy, the application is rejected. And if it happens that the discrepancy is due to an honest mistake, the
     applicant is requested to petition the CNIE in order to correct the information present in their database first.
     But in all cases, it is the information present in the latter that is used. As a consequence, the database for
     the ePassports is 100% harmonized with the CNIE identity database.

     This is an example of an electronic identity service that is offered by a foundational program. Relying on
     this identity verification service, the bureau issuing ePassports has issued more than 4 Million passports
     since 2009.



                                                                                      Validation


                                                                                                      ?
           BD
                                          CNIE                                                                                  Passport
                                                                                             Name
                                                                                                                                 Bureau
                                                                                             DOB
                                                                                             No CNIE




The Civil Register
Civil registration in Morocco is managed by the DGCL (Direction Generale des Collectivités Locales), a director-
ate within the Ministry of Interior. The office of civil registration lies within the DGCL hierarchy. It consists of a
small team of central staff charged with the coordination of the activities of a large and distributed number of local
community offices of the DGCL to affect and validate birth and death registration. The system is highly decentral-
ized with approximately 2200 offices distributed throughout the country.4



 Collectivités Locales en Chiffres, 2011 and 2009 both available online from http://www.pncl.gov.ma/fr/Publication/Statistique/Documents
4




                                                                                                                                           9
The civil registry bureaus break down into three categories:

     1.	    Principal offices attached to the local government offices of the commune (there are 1503, of which 1282
            are considered rural and 221 urban);
     2.	    Subsidiary offices or annexes in areas where the principal offices are insufficient to cover the demand
            (there are approximately 700); and
     3.	    Overseas, the civil registration office is attached to each Moroccan consular mission or diplomatic post
            (there are 69 around the world).

The responsibility to equip these centers lies in the hands of the municipal councils of the communities that
use their budgets with discretion to decide on their priorities. Some registry offices are modern and have infra-
structure, others continue to be somewhat basic in terms of technology and infrastructure and capacity. While
no official statistics are available, it is believed that the majority of the 2200 civil registry offices do not possess
connected computer systems. They do however each possess paper registers, one for births and one for deaths.

The register itself is a ledger (or a bound book) with serially numbered pages, unique to the office and to the year
of entry. The pages are numbered, controlled and verified by a public prosecutor (so called Royal Prosecutor
or Procureur du Roi) operating in the local first instance court (divisional court) with jurisdiction over the admin-
istrative district. Empty certified ledgers are received at the end of each year for use in the upcoming year. Two
identical copies of the birth and death registers are produced. Registration in both cases is made by hand and
the entries are considered a permanent record from then on, and they cannot be modified or corrected without
a court order. Each registration has a separate number which codes for the office, the register volume and a
sequential number tied to the page. Each civil registration is an act.

At the end of the year, both copies of the register are closed with a seal and signature of the civil registration offi-
cer5 on the first unused page—preventing the use of the remaining pages past the end signed page. One copy is
kept in the local office for operational use (to respond to citizen demands for copies of their act) and the other is
sent to the local competent public prosecutor for procedural audit, control and verification of the entries. No cen-
tral repository exists which would contain the birth records for the whole country in one location. As for marriage
and divorce, those are documented as handwritten notes in the margins of the act pertaining to the husband and
wife upon receipt of marriage or divorce certificates (which is court issued).

The current law which applies to birth registration is referred to as law no. 37.99 (effective as of 2003 and applies
only to a paper-based register) which mandates birth and death registration for everyone on the Moroccan ter-
ritory (including foreigners) and defines the processes that have to be followed to perform them including the
chain of responsibility for declaration of these events. The law requires that births and deaths be registered within
30 days of the event. Beyond 30 days it provides for a penalty and requires a court attestation or judgment before
the event can be registered officially. For example, adults that have not been registered at birth can do so follow-
ing a procedure which includes going to court, declaring under oath their date and location of birth and a judge
issues a declaratory judgment that can then be used by the civil register officer to insert the adult into the civil
register records. This act will be inserted into the current volume and not in the volume for the year of birth (since
that volume is sealed for additions at the end of each year).

It is important to note that there is no secure birth certificate document in Morocco as may be found in many other
countries (although there is a family booklet with the head of household). When a citizen is required to prove their
birth, the easiest thing is for them to go to the district office of their birth to obtain a copy of their registration act
of birth.6 The document is certified as a true copy and can either be a full copy of the two pages in the register
or an extract, which summarizes the basic information pertaining to that birth. The certified copy is valid for up


 The president of the local council or his/her depute or designee is recognized by law as the officer of the civil registration authority in the commune. Overseas,
5

it is the consul or his designee that plays that role.
 There are other alternative procedures that rely on the use of the family booklet or expired copies of birth registration which can allow someone to get an official
6

testament of birth from any office of the civil registration and not necessarily where they were originally registered, but the process is a little more complex and
takes longer.


10
to 3 months only. This paper is typically retained by the agency requiring the proof of birth and is not returned to
the citizen. Thus each time a proof of birth is required, a recent certified copy needs to be obtained. Typically, the
copy takes one day to obtain and costs 2 Dirhams in stamps (about 25 cents).7

Since 2012, the government has begun operating an electronic service (https://www.watiqa.ma/) for enabling
the citizens to order copies of their birth registrations online. This is a great facilitator but unfortunately not for
individuals asking for the first time since it requires that the individual supply the registration act number and the
year of the registration in addition to the office where the registration was affected. Assuming those are known
the individual can order any number of copies. The service costs 20 Dirhams and the document is delivered via
courier post to the title holder who is required to show some proof of identification upon receipt.


Accessibility
The civil registry in Morocco has been effective in ensuring a high level of registration of births. This may be due
to a high degree of awareness about the need for registration, which is considered a first step in the admission
to a structured society and hence a prerequisite for any interaction between the citizen and the state. Last official
published statistics on birth and death are from 2001,8 where birth registration coverage was stated at 86.5%
while death registration at 56.5%. In the intervening years, it is believed that considerable progress has been
made and that percentages today are higher. In the course of our inquiry, officials from the civil registry stated
they believed that today 95% of those born in Morocco exist in some local volume and that furthermore the reg-
istration of new births is above 95%. According to official statistics this represents about 660,000 birth registra-
tions annually. As for death registration it was stated that it stands at 60% and represents more than 200,000
deaths per year. It is important to emphasize that only aggregate statistics about registrations are communicated
by each office to the central civil registry bureau. The detailed information remains in a collection of a large and
growing number of physical volumes in the 2200 offices.9 As such civil registry in Morocco remains as a collection
of stand-alone registers and does not easily provide holistic coverage.

Regardless what the precise percentage of coverage for births is (which we believe to be in the 90s percentile
today) the fact that the civil registration has such a high number of offices, which translate to one office in the
service of 15,000 people on average, means that the system provides excellent access to the population. Regis-
trations that are done within the 30 day period permitted by law are free. Furthermore, there is no evidence that
there are barriers to civil registration for any specific minority groups. Finally the civil registration law provides for
mechanisms of inclusion of the adult population that was not registered before through the declarative judgment
mechanisms.

All of these factors taken into account contribute to giving the civil registration a high inclusion or accessibility
score, making it almost universal for birth registration even though in its current form it is unable to provide a
centralized holistic view of the registrations contained within. As for death registration the process still has room
for improvement primarily because the rate of death declarations continues to be low.


Robustness
As for robustness, the analysis is multidimensional. On the positive side we found that the register relies on
mature administrative procedures and controls that make it difficult to fabricate a new fraudulent entry into the
record. These include controlling the sequentially numbered pages in each register delivered to the civil registra-
tion offices by the local public prosecutor, and performing the registration in permanent ink on heavy stock paper
that are bound in an integral volume. No alternations are allowed without a documented court order.



 We were unable to ascertain if fraud in issuance of this copy or the extract of the birth registration act is an issue. We were led to believe however that the issu-
7

ance of a copy of the act itself is robust to fraud since it involves copying a historical act and not the issuance of a new document.
 See Collectivités Locales en Chiffres, 2009 both available online from http://www.pncl.gov.ma/fr/Publication/Statistique/Documents.
8


 In 1995 a study by the United Nations Economic and Social Council showed that the DGCL was distributing about 25,000 volumes each year for use by the
9

local bureaus of civil registration for both birth and death. This means that today there may be hundreds of thousands of volumes of civil registration covering the
historical records for the last 30 years or so. This report can be retrieved from http://unstats.un.org/unsd/vitalstatkb/Attachment245.aspx


                                                                                                                                                                  11
On the negative side we note that the administrative processes for enrollment into identity programs that rely
on the birth register require the citizen to procure a certified copy of his or her birth registration act or an extract
thereof, without allowing the requesting agency direct electronic access for verification. This creates opportuni-
ties for fraud at that level, where a copy could be faked or duplicated. This puts the robustness of the register
into question.

This issue could be even more significant with the introduction of the online service for requesting copies of the
birth registration via https://www.watiqa.ma. While this service is great for facilitation, it raises some security
concerns. Simply said, the authentication standard is not strong enough to ensure the copies are delivered to the
rightful owner. The process ultimately entrusts postal employees with affecting identity verification before delivery
of the document, a function they are not necessarily qualified to do and which could be susceptible to corruption.


Integration
The birth registration act or its summary has been a prerequisite for enrollment in many other identity programs.
The most important among those is the CNIE, which considers birth registration as an absolute prerequisite. The
dependency of other programs on the birth register has diminished somewhat with the introduction of CNIE since
it is supposed to act in lieu of a birth registration copy as discussed above. Nevertheless, there are still many
programs which rely on the birth registration along with the CNIE.

Lack of a consolidated data base of the civil register and electronic access to verify identity not only diminishes
the robustness of the civil register but diminishes its integration potential as well.



A National Register of Children (MASSAR)
MASSAR is an example of a recent development in information systems related to identity in Morocco. It is a
completely electronic system for management of all aspects of the scholastic life of children and includes one
important module related to the register of student identities, which takes place in a centralized and cumulative
identity database. The significance of MASSAR identity module derives from the following facts:

     1.	   It is the only identification database in the country that systematically covers a segment unserved by any
           other program, namely the segment between the ages of 6–18 years;
     2.	   It is supported by modern information systems with a central database and distributed secure access
           from 10,000 locations around the country;
     3.	   The administrative enrollment procedures, with emphasis on first-hand knowledge of the student, ensure
           the uniqueness of each entry into the student register;
     4.	   Currently contains 6,512,192 registered and unique students; and
     5.	   Database growing at the rate of 10% per year.

The system was developed by the Ministry of National Education and Training (Ministère d’Education nationale
et de la formation professionelle—MENFP) and was under development for two and half years before it was offi-
cially launched at the end of 2013. While an identity card is not issued, a unique number is generated and issued
for each student which remains the same for the entire duration of their scholastic life.

In addition to the state of the art identity system within MASSAR, there is another older identity register that has
been used within the conditional cash transfer program, Tayssir. This program was put in place to incentivize
disadvantaged families to send their children (between ages of 6–15) to school by giving them a monthly cash
transfer (via the post) for every child that attends school up to a maximum of three children per family. It is based
on geographic targeting and relies on building the register of eligible families and hence a register of identities.
Today the register contains 475,000 families and benefits about 825,000 students, 37% of which have been clas-
sified as reinsertions (reintroducing a child who had dropped out back into the school).


12
The Tayssir identity register constitutes only about 6% of households in Morocco and the information that it con-
tains in its database does not necessarily have the quality and accuracy needed for a reliable identity system. In
fact, the MENFP has plans to evolve the program under what they call Tayssir II, which will make the identification
module of MASSAR available to support the register required for Tayssir. For our purposes we see MASSAR as
providing a more fundamental identity register and hence we focused on assessing it instead of Tayssir, consis-
tent with the strategic direction of the MENFP.


Accessibility
MASSAR’s identification module has 100% coverage of school children that are registered in any of the more than
10,000 national educational establishments in the country. Today the register contains more than 6.5 M unique
identities within the age group of 6–18. This translates to about 94% of the population of that age segment, using
6.9 M as the total number of children in Morocco between 6–18 years of age (see Annex II). In fact the coverage
may be even better than that for children in primary schools. According to World Bank analysis the Net Enrollment
Ratio (NER) for Morocco is 98% for primary schools which means the MASSAR register, which covers 100% of
registered school children, has a 98% coverage for children in the primary school age range (6–10).

The significance of MASSAR derives not just from its nearly universal coverage but also from the fact that it covers
a population segment unserved by any other program. It is also a system that continues to register new entrants
at the rate of 600 K per year while retaining its cumulative database including those that have graduated and are
older than 18. Thus each year MASSAR’s age coverage will extend by one additional year. This means in 10 years
the MASSAR database will be more than 12 Million and will cover individuals between the ages of 6–28 years.


Robustness
While the identity module was initially developed as a functional identity program to serve the needs of the
MENFP, it seems to have the necessary ingredients of a potential foundational identity program that could serve
other needs. In addition, the administrative processes of vetting the students at each of the 10,000 learning
establishments in the country, give the system a certain robustness that assures the uniqueness of each record
in the database without recourse to biometrics. These administrative processes rely on the intimate knowledge
of the children that is derived from their contact with their teachers and principals and that is documented in their
scholastic histories which provide some sort of identity profiles. This is a form of Know Your Customer (KYC) or
Know Your Student, which is relied upon as an input for entity resolution (or identity resolution) text matching
engines to ensure that the child is unique and is not mixed with another, intentionally or unintentionally.


Integration
Today the identity module of MASSAR is completely online and can be accessed by other services that need it
for verification of identity. That has not happened thus far. Access to this system continues to be limited to the
organizations belonging to MENFP. However, in principle, the system is ready to be integrated into any other
national program that needs to rely on its identity data.

As for the legal framework, the same comments that we have made about the civil register apply here. The over-
arching privacy protection framework discussed in detail in the next section is applicable here.



RAMED (Régime d’Assistance Medicale)
Medical coverage has been recognized as one of the pillars of socioeconomic development by the Government
of Morocco. For this purpose, two regimes of basic medical coverage were created in the last ten years. These
are the Basic Mandatory Health Insurance (Assurance Maladie Obligatoire) or AMO for formal employees created
in 2005 and the non-contributive Medical Assistance Program (RAMED) created in 2011. Both are managed by
a governmental agency called ANAM (Agence nationale de l’assurance maladie). The first is a standard medical


                                                                                                                  13
insurance program for the benefit of individuals gainfully employed in the formal sector, pensioners, members of
the armed forces and students. RAMED is a non-contributive health insurance scheme that targets the poor and
vulnerable population. It is designed to enable economically disadvantaged groups to benefit from basic medical
coverage including free health care and medical services in public hospitals, health centers, clinics—including
emergency services and hospitalization.

The introduction of RAMED required the development of mechanisms for identifying and selecting eligible benefi-
ciaries in order to ensure that the system reaches most-needy households. This has resulted in the RAMED data-
base which contains identification information as well as data on socioeconomic conditions of the households.
Data are collected via a form completed by the head of each household, which provides declarative information
about the household composition, number of dependents, assets, and household income. This information is
used by a dedicated commission in each local administrative district that is in charge to determining the eligibility
of applicants according to a calculated socioeconomic score that takes into account urban versus rural contexts
and categorizes eligible applicants into poor and vulnerable according to a predefined formula. Eligible house-
holds benefit for a period of three years, after which a new application needs to be submitted for reconsideration.

While the medical benefits are free of charge, there is an annual contribution for active participation in the pro-
gram. The annual subscription amounts to 120 MAD (Moroccan Dirham) per individual per year (with a cap of
600 MAD per household) for those categorized as vulnerable and 40 MAD per year per individual for those cat-
egorized poor. The annual contribution for the poor is paid for by the local municipality on their behalf.

Eligible beneficiaries are issued a RAMED identification card. The card is valid for three years for the households
categorized as poor. Households categorized as vulnerable get the card for one year (and can renew it for 2 addi-
tional years after it expires) upon payment of their annual contribution. The card is a low-end ID1 card with a mag
stripe and has the photos of the head of household and the spouse along with basic identification information
including their personal RAMED numbers and the numbers of their CNIE (see Figure 2). The card also lists on
its back the dependents that are covered under the head of the household.

As of Feb. 2014, 2.7 million RAMED cards have been issued covering a total of more than 7.1 million individuals.
The program has been enrolling at the rate of 260,000 individuals and has a budgetary limit of 8 million active
participants, which will be reached within the coming year.

At the administrative and technical levels, the RAMED is managed through a collaboration between the ANAM
and the Ministry of Interior. The latter manages the identity module of RAMED at the level of enrollment, data
scoring and retention and sends ANAM the list of vetted beneficiaries for production and issuance of the RAMED
card. While the RAMED relies on the CNIE, in the sense that possession of the CNIE is a requirement for par-
ticipating in RAMED, and the CNIE number of the head of household and his spouse is printed on the RAMED
card, the identity register for RAMED is separate from that of the CNIE. Furthermore, the group that manages the
RAMED identity register at the Ministry of Interior is not related to the DGSN.


Accessibility
The RAMED is of great interest since it has a functional identity module which builds an identification system
for households out of individual identity. This is unlike all the other registers discussed earlier, which focus on
individual identity instead of household.

The RAMED identity module relies during the enrollment on the CNIE as a prerequisite foundational identity
before admitting someone into the program. Without a copy of the CNIE the application for eligibility for RAMED
would not be even considered. This means the inclusiveness within the targeted population for RAMED is encum-
bered by the same inclusiveness limitations of the CNIE. This may be a concern since the CNIE does not provide
total coverage of the population at the moment and is likely to exclude the poorest segments of the population,
those that RAMED aims to reach. Of course the RAMED uses other targeting criteria which could limit its inclu-
siveness but those are not related to the intrinsic properties of the identity module. So as a baseline, RAMED ID
has the same inclusiveness challenges as the CNIE.


14
Figure 2	 The RAMED ID Card




                                                                                                date d’expiration
                                                                                                de la carte
     No de la Carte
     d’Identité Nationale
     ou la Carte Nationale                                                                  No de l’Identifiant Personnel
     d’Identité Electronique                                                                de la Couverture Médiciale
                                                                                            (IPCM)


     No réquentiel de la carte


     Etablissment des
     Soins de Santé de base
     de rattachment




                                                                                         la lists des ayants droits qui
                                                                                         bénéficient avec le chef
                                                                                         de la famille




Source: www.ramed.ma


Robustness
As for robustness, no cross-checking of identify information with other foundational registries is conducted. At
the time of enrollment, only a copy of the CNIE needs to be attached to the application for the head of household
and the spouse. In addition at the time of service there is no infrastructure for authentication to ensure that the
individual receiving medical benefits is the one eligible per the RAMED identity card. This vulnerability to abuse
is particularly clear for dependents listed on the card, since there is no way to verify their identity at the time of
receipt of medical service. Furthermore the RAMED card does not have significant physical or logical security
features, hence it could be easily faked and counterfeited. It is not clear how much fraud actually exists in this
program but in principle there are no significant mechanisms for protection against it.


Integration
As for integration the RAMED is a stand-alone system. While it relies on the CNIE it does that through using a
copy of the identity card and not through a secure electronic link between the databases. At the moment there is
no cross-checking with the databases of social security at the CNSS, or the database of the identity databases
for the AMO as operated by the CNOPS (although studies on the effectiveness of such a link are planned for
2015).



Social Security (Caisse Nationale de Sécurité Sociale—CNSS)
The CNSS has yet another register of identities of individuals as well as their families, built upon employers
that declare their employees and submit them for registration in the social security scheme. In 2013 there were


                                                                                                                          15
Figure 3	 CNSS Issued Identification Card




165,500 employers participating in the scheme, with 2.9 million declared and active employees, which has been
growing at the rate of 7% annually. The database is even larger in size since there are spouses and children reg-
istered as well. The population of spouses adds another 1.5 million to the roster and the children add about 6 M
(although there are significant duplication coming from children who may have graduated and joined the ranks of
employees). The situation with the CNSS database illustrates the need for a unified register that can resolve the
individual registered and track the identity as it goes through changes in status. Although this issue at the CNSS
seems to be one of administrative efficiency and procedural simplicity more than one of fraud.

The enrollment procedure for the CNSS does highlight the administrative complexity that results from the lack
of unified identity register. The request for registration is done by the employer on behalf of the employees and
their family members and consists of the submission of copies of supporting documents including the extract of
the birth register, certificate of residence and certificate of life, as well as copies of the CNIE (all of which could
have been avoided if the country had a unique identity number for each individual). The CNIE number is used to
ensure that the individual is only enrolled once and is issued a single unique number by the CNSS for life. That
means as individuals change employers or they leave and reenter the workforce, they are not assigned a new
number.


Accessibility
As an identity system, the inclusiveness or the accessibility of the CNSS register is somewhat limited if measured
by coverage of the entire population. The register is focused on formal wage earners, which are estimated to be
at 3.5 M in total by HCP’s 2013 analysis. Within that sector of the population the register contains the identity of
about 3 M wage earners, which amounts to 85% of the total potential of that segment.




16
Robustness
The enrollment procedures lead us to believe that the identity information about the active participants is reliable
and robust (the same may not be said about other types of information, such as wages, which may be under-
reported or inaccurately reported). The robustness of the identity data comes from several factors. First the
set of documentation required to enroll is extensive and includes the CNIE. Second the application is done via
the employer who has in effect to vouch for knowing the individual, acting as a witness. On the other hand the
declarative information about spouses and children may lack the same rigor and reliability.


Integration
As for integration, the system continues to have no active links with other programs in the country. It does depend
on the national identity card and it does reserve updates from time to time on lists of deceased individuals from
the civil register, but in neither case does it have live electronic access. In addition, as far as we were able to
ascertain the CNSS database is not used by any other program. As for the legal framework, they operate under
a data protection charter in addition to the omnibus law 09-08 covering all programs.




                                                                                                                 17
3                 Analysis


This section elaborates on the strengths and weaknesses of the identity ecosystem in Morocco that were identi-
fied through the data collected in the preceding section. This discussion will set the stage for the options that
will be presented in Section 4 on how the strengths and assets uncovered could be leveraged to better meet the
current and future identification needs in the country.



STRENGTHS
A Number of Highly Developed and Extensible Registers
The country has today a number of identity programs that, with proper harmonization, could provide significant
coverage of the population. Table 2 displays the performance of each identity system discussed in Section 2
using the color-coded system of the SPA Identification Assessment Tool (see Annex I). The color-coded scores
are the results of a thorough analysis of the data collected for each identity system presented in the previous
section.

The analysis conducted indicates that systems display good robustness across the board. This positive feature
is achieved through the use of biometrics (as is the case in CNIE) or from the use of active administrative pro-
cedures (such as those seen in MASSAR) to ensure the uniqueness of each identity registered and to combat
against identity fraud in the enrollment process. The CNIE is the only register in the country that uses biometrics,
hence providing the highest degree of robustness of all registers assessed. However, robustness could improve
further if clear and reliable identity authentication protocols were developed. For the most part identity is verified
by manually inspecting ID cards and not through more reliable processes, such as checking the identity register
or by matching the biometric information of the individual against what is stored on the card (as is the case for
the CNIE).

It is interesting to note that the current systems in place are not very inclusive, but could become so if one under-
takes their integration since many of the programs are almost entirely nonoverlapping in their coverage.


Table 2	       Performance of the Major Identity Programs

    Dimension                CNIE           Civil Reg           MASSAR              RAMED               CNSS
 Accessibility
 Robustness
 Integration
 Legal Framework




                                                                                                                   19
For example there is very little overlap between MASSAR and CNIE. Hypothetically speaking, combining these
two registers would result in a database of about 23.5–26.5 M unique identities which translates to 70%–80%
coverage of the population, which is a great foundation to build on for a unified register of the population. We see
MASSAR (along with a digital civil registry for the newly born) as an important ingredient in that unified strategy
(see next sections) since it is the only identity register that exists covering children. Over time it will cover an ever
broader age segment as it retains the records of the students past their graduation and hence could be leveraged
for young adults as well in due time.

The analysis indicates that the area of integration is a major challenge. Broadly speaking, the identity ecosystem
is highly fragmented with a large number of programs operating in silos without any mechanism of integration
between them (with the exception of existing interinstitutional coordination for issuing the national passport, see
below).

Table 3 gives a summary of the identity registers that exists in the country in digital format along with the approxi-
mate number of records they contain in their databases.



A Number of Important Points of Contact with the Population
One of the challenges faced by identity registers is their dynamic nature, whereby they are constantly updated
with new and revised information (as new individuals take part of the register and/or as they update their informa-
tion/status). An identity register is not just about recording the identity at a given moment in time. It has to able
to keep up with many changes in the condition and status of individuals. Our analysis indicates that Morocco
disposes of significant number of points of contact with the population (see Table 4), which facilitates the interac-
tions between the available register and the population and gives individuals more opportunities to enroll in the
systems and to update their information. The availability of these points of contact, however, is not enough. Agen-
cies need to dispose of a coherent mechanism for linking the identity data with different agencies and attributing
them to a unique identity. Such mechanism remains lacking in Morocco.


Table 3	     Comparing Coverage of Different Digital Identity Registers

                     No. of Identities              In Percentage
  Program              Registered                     of Segment                   Population Covered
 CNIE                        17–20 M                      75–85%              Mostly adults over 18 years of age
                                                                              (estimated)
 MASSAR                        6.5 M                        98%               Children between 6–18
 RAMED                         7.1 M                          —               Poor and vulnerable
 CNSS                          3.0 M                        85%               Wage earners (total potential 3.5 M)

Source: SPA analysis


Table 4	      Points of Contact with the Population

                 Point of Contact                                                   Number
 CEDI                                                        120
 Civil Register Offices                                      2200 in country; 69 consular posts
 Schools                                                     10,000
 Employers                                                   165,500 registered businesses with CNSS

20
A Well Developed Privacy and Data Protection Legal Framework
Identity programs, in their very nature, accumulate and aggregate data that is considered private and of sensitive
nature. As a consequence they raise significant concerns related to data protection and the respect of individual
privacy rights. There is a heightened sensitivity about this issue in Morocco, where the legislator has proactively
worked to establish the legal framework for privacy protection already. Today this legal framework is derived from
three bodies of law:

   1.	   Law 09-08 as promulgated by Dahir No. 1-09-15 of 2009 and the Executive Order (décret) 2-09-165 of
         2009;
   2.	   Article 24 of the Moroccan Constitution of 2011; and
   3.	   Preamble to the Constitution.

The legislation 09-08 is an omnibus data protection law that covers all data that can be considered personal or
private irrespective of what application it is being used for. The law explicitly incorporates the following interna-
tionally recognized principles for protection of personally identifying information (PII):

   •	    National privacy commission: The law establishes a privacy commission reporting to the office of
         the Prime Minister called the CNDP (Commission National de Contrôle de la Protection des Données
         à Caractère Personnel).
   •	    Collection limitation: The PII should be obtained by lawful, fair and transparent means with the
         knowledge and consent of the individual.
   •	    Purpose and notification: The purpose for collecting PII should be clear, precise and limited and
         should be communicated to the individual from whom such data is being collected and to the CNDP
         when such data is being processed or handled.
   •	    Proportionality: The collected data should be necessary, proportional and not excessive relative to
         the purposes for which they are being used.
   •	    Data quality: The data collected should be accurate, reliable, and complete and kept up to date.
   •	    Duration limitation: PII must be kept for a limited period not exceeding the time required to fulfill the
         purpose of the processing for which they were collected.
   •	    Respect of individual rights: Organizations that handle PII have the responsibility to respect indi-
         vidual rights (including right for access, review, correction, inquiry about source and protest) and the
         obligation to put in place all measures necessary to enable the individual to assert these rights.
   •	    Security and confidentiality: PII should be protected by reasonable security safeguards against
         such risks as loss or unauthorized access, destruction, use, modification or disclosure of data.

The law also explicitly specifies the scope of authority and mission of the CNDP as follows:

   1.	   Awareness: Informing and educating the public about their privacy rights and reminding those who
         handle PII of their obligations and responsibilities in conformance with the law.
   2.	   Advice and guidance: Providing opinion and advice to the government, to the parliament and to com-
         petent authorities relative to any projects or legal propositions that could impact privacy.
   3.	   Protection: Ultimately it is the CNDP that is tasked with protecting the privacy rights collectively, by
         ensuring that no applications that violate privacy are launched and, individually, by representing individu-
         als in their redress, protest or complaints.
   4.	   Monitoring and investigation: To ensure ongoing compliance with the law.
   5.	   Legal and technological watch: The CNDP monitors, investigates and analyzes the trends and tech-
         nological, legal and societal changes that may impact privacy and data protection.




                                                                                                                     21
While the body of existing law pertaining to this issue is impressive and more advanced than what is found in
many developing countries today, its implementation is still in its early stage and the country lacks experience in
detection, enforcement and assessment of penalties. In fact the CNDP is a small body that lacks the resources
necessary to bring actions against violators.

In addition, the privacy law 09-08 has a broad exception for national security. This exception could be exploited,
absent a clear definition of what constitutes an exempt national security matter. Finally, to date there has yet to
be a formal privacy impact assessment related to any of the identity programs in the country.

Overall we see the current legal framework as a foundational asset which imposes certain constraints but not
barriers to a unified identity regime in Morocco. It creates guidelines for responsible handling of citizen data in a
way that protects the privacy of the individual.



WEAKNESSES
Lack of Digitization and Complete Decentralization of Identity Information:
The Civil Register
The civil register in Morocco is robust and is highly inclusive but lacks integration and hence cannot in its present
form play an important foundational role in the identity landscape in the country. The register contains in its total-
ity an estimated 45 M records, all distributed in thousands of ledgers scattered in thousands of locations around
the country.10 This is very valuable information that needs to be captured in a consolidated digital form that could
be accessed by other applications to vet identity and to connect it to its origin, but it could be very costly if not
done right (see next section for options to consider).



Proliferation of Identity Numbers
The state of fragmentation of the identity ecosystem in Morocco is reflected in the proliferation of identification
numbers that exist in the country. Each program has resorted to creating its own number. None of these numbers
are interoperable or even follow the same logic or standards. For the most part there is no link between them.
This has a significant administrative impact both from a cost and complexity perspective and puts unneces-
sary burden on the individual to repeatedly prove his or her identity in order to assert his rights and privileges.
In Table 5 we give a summary of some of the more prominent identification numbers utilized in the country and
their structure. This state of affairs calls for the creation of a UIN, a unique identifying number that could link all
of these disparate numbers and registers.



Strong Online Presence but Non-Transactional
The country seems to have embraced the web as a mechanism of informing the public and providing forms for
needed services. This extends to the identity domain, where each agency now operates a web portal to provide
the public with what they need to know in order to apply, qualify and enroll in an identity-based program. While
the use of the web proliferates, it is limited to non-transactional interactions. Today a limited number of transac-
tions can be conducted by an individual with an enrolled identity electronically via the web. Unless this deficiency
is addressed, the country’s attempts to reap the benefits of electronic government will be severely limited and

 To appreciate the challenge we note the following back of envelope calculation. According to a 1995 report by the United Nations (cited earlier), the DGCL was
10

distributing 25,000 bound registers per year for both birth and death which are supposed to be done in duplicates, which implies that the country was consuming
12,500 registers per year. We estimated it breaks down to 75% of these for birth and 25% for death registration (consistent with the coverage); this means the
country consumes approximately 10,000 birth registers per year. Thus over the last 50 years we would expect to find about 500,000 birth registers scattered
around the 2200 civil register offices. This is a very rough estimate since it does not take into account year to year variations, but as an order of magnitude it is
good enough to illustrate the challenge faced by any attempt to modernize the civil register.


22
Table 5	     Examples of Identification Numbers Associated with Various Programs in Morocco

   Number                Structure of digits                                          Notes
 CNIE              2 (region) + 6 (sequential) + 2 (control)    National Identity Number, more than 20 million
                                                                issued to date. Stored in a database and bound
                                                                to identity data.
 Civil Register    The year + Regional office code +            Not electronic and hence not stored in a data-
                   Page number (digits vary)                    base. It is noted in other databases for verifica-
                                                                tion and disambiguation purposes but there is no
                                                                evidence it is used to retrieve a record. 45 M to
                                                                date are known to exist.
 ePassport         2 (issuance location) + 7 (serial number     4 million numbers issued to date (over the last
                   of document)                                 5 years).
 MASSAR            2 (region) + 2 (year of creation) + 7        6.5 M (May 2014).
                   (serial)
 RAMED             14 digit each for husband and wife           Number codes location, gender, year of birth,
                                                                plus control key.
 CNSS              9 digits                                     Begins with 1 and has control digit at end.
 In addition to the above there are the Driver’s License number, Pensioners ID number, etc.


restricted to one-way interaction, whereby agencies provide information and forms to be printed and filled by
applicants demanding service for the most part. In order to enable electronic interaction between the citizen and
the government, and conduct proper transactions online, a true digital identity platform (for example supporting
all requirements of eID) needs to be established in the country which uses security mechanisms to create a
trusted platform for transacting for public service.



No Authentication Infrastructure
Available identification registers focus notably on individual registration or enrollment which is rather well devel-
oped within several programs (e.g., CNIE and MASSAR). However, no strong authentication is used subsequent
to enrollment to verify identity using the issued credential. The identity verification is mostly done by visual
inspection, which is highly unreliable.

For example, while the CNIE contains the biometric templates for two fingers stored in its memory, there has yet
to be a single program that reads the template and verifies it against the live fingerprints of the individual to prove
they are who they claim to be. The CNIE is used mostly as a flash badge. When needed, a photo copy of the
CNIE is made and attached to a form, and this is the extent of identity authentication.



Vendor Lock-in: Use of Proprietary Biometric Template
The CNIE, currently the most important identity program in the country, uses a proprietary template stored on
the card. This is a form of dependency that gives the vendor control over the country’s planned use of the card.
Today, there are 20 M cards issued with this specific vendor template and hence it would be costly to recall and
replace should the vendor decide not to be flexible in supporting applications that use the template. Thus far
this issue has not been a problem because no program has been launched that reads and verifies the template.
However, once the country decides to use the CNIE for ID verification and for actual transactions (such as


                                                                                                                    23
service delivery or allocation of social programs), the question of allowing third party developers other than the
original vendor to read and verify the template becomes important. For example, device and terminal markers
need access to this template in order to create authentication terminals that can be used by government agen-
cies and authorized enterprises in order to authenticate and verify identity at points of service. These are similar
to point of sale terminals and it is important to have multiple vendors that are able to compete to offer different
products and prices to suit different needs. Since the template is proprietary, these product makers would need
to be licensed by the owner of the template which often inhibits entry by these third parties into the market. This
is a form of vendor lock-in and it has long-term implications and could limit the country’s options as it seeks the
latest and greatest technology in this domain. It is counter to the best principles advocated for the creation of a
vibrant ecosystem in the country where vendors compete to offer their best products and solutions in an open
market with no one vendor getting an unfair advantage.



Biometric Enrollment Is Not Done According to Best Practice
Currently the only program that uses biometrics is the CNIE and the enrollment is done in a hybrid fashion. First
and in the interest of time, four fingers are captured on a live scan device. They are captured one finger at a time.
Then ten fingers are inked and scanned and submitted to the database in due time for additional checks and
archival. This is a nonstandard 10 print enrollment and is fraught with potential issues, which include:

     1.	   Time to enroll and subsequent scan of the ten prints is costly;
     2.	   Sequence errors could be introduced by a one finger at a time capture; and
     3.	   Low quality: Ink and paper scan does not produce the same quality fingerprint images as live scan
           capture.


Absence of a National Identity Strategy
During the process of data collection it became clear that the country does not have a national strategy for iden-
tity that could meet the needs of all the stakeholders. The approach to identity continues to be fragmented with
little coordination. Furthermore, there are many unilateral initiatives on the part of several agencies that aim to
improve their identity systems. These initiatives have overlaps and redundancies among them.

It is also clear none of the existing programs on their own are capable of meeting the current or evolving identity
needs of the country. Indeed, the identity assets are currently underutilized which undermines existing registers
to achieve their full potential.



Cost of Main Credential Is Relatively High
Almost all identity programs in the country issue a physical credential. For the most part they are a low-end ID1
card format whose cost is insignificant and not a factor in the adoption of the credential. This is true with the
exception of the CNIE card, which is a smart card and appears to have a high procurement cost for the consum-
able since it is supplied by one vendor only. The cost to the government is about $8.5 per card, which is approxi-
mately the fee that the citizen is charged when they apply for their national ID. This is double the average price
for a processor smart card, which according to industry numbers is currently at $3.79 (Source Gemalto website).

The physical ID card, the so called ID consumable, has a significant ongoing cost as it grows proportional to
the population (in addition to the replacement cards for lost and stolen IDs and for change of address) and
could reach hundreds of millions just for the card stock. This cost, if passed onto the citizen, which appears to
be the case with CNIE, becomes an inhibitor and a burden on families that are poor or vulnerable. The law also
requires that a new card be issued when changes in address or other fields printed on the card occur, which
adds to the cost of the card. Even though the card is valid for a period of 10 years, during this period it is likely

24
that a significant number of cards would have to be replaced. While official statistics were not disclosed, it was
estimated that currently about 1 in 3 cards is a replacement card (the replacement rate has gone up since the
program is entering into its 5th year and the population that has the card has increased significantly).

Equally important, a high cost of the card robs the program of funds that could have been invested on an IT
system and connectivity instead of on consumables. In general it is good to promote competition among multiple
vendors supplying the card stock as such competition usually drives prices down.




                                                                                                               25
4                 Options for Consideration



Establishing a National Organization for Identity Management
Identity is now being recognized as a national asset in many countries around the world. Managing it properly
has important implications to a country’s socioeconomic development. As such, identity has to be interoperable
and available to support all needs and not just those of a specific ministry. For achieving such a purpose, it has
become a best practice to establish a national body that coordinates all the activities related to identity verification
in a country. In many countries such an institution is commonly known as the National Identity Authority (NIA).
The institutional arrangements for the NIA vary dramatically from country to country. It can be an autonomous
body with direct cabinet or executive level reporting, an autonomous body governed by a board representing
stakeholders, or an agency/directorate of an existing ministry. More importantly there is a wide range of roles that
can be attributed to the NIA depending on what identity assets exist in the country and at what stage of develop-
ment they are in.

For Morocco, there are several well developed identity repositories, as well as several identity enrollment pro-
cesses. As such, we see the NIA not reproducing what exists already but coordinating the activity in order to cre-
ate a unified identity infrastructure for the country. This does not mean consolidating data in a central place, but
it means orchestrating interactions between different repositories (in the language of Service Oriented Architec-
ture) so that a unified identity system could emerge through virtual means. The role of the NIA will be elaborated
further below.

It is important to emphasize that the NIA needs to represent all the stakeholders of the country as part of a col-
legial framework for cooperation between all those concerned with identity in the country. As such, its institutional
governance needs to reflect that. Usually its Steering Committee is made up of high-level representations of each
of the ministries or agencies that have legitimate need for identity management.

The NIA needs to be an institution with provisions for good governance, change management, a sustainable
business model, managerial and technical capacity, data protection expertise, strong operational controls, moni-
toring and evaluation (M&E), and long-term operations and maintenance (O&M). This NIA should not only dem-
onstrate operational efficiency but should also be resilient to changes in the political environment and territorial
competition between the different ministries.

It is important to emphasize that the NIA does not have to be a large institution. It is often a very small organiza-
tion with limited staff that takes on the role of coordination among other agencies and organizations that are the
keepers of the identity assets.



Establishing a Unique Identity Number (UIN) for Individuals
While the need for a UIN seems to be clear in the analysis of several government agencies in the country, there
is no consensus for how to get there. There is a universal desire, however, that whatever path is taken to get
there, should leverage and use the existing identity assets which are scattered across several organizations. This


                                                                                                                     27
principle has strong implications to what strategy should be adopted for establishing the UIN. It is important to
emphasize producing a UIN requires producing a unified fundamental register of identity.

A priori one could imagine a circumstance where identity data is consolidated from various agencies, by moving
that data into a central repository. This is the physical unification path. Moving identity data to a central place
does not work unless all the identity processes that support it are moved along with it. These processes include
what is done at registration centers, the mechanisms for updating data and information, and the procedures for
recourse in case an identity has been captured incorrectly or compromised by a theft or other problems. Moving
all of these processes and unifying them is not really feasible among a large number of organizations that have
built a mature identity infrastructure, as is the case in Morocco.

Indeed, these processes have been entrenched within existing ministries and cannot simply be moved without
risking the collapse of the currently functioning identity systems of the country. For example identity enrollment of
school children is done within MASSAR and is well elaborated using procedures that are adapted to the educa-
tional environment, so moving MASSAR under a central framework would require disruption of those procedures
and their reestablishment within an organization that does not have the advantage that the schools have—
namely knowing the students intimately. In addition, domain rivalries among agencies foster an atmosphere
where data sharing through consolidation may be resisted by many who own valuable data. This is seen almost
universally, for example in India when the UID project was put in place and in Nigeria before the formation of a
central identity authority (the so called NIMC).

If identity data and processes cannot practically be moved and consolidated, the next option to consider is con-
solidating identity knowledge in a National Identity Index (NII). Today, there are several agencies that have excel-
lent identity knowledge of the segments they serve. For example, the DGSN knows the majority of adults above
the age of 18, while the MASSAR of MENFP knows the majority of children between the ages of 6 and 18 years.
One way to consolidate this identity knowledge is to create the NII which essentially lists a limited set of attributes
of each identity, such as the name of the individual along with simple identifying information, but more critically,
it will include a reference (a pointer in IT language) that shows in what institutional databases this identity was
enrolled and can be found today.

This extended set of attributes constitutes the so called Identity Data Structure Model (IDSM) (see Figure 4).
It is worth noting that such a register is not an enrollment register but simply an identity index. It relies on the
enrollment databases that will continue to operate separately in the country (under their respective functional
programs) but will systematically provide and update information that would be used in the IDSM.

The NIA could be tasked with the responsibility of keeping the master NII. Within this framework there are three
key institutional roles:

     1.	   Users of identity: Any program that has a legitimate need for identity would be in that category;



Figure 4	 Identity Data Structure Model Which Integrates an Enrollment Reference Number along
          with Biographic Data as Attributes for Identity


                                   Identity Data Structure Model (IDSM)
                                                       Name,
                                                   Family Name,
                                                   Date of Birth,
                                             Enrollment Reference No.




28
      2.	   Identity Attestation Services: These are the agencies that have identity knowledge with repositories
            that have enrolled a certain segment of the population. To qualify in that category, the enrolled identity
            data in these repositories has to be shown to be reliable or robust (using the criteria of the SPA tool) and
            already in electronic form. Reliability would be assessed more deeply than what was done during the
            current SPA assessment to ensure that identity is unique and is connected to a physical person even
            when no biometrics are used. This means the enrollment procedures of an agency would be assessed
            to ensure that they qualify to be an Identity Attestation Service provider. It is our expectation that there
            would be many attestation services in the country which cover different segments of the population. For
            example, the identity programs of CNIE, MASSAR, the civil register (if and when it is digitized), and to
            a lesser extent RAMED could serve as Attestation Services in Morocco based on the results of the SPA
            assessment;
      3.	   Coordinating body (the NIA): This role would be undertaken by the NIA, which could be a small coor-
            dinating body tasked with generating and keeping the master list of UINs for the country in addition to
            certain other tasks which we discuss next. Figure 5 shows a schematic of how the three players could
            interact to achieve the desired result.

The process of generating a UIN and attributing it to a citizen could be on demand (batch11 or one at a time) and
would work as follows: A program in need to add a UIN to an individual identity could request so to the NIA by
submitting a basic set of identifying biographic information (name, family name, date of birth, etc.) along with an
attestation reference code conforming to the IDSM. This latter code would tell the NIA in what databases this
individual could be found. Ideally it would include the identity number associated with that database.12 The NIA
would submit a request to the referenced database for verification of that identity. Assuming the verification is
successful (the identity is alive, it exists, and is associated with the biographic data and is unique) the NIA gener-
ates a UIN and attributes it to that identity, which is added to the National Identity Index and is communicated to
the requesting program.

Figure 5	 A Possible Mechanism for Generating a National Identity Index

                 Social
                                Elections         Health         Education                                                            Programs
               protection




                                                                      National Identity Index

                                                                                                                                      National
                             Service:                 Interface:
                            Request for               Validation            Attribution               List of                          Identity
                             Numbers                   Channel                of UIN                 Numbers                            Index
                                                                                                                                      Authority




                                                                                                                                      Identity
                            CNIE                           MASSAR                        Civil                                       Attestation
                                                                                        Register                                      Services


Source: World Bank.


  It is interesting to explore the batch mode: the UIR (Unique Identity Register) could be seeded by moving the list of names, date of births, and the reference
11

in the attestation databases (CNIE, MASSAR, etc.) to a central repository under the control of the NIA. Each entry would then be assigned a UIN and kept in
the unified register. When a program requests the UIN for an individual, this master list would be checked first. Individuals who are not in the register but are in
attestation databases would be verified from those databases and added over time to the UIR.
 If the identity number is not known, but one believes that the individual exists in a given database, an exhaustive search in the reference database could be
12

made. In that case the submission may need to include additional biographic fields to remove ambiguities.


                                                                                                                                                               29
Once the UIN is communicated, the program uses this number in association with that identity. As more programs
participate in this process, the list of attributed numbers grows and all programs are assured to use the same
number provided by the NIA to refer to the same identity.

This approach achieves the harmonization without having to re-enroll any of the already enrolled identities. For
the Morocco case, following up this method could create a unified register of individual identities by leveraging
the CNIE for adults above 18, the MASSAR for children between the ages of 6–18, and the civil register when it
is put online for those under 6 (see section on options for modernizing the civil register below).



Securing the UIN with a PIN
The architecture of the UIN is important and should be the outcome of technical analysis involving all the stake-
holders. This includes deciding if the number includes certain immutable information about its bearer or not; and
if it does not, whether it will be sequential or random. One element of critical importance to consider is associat-
ing a security mechanism to this number. This could be in the form of a Personal Identification Number (PIN) like
what is used to secure banking or ATM cards. The PIN would be a private code, stored in the NIA database and
could be changed by the individual through services provided by the NIA (just like one would change the PIN
on a banking card by calling a service or going online). Figure 6 shows a possible structure for the UIN and the
associated PIN. The PIN is kept private in the NIA database.

It should be emphasized that the PIN is a critical ingredient in building mechanisms for secure delivery of services
online within the context of eGovernment. Without a PIN to authenticate the identity of the demander of service,
one cannot be sure that the demand is legitimate, and the privacy of the individual could not be protected. Thus
absent a PIN or other mechanisms for securing the UIN, agencies would be unable to use the web or mobile
in order to deliver services. The UIN by itself is not secure to conduct transactions and/or to allocate transfers.

The PIN can only provide a basic level of security, but it has the additional advantage that its authentication can
be fast, easy, and could be performed by the NIA as a service. Other stronger mechanisms of identity authentica-
tion would involve the use of a smart card with biometrics and a PIN. The current CNIE has the potential to add
strong authentication mechanisms, which would allow for highly secure transactions and identity verification, but
such an initiative would require significant infrastructure to support it.



Conducting a Legal and a Privacy Impact Assessment
Before a unified register with a UIN is developed, a review needs to be conducted to determine the following:

     1.	   Is the current legal framework sufficient to allow for the development of such a register?
     2.	   What legislations may have to be put in place to allow such a development?
     3.	   What are the potential effects of the UIN on privacy and what are the ways to mitigate or avoid any
           adverse risks?

Figure 6	 A Possible Structure for an Uncoded UIN Showing Control Digit(s) and PIN


                XXXXX...XXXX                                        C               ****
                           10−15 Digits Serial or                 Hash or       Personal Identification
                             Random Number                      Control Digit       Number (PIN)

Source: World Bank.

30
For the case of Morocco, it is most likely that new regulation would be required to introduce the UIN as a legal
instrument for identification and to institutionalize its use in all of the government programs serving the public.

On the second point, a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) would have to be conducted systematically by the iden-
tity stakeholders in the country, including the National Identity Authority, the CNDP and all the other organizations
that use the register as a means to identity verification. In recent years, PIAs have become a standard element of
IT system planning. They are routinely conducted by government as well as private organizations early in the life
of a project in order to assess and minimize privacy risks to individuals and, where applicable, ensure compliance
with existing privacy regulations and laws. In Morocco, as mentioned in Section 3, the legal framework for privacy
is already well developed and hence a legal opinion would have to be sought to assess the type of constraints
that the existing laws would impose on the UIN and the UII. This would be part of the PIA exercise. There is a
body of best practices within the IT community that has emerged and a standard that is currently under develop-
ment for the methodology of PIA (ISO/IEC WB 29134, targeted for release at end of 2016).

Whatever approach is used, one should consider making the results of the PIA public so that people are assured
maximal transparency from the get-go. Privacy is often a public concern regarding identity programs and uni-
fied registers. Privacy, however, is only part of the picture. In general there is another dimension that is typically
encountered and that is the concern about the loss of control over their identity information once it is provided.
The public is more likely to endorse a unified national register if they are treated as stakeholders from the begin-
ning and their input and opinions are sought during the PIA and are taken into account in constructing the reme-
dial plan.



Modernizing the Civil Register
As discussed earlier, the civil register of Morocco contains valuable identity information that is foundational to
all other programs. It uses robust administrative procedures and controls for birth registration that prevent fraud
and ensure the traceability of each individual within the historical register. Today it contains what is estimated to
be 45 M birth records. Unfortunately that wealth of information is not easily accessible as it continues to exist in
paper ledgers only. To improve the access and capabilities of this register, there are some key actions to con-
sider. These include:

   1.	   Amend law 37–99 to cover an electronic civil register. Current law covers only paper-based registers;
   2.	   Modernize the registration offices with connected IT systems; and
   3.	   Develop a phased plan for modernizing the civil register which includes consolidation of the register cen-
         trally, electronic registration of new births, and a plan to digitize the historical records or at least a portion
         thereof focusing on the population segments underserved (0–6, and 6–18 years of age).

The DGCL and the Ministry of Interior recognize the need to digitize the historical civil register. Cost, time, and
lack of consensus are important challenges that need to be overcome before undertaking to execute this activity.
Recent experiences in Africa show that the digitization of birth records can cost between $0.25–0.30 per record
for central registers. As such, the cost of digitization of a large register could be significant, especially if the data
is decentralized and scattered around 2200 locations as is the case for the civil register in Morocco.

This activity, however, could be conducted in phases or through means other than full digitization. The options
include:

   1.	   Digitizing historical records going back a limited number of years (e.g., last 6 years);
   2.	   Indexing as opposed to digitizing the civil register records (going back to its beginning, nearly
         60 years); and
   3.	   Digitizing the full records of the civil register (going back to its beginning nearly 60 years).



                                                                                                                        31
Figure 7	 Creating a Searchable Digital Index for the Civil Register
                       Book Scanner                                                                            Transcription & Data Entry
                                                                         Masking Software




                                                                                                                       Identity Index


                                                                         JPG
                                                                                                          Name:                   Family Name:
                                                                        Image
                                                                                                          Date of Birth:          Place of Birth:

                       Volume of the
                       Civil Register



Source: World Bank.


The reason one may want to consider digitizing a limited number of years, such as 6 years for example, is that
the civil register may be the only identity record that contains information about children under the age of 6. Thus
in order to create a unified register it is inevitable that one may have to tap into at least 6 years back in order to
cover that segment of the population. This makes the digitization effort ten times less complex and consequently
may become more affordable.

Indexing records is another promising option. It involves taking digital photos of the pages of the register (using
the same setup as those used to digitize books into pdf format). The digital photos would then be masked in soft-
ware to show only a limited set of fields such as name, family name, date of birth, location of birth. These masked
pages would then be presented on a computer screen to a data entry person who would transcribe the visible
fields. The transcribed fields, which consist of searchable text, would be added to a database of the civil register
and a jpg image of the birth act for that identity would be associated with each identity record. The digital image
is not searchable but can be used to verify certain additional information that goes beyond the basic searchable
text fields. See Figure 7 for a schematic of this workflow.

Thus the digital civil register would be turned into a collection of digital photos along with a textual index of
names, with each name associated with the corresponding digital photo. The advantage of this method is the
speed by which it could be done and the reduced cost since there is less labor involved in indexing than in fully
digitizing.13



Anchoring Household Registers on Unified Individual Registers
Many social protection programs need registers of the household, since the targeting methods are based on
household socioeconomic data and not individual information. Registering households is clearly more complex
since, unlike individuals, households are more dynamic. There are more events that change the composition of
the household; individuals enter and exit a household more often than just birth and death, the only two events
that affect individual identity.

  Other methods could involve the transcription of all fields in the registration which could be costlier since there may be a lot of information documented and even
13

notations written by hand in the margins, which would require spending a significant amount of time per act to transcribe. In addition, OCR technology could be
considered. However the success of OCR for civil register digitization has been very limited primarily because of the significant variations in the writings across
time, pages, and volumes of the civil register.



32
It is useful to consider building up household registers using data from the unified individual identity register. In
other words, a household represents an association of multiple UINs

                                     Household # 5 {UIN1, UIN2, . . . , UINn}

The UINs that form a household are kept in a link table, which tracks the individual participation. Within this
framework there are two roles that can be played for a unique number within a household: It can either belong to
the head of a household, the spouse, or to an adult dependent. Allowing for up to two people to assume role of
head of a household (husband and wife couple), a household link table defining the relationship among a group
of UINs or people would look as follows:


                                                 Household #
                                       UIN1                              UIN2
                                                        UIN3
                                                        uIN1
                                                          …
                                                        uINn


Where UIN1 and UIN2 are the kept for heads of household (husband and wife), and uIN1…uINn are for designat-
ing children and other dependents, such as other family members or relatives that are supported by the head of
household. Other adults who are members of the household need to also be listed (e.g., UIN3) even though they
are not heads of household since the earnings of these individuals are part of the scoring for determining eligibil-
ity for social protection. Additionally, there are some rules that have to be imposed on the process of constituting
this table for each household and on checking its integrity against fraud. The principal ones are:

Registration: The registration of the household could be open ended, in the sense that, as long as one head of
household UIN is provided, any social assistance transfer that is dependent on the household size is not given
based on declarative statements but allocated based on the UINs that have been provided. This could be done
over time by the head of the household. Individuals are added to the household table by providing the evidential
link (extract of birth act, marriage certificate, etc.) as well as the UIN for each member. Individuals could exit a
household (upon marriage, divorce, death, etc.) which should not be a problem as long as the UIN of the indi-
vidual is used to track the changes in the link table that constitutes the family.

De-duplication: The UINs would be checked exhaustively against the link tables of all registered households.
Any match in the UIN would trigger an investigation to determine if the match is acceptable within the business
rules (e.g., a man with several wives registered under multiple households) or is an attempt at defrauding the
system by registering, for example, the children in multiple households.

Active or dynamic reconstitution: The challenge with household registers comes from the need to build in
mechanisms to update the composition of the household because of their more dynamic nature. This may require
that the registration has a limited duration of validity. With a permanent unified individual register, it becomes
easier to reconstitute the household register more frequently in time and hence could help in maintaining the
timeliness of the information that it contains. The concept of dynamic registration of households would then be
very similar to the use of a unified individual register to reconstitute the list of those eligible to vote, in what is
known as an Active Voter Registration process (see Box on Voter Registration: An Example of Dynamic Regis-
ters). Household registration and updates would be determined by the different programs and/or on demand for
registration (when households would like to participate and register in a particular social protection program).
This would be an example of a functional register that relies on a fundamental individual identity register to build
the households on a more dynamic basis. This can only be possible if the UIN is available for every individual.


                                                                                                                    33
Creating a Unique Digital Identity
International experience has demonstrated the importance not only of having a UIN infrastructure in the country
but also that of a true digital identity. Digital identity has become a prerequisite for empowering the daily transac-
tions of individuals online and via the rapidly growing mobile platforms. It is also a driver of economic develop-
ment as it allows private enterprises to offer new services based on the nationally issued digital identity.

Morocco has a national identity program that is very close to a digital or electronic identity but is not there yet. The
CNIE lacks certain critical ingredients that would allow it to be truly a digital identity. In order to turn an identity into
a digital identity, it needs to be associated with a set of digital assets given in Figure 8 (see World Bank Digital
Identity Toolkit). Notice that one of those assets is the UIN. Therefore a UIN is a prerequisite for digital identity.

A more thorough gap analysis needs to be performed to determine what elements need to be added to the CNIE
in order to upgrade it to a digital identity. From a superficial analysis, we would expect that the CNIE, in addition
to the UIN, would have to be supplemented by a digital signature, encryption and authentication infrastructure
before it can be turned into a useful digital identity.

Once the CNIE is recognized as a digital identity (in the sense that it possesses the ingredients necessary for it
to become a traceable unique electronic identity that can be accessed online as listed in Figure 8), a ubiquitous
authentication infrastructure could develop, which would use the CNIE not just as a badge but as a token against
which identity could be verified at all points of service. For example, through the use of specialized points-of-
service devices or mobile terminals (similar to the readers of credits cards at points of sale) equipped with single
finger readers, the CNIE could be securely read, and the templates on the card could be used to verify against
the live fingerprint of the bearer of the card. This is an example of strong authentication. It gives the assurance
that the person holding the card is the legitimate person. This type of strong authentication has been imple-
mented successfully in cash transfer and subsidy programs in many countries, including for example a program
in Mexico that has distributed 30,000 point-of-service terminals to verify the digital identity of individuals buying
subsidized goods from a social protection store.




Figure 8	 Digital Assets Associated with an Identity


         Biometric               Biometric               Unique ID                 Digital                 Digital
        Image Data               Templates                Number                  Certificate             Credential

                                                                               The public portion of
                                 Extracted from          Generated and
        Captured during                                                        encryption key pair,    The private portion
                               Biometric Image           assigned to the
          enrollment in                                                        packaged with some        of the key pair
                              Data using biometric       unique identity
        standard formats                                                        identifying and use    generated securely
                               coding algorithms              for life
                                                                                    information



                                                                                                        Stored in a trusted
      Archived in a secure     Stored in an active           May be                                    environment either in
        central repository.   database. Accessed       communication to                                 a central repository
      Accessed again only     on an ongoing basis      other government         Stored in the PKD       and/or on a secure
           if a need to       during de-duplication   agencies to use it for                              physical token
       re-template arises.        & verification.     client administration                                (smart card,
                                                                                                           mobile, etc.)



Source: World Bank report.



34
   Voter Registration: An Example of Dynamic Registers

   At the appropriate time in the election cycle, an election commission invites the population to register by a
   certain date in order to actively assert their eligibility to vote for an upcoming election. With a Unified Iden-
   tity Index or Register this process is very simple. According to pre-determined rules, an individual needs
   to provide proof that he/she is alive by showing up to voter registration centers to be verified against their
   registered identity in the UII; and if they are of the correct age for voting their name is added to the voter
   roster for that election only. While the unified individual register remains permanent, the voter register is
   reconstituted actively for each election cycle and hence is different for each election in order to account for
   people that have died, and for individuals that have attained voting age.

   The concept would be similar for household registration, where the individual register is used as the foun-
   dation of the household register and is reconstituted as members of the household go through milestones
   of their lives.



Upgrading the CNIE Enrollment Process
As explained in the previous section, the current biometric enrollment process of the CNIE is nonstandard and
does not conform to any of the internationally recognized best practice recommendations. It uses a two-step
process where four fingers are first captured (one at a time) on a live-scan reader, then the 10 fingers are inked
and subsequently the page is scanned in order to convert them into digital records.

A more efficient alternative to this procedure which would ensure high quality capture, avoid sequence errors
and could make it faster to perform the capture is the use of 10-print scanners whose price has now dropped to
about 30–50% of their original price when the CNIE was put in place five years ago. The 10-print scanners are
available from multiple vendors around the world and are subject to so called US FBI Appendix F certification. In
addition the software that drives them captures the fingerprint data subject to the ISO/IEC 19794 (Part 4), thus
ensuring an open standard which allows interoperability both with capture devices (can buy off-the-shelf products
that are interchangeable) as well as with any AFIS system or biometric matching system bought from any third
vendor conforming to open standards.



Improving Openness and Interoperability of the CNIE
In the course of our SPA data gathering we became aware that the CNIE uses a proprietary template for the
fingerprints stored on the card (in other words the mathematical code representing the fingerprint). As explained
in the previous section, this has many undesirable consequences since it is a form of a vendor lock-in. In best
practices, the template that is stored on the card should be the interoperable verification template, the so-called
Minex compliant template. The Minex template can be generated and matched using any certified algorithm and
not just the original vendor algorithm and hence mitigates against potential vendor control.

As a remedial action, the DGSN should consider the following:

   1.	   Issue the new cards with an open source Minex compliant template;
   2.	   Demand that the vendor provide SDKs for reading and matching the template that could be used by a third
         party without a need for a license in order to create products that use the CNIE for authentication; and
   3.	   During the period of time, support the legacy template—vendor proprietary—as well as the Minex tem-
         plate. This is easy to do since the authentication software could decide which matcher to use based on
         the header of the data or the date of issuance of the card.



                                                                                                                       35
Conducting a Technical Review of the Identity Assets
More generally, it is recommended that a technical review of all identity systems that could be relied on for the
unification process of the proposed UIR be conducted. The review should assess, subject to internationally
accepted standards, the following dimensions for each system (in particular CNIE, MASSAR, and RAMED):

     1.	   Conformance to international standards for open architecture;
     2.	   Cost efficiency (look for alternative lower cost suppliers for consumables and technology modules);
     3.	   Scalability;
     4.	   Reliability as IT systems;
     5.	   Information security: resilience against intruders and attacks; and
     6.	   Availability and its impact on the performance of the NIA.




36
1
Annex


                   Color-Coded Matrix
                   of Practices




Accessibility       Minority of popu-        Majority of popu-     Almost universal       Universal cover-
                    lation has an            lation covered;       coverage with          age (including
•	   Coverage
                    accepted ID; poor        acquiring ID less     isolated pockets       noncitizens); cost
•	   Access and     generally excluded;      costly but govern-    not covered; civil     of acquiring ID
     timeliness     acquiring ID costly      ment policy can       registry captures      minimal in relative
•	   Updating       in relative terms.       be onerous; civil     majority of births     terms. Good links
     and link       Civil registry unreli-   registry functional   in central regis-      with centralized civil
     with civil     able or inacces-         but coverage          tries with minimal     registry for updates;
     registries     sible with very low      is low, records       delays; obtaining      children issued
                    rates of birth and       decentralized and     ID not costly and      unique numbers
                    death certification.     with significant      proactive efforts to   in timely fashion
                                             delays after birth;   enroll in progress.    in full coordination
                                             passive enrollment                           between ID agency
                                             approach for ID.                             and civil registry.
Robustness          Official IDs are         Some control of ID    Modern tech-           All IDs de-
                    easily falsified and     issuance, qual-       nologies employed      duplicated and in
•	   Uniqueness
                    weak enforcement;        ity control and       for ID security        electronic format;
•	   Security       government and           database main-        features; Basic        very difficult to
•	   Authentica-    donor programs           tenance. Mostly       authentication         produce fraudulent
     tion           use proprietary          paper based           processes.             IDs. Good authen-
                    ID to fill gap. No       recordkeeping.                               tication standards
                    institutional capac-                                                  applied.
                    ity to monitor ID
                    database.
Integration         Little or no data-       A few major pro-      Some private and       Most private and
                    base linkages            grams use a com-      public transac-        public transac-
•	   Ubiquity
                    across programs;         mon identification    tions can be done      tions can be done
•	   Interoper-     high dependence          platform. Benefits    with single ID;        with single ID at
     ability        on local knowledge       tied to particular    most program MIS       national level.
•	   Common         (e.g., community)        locale and not        linked; authenti-      Same advanced
     transaction    and references for       portable.             cation standards       authentication stan-
     standards      verifying identity.                            exist but are weak     dards used across
                                                                   and vary across        programs. Vast
                                                                   programs.              majority of govern-
                                                                                          ment MIS can be
                                                                                          linked by unique
                                                                                          ID or through other
                                                                                          mechanism.
                                                                                                   (continued)

                                                                                                              37
Continued



 Legal framework/   Ad hoc or non-      Minimal protocols    Government             Government
 Personal data      existent mecha-     in place for per-    agency designated      agency designated
 protection         nisms for privacy   sonal data protec-   as responsible but     as responsible and
                    and data access.    tion and privacy.    lacking resources      well resourced,
                                        Government           for implementa-        good capacity.
                                        agency designated    tion and limited       Full compliance
                                        as responsible.      capacity. Most of      with internationally
                                                             the internationally    accepted personal
                                                             accepted personal      data protection
                                                             data protection        guidelines.
                                                             standards and pro-
                                                             tocols are followed;
                                                             mostly digital
                                                             information on indi-
                                                             vidual records.




38
2
Annex


                  Methodology and Raw Data
                  Collected

The assessment pilot was conducted based on an instrument including a questionnaire with structured and
open-ended questions and supplemented by in-depth interviews. The instrument includes subsection focusing
on different dimensions of the identification and civil registration process ranging from the use of technology to
legal and regulatory issues. These issues are described along with the rationale for the assessment criteria in
the “What Matters” section of the identification module (which, in turn, is the first of a planned series of ‘delivery
modules’).

The tool was used in Morocco June 23–28, 2014. The team that visited the country included Joseph J. Atick
(Identity Counsel International, consultant to World Bank), Diego Angel-Urdinola, Dorothée Chen, and Fatima
El Kadiri (from the World Bank Morocco office), and Ariel Pino (from ILO) and was supported by Robert Palacios
(TTL for SPA assessment) from the World Bank office in Washington DC.

   •	   The assessment involved consultations with government officials, including a series of meetings with
        the main institution responsible for the national ID and civil registry. These included the MAGG, DSIC
        of the Ministry of Interior, DGCL (civil register), Division of DSIC in charge of Passport, DGSN for the
        CNIE, CNDP, ANAM and Division of DSIC in charge of RAMED, the MENFP for MASSAR, and CNSS.
   •	   There were also several presentations to large groups of stakeholders which covered a wide array of
        policy and technical matters and provided for an exchange of information over and above what was
        collected through the questionnaire.
   •	   Stocktaking and review of published literature, reports, guidelines and assessments. The team col-
        lected and analyzed publications and reports produced by many agencies, notably the civil register,
        the CNDP and DGSN. In preparing this report many websites operated by the many agencies in
        Morocco were accessed. Most notably:
        •	   http://www.ramed.ma
        •	   http://www.cnie.ma
        •	   http://www.cnss.ma
        •	   http://www.passport.ma
        •	   http://www.hcp.ma
        •	   https://www.watiqa.ma/
        •	   http://www.service-public.ma/
        •	   http://www.egov.ma/fr
        •	   http://www.maroc.ma/fr
        •	   http://www.pncl.gov.ma/fr/Pages/default.aspx




                                                                                                                   39
Background Information

  1.	   Name of country                                  Morocco
  2.	   Date survey was filled out                       June 23–27, 2014
  3.	   Name of person filling out survey                Joseph J. Atick
                                                         Except for CNSS and RAMED where it is Ariel Pino
  4.	   Employer of agency with whom associated          Joseph J. Atick, Identity Counsel International—
                                                         Consulting partner to World Bank
                                                         Ariel Pino, ILO
  5.	   Counterpart government agency                    Ministry of Interior



Part I: National Level Civil Registration and Identification Ecosystem
Civil Registry

  6.	   What government entity is responsible for          The DGCL (Direction generale des collectivités
        administering the civil registration system?       locales) which is a directorate within the Ministry
        a.	   Ministry of Interior                         of Interior. The DGCL is responsible for coordi-
                                                           nating the affairs of the local districts or com-
        b.	   National ID agency                           munes in the country. Within the DGCL there is
        c.	   Specialized, autonomous agency (name)        the office of civil registration, which is made up
        d.	   Other, please specify ________________       of a small central staff charged with coordinating
                                                           the civil registration activities of a large distrib-
                                                           uted number of civil registration offices attached
                                                           to the local districts where the actual civil regis-
                                                           tration takes place.
  7.	   Does the responsible agency (if not the same       No
        as the ID agency above) have formal coopera-
        tion arrangements with other agencies or orga-
        nizations to improve inclusion and access to
        registration and identification documents?
        a.	   Yes, with other government agencies
        b.	   Yes, with the private sector
        c.	   Yes, with international agencies and
              donors
        d.	   Yes, with nongovernmental organizations
        e.	   Yes, with other organizations, please
              specify _________________________
        f.	   No
  8.	   How is the national level ID system linked to      Births are not communicated to the national ID
        birth and death registries?                        but an extract of the birth registration act or a full
        a.	   It is not                                    copy of the act pertaining to the concerned indi-
                                                           vidual is required for enrollment in the national
        b.	   Births and deaths are reported to the        ID or for that matter in many functional identity
              agency intermittently and updated            programs.
        c.	   Birth registration is regularly communi-
              cated to the ID agency

40
       d.	   Death registration is regularly communi-
             cated to the ID agency
       e.	   Birth registration is directly linked to the
             issuance of a new national level ID
 9.	   What is the estimated percentage of births that        Not known
       take place in medical facilities (i.e. institutional
       births)?
10.	   What is the estimated percentage of actual             86.5% (according to official and published gov-
       births that are registered (i.e. issued birth          ernment statistics in 2001). ~95% according to
       certificates)?                                         unofficial government estimates to update the
                                                              previous 2001 figure.
11.	   How long is the process from the time of birth         The law requires that new births be registered
       to the issuance of a birth certificate (number of      within 30 days of birth. Beyond 30 days it pro-
       days)?                                                 vides for a penalty and for registration via a
                                                              court declarative judgment. Thus adults that
                                                              have not been registered at birth can do so
                                                              following a legal procedure which includes
                                                              declaring under oath in the competent court the
                                                              specifics related to their birth, and the issuance
                                                              of a declarative judgment by the presiding judge.
                                                              This legal document can then be used by the
                                                              civil register officer to insert the birth into the
                                                              civil register records. The adult is inserted into
                                                              the volume for the current year and not in the
                                                              year of birth (since that is closed at the end of
                                                              each year following the administrative controls).
12.	   Are there specific population groups that              No
       encounter obstacles to obtaining a birth
       certificate?
       a.	   Yes, indigenous people
       b.	   Yes, migrants and/or nomadic people
       c.	   Poor people
       d.	   Women
       e.	   Other, please specify ________
13.	   Are birth registrations digitized, stored electron-    No
       ically? Yes/no
14.	   Is birth registration information centralized at       No
       the national level? Yes/no
15.	   Is there national legislation that makes the reg-      Yes. The civil registration law is called Law
       istration of births and deaths mandatory? Yes/         No. 37.99 promulgated by Royal Decree (Dahir)
       no                                                     1-02-239 of 2002 and further clarified by Execu-
                                                              tive Order 2-99-665 of 2002. The law mandates
                                                              birth and death registration for everyone on the
                                                                                                      (continued)




                                                                                                                 41
Civil Registry  Continued

                                                                Moroccan territories and for Moroccans abroad,
                                                                and defines in detail the processes that have to
                                                                be followed to perform them. It must be noted
                                                                that the law is specifically written for a paper-
                                                                based registration process and not electronic
                                                                registration.
 16.	   Are there regulations or norms that oblige hos-         No. Hospitals and clinics do not bear the respon-
        pitals and clinics to report births and deaths to       sibility to declare births. It is the family that is
        the Civil Registration authority in a prespecified      responsible. The hospitals and clinics provide
        period of time? Yes/no                                  what is called an attestation or testament to the
                                                                birth which is used to perform the declaration
                                                                and subsequent registration by the family. On
                                                                the other hand should a death occur in a hospi-
                                                                tal or any public establishment such as clinics,
                                                                jails or other institutions then they do bear the
                                                                responsibility of reporting the death to the civil
                                                                registration officer.
 17.	   What is the total number of offices that handle         ~2200 offices distributed throughout the country.
        civil registry functions across the country includ-     These break down into two categories:
        ing the decentralized or local offices?
                                                                a.	 Principal offices attached to the offices of the
                                                                    municipalities/communes or administrative
                                                                    districts;
                                                                b.	 Subsidiary offices in areas where the principal
                                                                    offices are insufficient to cover the demand.
                                                                In addition the 69 diplomatic bureaus overseas
                                                                perform the civil registration function.
 18.	   What percentage of these offices are estimated          NOT KNOWN. Majority do not possess con-
        to have the following infrastructure capacity?          nected information systems. The responsibil-
        a.	   Photocopiers                                      ity to equip these centers lies in the hands of
                                                                the municipal councils of the communities that
        b.	   Telephone                                         use their budgets with discretion to decide on
        c.	   Computers                                         their priorities. Thus the offices range from well
        d.	   Electronic forms                                  equipped modern to very primitive facilities.

        e.	   Capacity to transmit data by internet 	
 19.	   Is there a mechanism for working with commu-            Yes. Education, awareness and campaigns to
        nities and community leaders for registration of        explain to the population that registration of births
        noninstitutional births? Yes/no                         is the first step towards admission into society.
 20.	   How is documentation about births and deaths            Each office of the civil registration organization
        from local and regional offices transferred to a        has a register, which is a ledger with serially
        central, national data repository?                      numbered pages in which entries are made by
        a.	   On-line transfer in real time                     hand. There is one register for births and another
                                                                for deaths. They are produced in two copies. At
        b.	   Electronic transfer periodically                  the end of the calendar year, one copy remains in
        c.	   Physical files     or   copies     periodically   the local office and the other is sent to the local
              transferred                                       public prosecutor’s office (Procureur du Roi) for
        d.	   Documentation is not transferred and              verification and control. As a consequence there
              remains at the local agency                       is no centralization of records.


42
21.	   Is there a specified time frame for this transfer        No transfer is done.
       to occur?
       a.	   n/a
       b.	   No
       c.	   Yes, the time frame is _________________
22.	   Can individuals request birth and death certifi-         No. They must request them from the district
       cates in any civil registry office in the country        office where the event took place. Alternatively
       independent of where the original registration           the individual can present the family booklet if
       took place? Yes/no                                       available (or an expired copy of birth record from
                                                                the original district) to any civil register office
                                                                which could issue a certified extract of birth
                                                                record.
23.	   How long does it typically take to obtain a birth        There is no birth certificate. A citizen when
       certificate?                                             required to prove their birth has to go to the
                                                                district office and obtain a copy of their birth
                                                                record. The copy is certified as a true copy. The
                                                                copy is retained by the agencies that required
                                                                the proof of birth. It is not returned to the citi-
                                                                zen. Thus each time a proof of birth is required
                                                                a copy needs to be obtained. Typically the copy
                                                                takes one day to obtain and costs 2 Dirhams in
                                                                stamps (about 25 cents). Alternatively the family
                                                                booklet could be used if available. In 2012, a new
                                                                egovernment service was put in place to allow
                                                                individuals who know their birth reference num-
                                                                bers to order copies of their birth registration act
                                                                online. This service costs about 10 times more
                                                                than the normal procedure.
24.	   Are there mobile units or kiosks that allow indi-        No
       viduals to obtain these certificates without hav-
       ing to visit civil registry offices? Yes/no
25.	   How much does it cost for an individual to               2 Dirhams (considered an insignificant cost)
       obtain a birth certificate at a civil registry office?
26.	   In the case of an individual that does not have          There is a well-defined process, where the indi-
       a birth certificate but wishes to apply for a            vidual is required to obtain declarative judgment
       national ID, what is the process?                        of court which may or may not require witnesses
       a.	   There is no process defined or in place            and affidavits from local community leaders. See
                                                                response to question 16 above.
       b.	   Individual must obtain a birth certificate first
             by documenting his/her identity through
             multiple witnesses with notarization or
             some other legal certification process
       c.	   Individual must obtain birth certificate
             first documenting his/her identity through
             witnesses recognized by the national ID
             agency without further legal process
                                                                                                         (continued)




                                                                                                                  43
Civil Registry  Continued

        d.	   Individuals can obtain both the birth cer-
              tificate and national ID through the same
              enrollment process using witnesses
        e.	   Other, please specify ________________
              ______________________
 27.	   What is the annual budget for civil registration    Not disclosed.
        (latest year available)?
 28.	   Are those registered as dead removed or deac-       Deactivated. But the communication of the
        tivated from the national ID database? Yes/no       deaths to the national ID is not reliable. Also
                                                            it is estimated that only 50% of the deaths are
                                                            communicated.
 Additional Questions Not in Original Questionnaire (additional questions are unnumbered in order to
 maintain original numbering)
 What is the cumulative number of records in the civil      Estimated at 45 million records.
 register for births?
 How many births occur annually?                            They registered 660,000 per year which is sup-
                                                            posed to represent 95% of all births.
 How many deaths occur annually?                            Currently they register about 220,000 deaths per
                                                            year which is supposed to represent however
                                                            about 5% of all deaths.
 What are the origins of the civil registration system in   The first system of civil registration was put in
 the country?                                               place in 1915 which was inspired by the French
                                                            civil registration code. It was applicable to
                                                            French and foreign nationals only present in
                                                            Morocco.
                                                            The system began to accept on a limited basis
                                                            registration of Moroccan births and deaths start-
                                                            ing in 1931. But registration of Moroccans was
                                                            optional and not mandated by the law. So this
                                                            register remained primarily a foreign register.
                                                            In 1950 a separate full-fledged civil register for
                                                            Moroccans was put in place and registration
                                                            became mandatory for those requiring social
                                                            assistance.
                                                            In 1959 the two registers were unified but little
                                                            change has really taken place in terms of regula-
                                                            tions requiring obligatory registration.
                                                            Only in 2003 with the adoption of the new law
                                                            37-99, did Morocco finally have a civil registra-
                                                            tion legal framework that would enable a robust
                                                            civil registration system to emerge. From then
                                                            on, declarations became obligatory. It also
                                                            defined guidelines as to acceptable names and
                                                            names for abandoned children. It simplified the
                                                            procedures for rectification of the civil registra-
                                                            tion in cases where a registration was not done
                                                            at birth.
44
 What identifying documents are issued by the offices        While there is no birth certificate as such, the
 of the civil registration?                                  offices of the civil registration are able to pro-
                                                             duce the following documentation:
                                                              1.	   An official copy of the birth Act—two page
                                                                    copy of the full act registering the birth
                                                              2.	   An extract of birth registration act—an
                                                                    abridged one page document.
                                                              3.	   Family booklet given to the head of a fam-
                                                                    ily documenting the information available in
                                                                    the civil register about all members of his
                                                                    family.

National ID

 29.	   Does a nationally issued ID exist? Yes/no (If        Yes
        ‘no’, skip to question 60)
                                                             A national identity card existed since the late
                                                             1970s. It was instituted under law 1-73-560.
                                                             This identity card which was called the CIN was
                                                             replaced by an electronic ID card called the
                                                             CNIE. The CNIE for the most part has replaced
                                                             the CIN.
 30.	   What is the title of the legislation that estab-     Law 35-06 which went into effect in 2007
        lishes and defines this form of identification and
        the year that it was approved? _____________
 31.	   Is it intended to cover                              Covers citizens. Mandatory for all adult citizens
        a.	   All residents                                  18 years and above.

        b.	   All citizens                                   In principle the same card (different color) cov-
                                                             ers residents but its adoption by residents has
        c.	   All adult citizens or voters
                                                             not been significant.
        d.	   Other, please specify
              ___________________
 32.	   What is the name of the most prevalent ID            CNIE (Carte Nationale d’Identité Electronique)
        card?
 33.	   Do other national level IDs exist? If so, please     There is a very large number of other national ID
        specify.                                             programs which cover different segments of the
        a.	   Tax identifier                                 population. For the most part these are func-
                                                             tional programs. They include:
        b.	   Voter ID
                                                             Tax identifier—limited coverage
        c.	   Social security number
        d.	   Other, specify _______________                 Social security number—see section on CNSS

        e.	   There is only one national level ID            MASSAR
                                                             RAMED
                                                                                                       (continued)




                                                                                                                  45
National ID  Continued
 34.	 What percentage of the population is estimated          More than 20 M cards have been issued thus far.
        to have the most prevalent ID listed above?           Majority has been issued over the last 2–3 years.
                                                              It was emphasized by officials from the DGSN
                                                              that they believe they have about 20 M unique
                                                              and living individuals in the database for the
                                                              CNIE out of an adult (> 18 years) population of
                                                              26–28 M.
                                                              This represents more than 75% of the adult
                                                              population.
                                                              There is doubt about this number since it does
                                                              not take into account the duplicates. We under-
                                                              stand the duplicates were not a significant num-
                                                              ber before, but they are becoming significant
                                                              now. The DGSN has recently ordered another
                                                              5 M cards to cover its short-term needs.
 35.	   When was this ID, in its current form, first          2009
        issued?
 36.	   What is the estimated number of undocumented          Undeclared
        or illegal residents or noncitizen refugees?

Issuing Agency

 37.	   What is the name of the agency that is           The identity card is issued by the DGSN—Direction
        responsible for issuing this ID?                 generale de sureté nationale—which is essentially
                                                         the national police.
 38.	   Is this an independent agency (ie. not part of   It is not. It is part of the Sureté Nationale, which is
        another agency or ministry)?                     loosely under the Ministry of Interior.
 39.	   If no, to what Ministry or other government      Ministry of Interior
        entity does it report?
 40.	   What is the annual budget of this entity?        Undeclared
 41.	   How many branch offices does it have?            120 offices throughout the country
 42.	   How many employees/staff?                        Undeclared

Information Captured for the ID and Other Characteristics of the ID

 43.	   What information is captured in the ID data-     •	    Family name, given name: in Arabic and
        base for those enrolled?                               Latin characters
        a.	   Name                                       •	    Date of birth
        b.	   Date of birth                              •	    Place of birth in Arabic and Latin characters
        c.	   Sex                                        •	    Sex
        d.	   Address                                    •	    Address
        e.	   Ethnicity                                  •	    Name of father and mother
        f.	   Religion




46
       g.	   Political affiliation                      •	    Optional: Name of husband, or indication if
       h.	   Information on parents or other family           woman or man is widowed
             members                                    •	    Reference no. of civil register
       i.	   Other, please specify __________
44.	   Is a photo captured at the time of enrollment?   No.
       a.	   Yes                                        Applicant is supposed to supply 4 photos that con-
       b.	   No                                         form to international standards.
       c.	   Other
45.	   What biometric information, if any, is cap-      •	    4 fingers (flat) are captured on live scan
       tured at enrollment?                                   device one at a time
       a.	   None                                       •	    10 fingers (rolled validate) are captured via
       b.	   Fingerprints                                     ink then scanned.

       c.	   Iris                                       •	    The 4 live scan fingers are used to do a
                                                              quick check on duplicates in the database
       d.	   Digital facial image
       e.	   Other, please specify ____________
                                                        •	    The 10 inked and scanned fingers are used
                                                              for offline validation
                                                        •	    Note: It is not clear why they have opted
                                                              for this type of nonstandard biometric
                                                              enrollment process. One theory is that they
                                                              wanted 10 print fingers rolled for criminal
                                                              applications down the line.
46.	   Are biometrics used to ensure that new ID        Yes. An AFIS is used to check the fingerprints
       numbers are not issued for people already        against the cumulative database of all fingers
       in the database (i.e. deduplication)? Yes/no     captured.
47.	   How many IDs were issued last year?              Undeclared. But estimated at around 5 M
48.	   How many IDs have been issued to date            More than 20 M
       (cumulative figure)?
49.	   What proportion of these are deduplicated?       100%
50.	   How many IDs are estimated to be held by         Since the majority of the population has received
       individuals today (IDs issued net of deceased    its CNIE card in the last few years, nearly 20 M
       ID holders)?                                     cards are in the hands of living individuals accord-
                                                        ing to official estimates. The total database of indi-
                                                        viduals registered at the DGSN as a result of the
                                                        old CIN and the new CNIE registration is 28 M but
                                                        only 20 M have been issued CNIE cards.
                                                        They estimate 5 M more cards to be issued in the
                                                        next 12–18 months. It also includes duplicates
                                                        which are becoming more significant.
                                                                                                    (continued)




                                                                                                              47
Information Captured for the ID and Other Characteristics of the ID  Continued

 51.	   What kind of ID is issued?                       Contactless smart card
        a.	   None
        b.	   Paper
        c.	   Bar card
        d.	   Mag strip
        e.	   Smart card
 52.	   What information is printed on the face of the   Recto:
        card?
                                                         •	   Family name, given name: in Arabic and
        a.	   ID number                                       Latin characters
        b.	   Name                                       •	   Date of birth
        c.	   Address                                    •	   Place of birth in Arabic and Latin characters
        d.	   Age                                        •	   Date of expiration of card
        e.	   Sex                                        •	   The first letter of family and last name in
        f.	   Ethnicity                                       Latin characters
        g.	   Political affiliation                      •	   Photograph in color
        h.	   Religion                                   •	   National identity number or the No. CNIE
        i.	   Other, specify __________                  •	   The same photo in black and white and
                                                              reduced size
                                                         •	   The authority that issued it with signature
                                                         Verso:

                                                         •	   No. CNIE
                                                         •	   Date of expiration of card
                                                         •	   Sex
                                                         •	   Address
                                                         •	   Name of father and mother
                                                         •	   Optional: Name of husband, or indication if
                                                              woman or man is widowed
                                                         •	   Reference no. of civil register
                                                         •	   2D bar code
 53.	   What information is stored on the card that is   In the 2D bar code:
        not visible but machine-readable?
                                                         •	   No. CNIE
        a.	   ID number
                                                         •	   Sex
        b.	   Name
                                                         •	   Family name, given name: in Arabic and
        c.	   Address                                         Latin characters
        d.	   Age                                        •	   Date and place of birth in Arabic and Latin
        e.	   Sex                                             characters
        f.	   Ethnicity                                  •	   Date of expiration of card
        g.	   Political affiliation
        h.	   Religion
        i.	   Other, specify __________


48
                                                         In the electronic chip:

                                                         •	    No. CNIE
                                                         •	    The photograph of card holder
                                                         •	    Sex
                                                         •	    Family name, given name: in Arabic and
                                                               Latin characters
                                                         •	    Name of father and mother in Latin
                                                               characters
                                                         •	    Date of birth
                                                         •	    Place of birth in Latin characters
                                                         •	    Reference no. of civil register
                                                         •	    Address in Latin characters
                                                         •	    Date of expiration of card
                                                         •	    The proprietary templates for two fingers
                                                               (best two out of four are chosen; cogent
                                                               template is used)
54.	   Are biometrics stored on the card? Yes/no         Yes. Face image. Two fingerprint templates.
55.	   What external security features are on the        Hologram, microprinting, UV printing.
       card?
       a.	   Holograms
       b.	   Microprinting
       c.	   UV printing
       d.	   Other, specify __________
56.	   How many digits are in the ID number?             10 digits
57.	   Is there ‘logic’ in the number? Yes/no            Two alpha for issuing office
                                                         6 digits serial number (no code)
                                                         2 digit check sum
58.	   How often must the ID be replaced?                Once every 10 years
       a.	   Never
       b.	   Less than every five years
       c.	   More than every five years
59.	   How much does the ID cost to produce and          6.25 euros
       issue?
60.	   How much is the individual enrolled charged       75 Dirhams
       for this ID?
61.	   Is there a cost to the individual for replacing   Yes
       a lost or stolen ID? Yes/no
62.	   If so, what is the cost of replacement to the     75 Dirhams (need to check)
       individual?
                                                                                                    (continued)




                                                                                                             49
Information Captured for the ID and Other Characteristics of the ID  Continued

 63.	   What is the estimated number of days that        Normally 5–10 days in all cases including transport
        it takes to issue a new card in the following    of card
        cases:
        a.	   New ID
        b.	   Renewal
        c.	   Lost or stole
 64.	   What documents are required to apply for         Certificate of residence
        this ID?                                         Copy of the relevant pages of the family booklet
        a.	   None, issued at birth along with birth     which should also be presented for examination
              certificate                                Or
        b.	   Birth certificate                          Copy of the civil registration of birth
        c.	   Community verification/affidavit
                                                         Or
        d.	   Verification of another individual or
                                                         An extract of the birth register
              individuals
        e.	   Other __________                           Copies should have been done within last three
                                                         months
 65.	   What is the age requirement for obtaining        Age considered as an adult
        this ID?
        a.	   None
        b.	   Voting age
        c.	   Age considered as an adult
        d.	   Other, specify __________
 66.	   If yes, what age?                                18 years
 67.	   Are there particular categories of the popula-   No
        tion that face geographic, cultural, economic
        or legal barriers that prevent them from
        obtaining this ID?
        a.	   Yes, migrants
        b.	   Yes, indigenous people
        c.	   Yes, women
        d.	   Yes, other groups, specify
        e.	   No
 68.	   Is there a mechanism for changing informa-       Yes under change of address, change of name,
        tion on the ID? Yes/no                           correction of erroneous information. New card is
                                                         issued
 69.	   How many requests for such changes are           No accurate information was provided.
        processed annually?




50
Transactional Uses of the ID

 70.	   Is the national level ID used commonly for      The National ID in Morocco replaces four
        any of the following purposes?                  documents
        a.	    Opening a bank account                   •	   Birth certificate
        b.	    Obtaining credit or loans                •	   Certificate of residence
        c.	    Reporting to the tax authority           •	   Attestation of liveness
        d.	    Obtaining marriage certificate           •	   Certificate of nationality
        e.	    Obtaining private health insurance       It is used and requested in almost every aspect of
         f.	   Enrolling in social insurance programs   transactional life in Morocco, from opening up a
                                                        bank account to obtaining a passport to getting a
        g.	    Qualifying for cash transfers, food or
                                                        driver’s license. The list includes every application
               other safety net programs
                                                        that requires identification.
        h.	    Getting a cell phone account
                                                        However it is important to emphasize that the
         i.	   Obtaining a passport                     CNIE is used as a badge. It is not used as an
         j.	   Getting a driver’s license               electronic credential that can be integrated online
        k.	    Voting                                   or for mobile transaction. It is simply requested
                                                        and used upon presentation and inspection by an
         l.	   Registering a vehicle
                                                        agent of the requesting agency or organization.
        m.	    Purchasing property                      It is used both for government as well as private
        n.	    Other, specify __________                applications.

 71.	   In which of these databases would the           Social insurance programs
        national, personal identification number be
                                                        Income tax records
        included?
        a.	    Social insurance programs                Vehicle registration

        b.	    Social assistance programs               Driver’s license
        c.	    Income tax records                       Voter registration rolls
        d.	    Vehicle registration                     Bank records
        e.	    Driver’s license                         Criminal records
         f.	   Voter registration rolls
                                                        Passport records
        g.	    Credit rating agency records
                                                        Formal employment records
        h.	    Bank records
                                                        Others have not been verified.
         i.	   Utility billing records
         j.	   Criminal records
        k.	    Passport records
         l.	   Formal employment records
        m.	    Private insurance records
        n.	    Other, specify __________




                                                                                                              51
Interagency Information Flows and Interoperability

 72.	   Does the ID agency use IDs to help other       Yes, but for one application only. The electronic
        government entities to cross-check data-       passport is totally dependent on the CNIE records.
        bases? Yes/no                                  The bureau of passports has established a link into
                                                       the DGSN which allows them to verify name, family
                                                       name, date of birth, and nationality of an applicant
                                                       by simply submitting their CNIE number along with
                                                       the minimum passport application information.
                                                       An electronic verification is conducted and a
                                                       response is sent back to the passport bureau. Fin-
                                                       gerprints and photo are transmitted from the CNIE
                                                       database for the personalization of the electronic
                                                       passport.
                                                       In other words, one cannot have an electronic
                                                       passport without first having a CNIE. This covers
                                                       the entire traveling adult population.
                                                       For children above the age of 12 that need a pass-
                                                       port they are required to enroll as if applying for
                                                       the CNIE but they would not be required to have
                                                       possession of the smart card. Only a CNIE no. is
                                                       issued to them printed on a paper which is then
                                                       subsequently used by the passport bureau to verify
                                                       their identity.
                                                       The significance of the age of 12 is that it is the
                                                       minimum age that by a policy, fingerprints (like
                                                       in Europe) could be captured and de-duplicated
                                                       reliably.


 73.	   If yes, what kind of cross-checking is done?   The CNIE is presented for visual inspection and
        a.	   Social insurance and social assistance   verification of biographic data. Only the elec-
                                                       tronic passport uses the CNIE database for
        b.	   Social assistance and income tax data
                                                       cross-checking.
        c.	   Social insurance and income tax data
        d.	   Property/assets and income tax data
        e.	   Public employment status
        f.	   Other, specify __________
 74.	   How many government agencies issue their       Cards are issued for the Social Security, driver’s
        own forms of ID cards?                         license, RAMED, and other programs but they are
        a.	   1                                        not considered as a form of ID. The CNIE is really
                                                       the only form of ID that exists in the country (and
        b.	   2                                        its predecessor the CIN).
        c.	   3–5
        d.	   6–10
        e.	   10+
 75.	   Are there formal coordination mechanisms       Only between the passport bureau and the CNIE
        between government ID card issuers?
        Yes/no


52
 76.	   Are there standards for data formats and           No. Each organization has its own data structures.
        fields that apply across the major govern-
        ment databases?
        a.	   Yes, but only for a subset of govern-
              ment agencies/programs
        b.	   Yes, and widely applied
        c.	   No
 77.	   Are there common ID authentication stan-           No
        dards for transactions in different programs?
        a.	   Yes, for most transactions there is a
              single authentication mechanism
        b.	   Yes, for some transactions there is sin-
              gle authentication mechanism
        c.	   No
 78.	   How many of the major government pro-              Currently zero
        grams require some form of electronic
        authentication using this ID?
        a.	   1
        b.	   2
        c.	   3
        d.	   4
        e.	   5 or more
 79.	   How many government programs require               Currently zero
        biometric verification of identity using this ID
        in order to receive a benefit?
        a.	   1
        b.	   2
        c.	   3
        d.	   4
        e.	   5 or more
 80.	   Are there any private transactions that use        Currently no
        this ID to electronically verify identity at the
        point of the transaction? Yes/no

Personal Data Protection

 81.	   Are there explicit rules and regulations as        There is a law 09-08 which provides legal frame-
        to how government agencies can link their          work for the protection of data and personal infor-
        databases using the national ID? Yes/no            mation. Interpretation of this law by the CNDP or
                                                           the Commission national de contrôle de la protec-
                                                           tion des données à caractère personnel, would
                                                           impact how government agencies can link their
                                                           databases.
                                                                                                     (continued)



                                                                                                                 53
Personal Data Protection  Continued

 82.	   Is there an explicit list of government agen-    There is no specification of who can access. Each
        cies that are allowed to access the national     agency accesses its own information and with lim-
        level ID database? Yes/no                        ited exception (the passport) they do not currently
                                                         share.
 83.	   Is there a standard format for MOUs between      No
        the ID issuing agency and other government
        agencies? Yes/no
 84.	   Is there legislation on privacy or protection    Yes. The legal framework is provided from three
        of personal data that delimits the access        sources
        and use of data in the national ID database?
        Yes/no
                                                         •	   Law 09-08 of 2009
                                                         •	   Article 24 of the Moroccan Constitution of
                                                              2011
                                                         •	   Preamble to the Constitution
                                                         In general, there seems to be a heightened sensitiv-
                                                         ity about privacy and this is reflected in the legal
                                                         framework as well as the activities and heightened
                                                         profile of the CDNP.
                                                         One area of concern is the fact that national
                                                         security is exempted from the application of the
                                                         privacy and data protection laws. The exemption
                                                         is very vague. Since the CNIE is issued and man-
                                                         aged by the Sureté Nationale, some would argue
                                                         that none of these provisions are applicable to the
                                                         national ID.
 85.	   Has a “privacy impact assessment” ever           No
        been conducted? Yes/no
 86.	   Does the legislation establishing the national   No. But Article 5 of the DAHIR which promulgates
        level ID clearly establish protection of pri-    the 35-06 law establishing the CNIE limits under
        vacy of data? Yes/no                             penalty of law access to information in the smart
                                                         card or 2D bar code to only government and
                                                         their agents concerned with national security or
                                                         administration.
 87.	   If yes to 85, are there ambiguities or broad     While no formal privacy impact assessment was
        exceptions to this protection that could be      made, a quick review of the body of law shows that
        abused? Yes/no                                   there are very ambiguous exceptions for national
                                                         security that could be exploited.
 88.	   Is the public reporting of exceptional cases     It is published in the body of the law.
        of accessing data (e.g., based on national
        security threats) required? Yes/no
 89.	   Is there a supervisory body within govern-       Yes. The CNDP
        ment responsible for monitoring compli-
        ance with privacy and data protection rules?
        Yes/no




54
 90.	   Are the penalties for violation of the privacy     Penalties have not yet been applied or specified.
        rules clearly established and appropriate?         The CNDP has 7 people working and has only been
        Yes/no                                             in operation for two years.
 91.	   Is the process for grievance redressal for         The CNDP is working on a process for grievance
        individuals who claim their privacy was vio-       and is encouraging the public in the meantime
        lated clear? Yes/no                                to come forward on an adhoc basis for help with
                                                           redress. To date, no case has been dealt with.
 92.	   Is the information that must be provided for       In our opinion the information is not a minimum
        obtaining the national level ID the minimum        set. What is being requested goes beyond the core
        required for the purposes of this ID? Yes/no       minimum.

Strategic Issues

 93.	   Is there a national strategy for identification?   No
        Yes/no
 94.	   Is there a coordination body or steering           No
        committee involving different government
        agencies and stakeholders that focuses
        on improving coordination of identification
        across sectors and programs? Yes/no
 95.	   If yes, which of the following are objectives      Does not exist
        of this strategy?
        a.	   Reduce coverage gaps
        b.	   An integrated national identification
              system
        c.	   Establish a unified system of civil regis-
              tration and identification
        d.	   Reduce leakages in social protection
              programs
        e.	   Reduce exclusion from social protec-
              tion programs
        f.	   Ensure identification for KYC for finan-
              cial inclusion
        g.	   Security and border control
        h.	   Other, specify __________
 96.	   Are there budgetary incentives in place            No
        based on results in terms of the coverage
        of civil registration and identification? Yes/no
 97.	   Is there a national strategy for communica-        Yes. Through brochures and a webportal that
        tion and awareness for the national level ID?      explains to the public in Arabic and French the
        Yes/no                                             requirements and benefits of the CNIE and pres-
                                                           ents the laws and decrees that impact it.
                                                                                                   (continued)




                                                                                                             55
Strategic Issues  Continued

 98.	   What approach or approaches are taken for        NA
        extending awareness?
        a.	   Periodic information campaigns at local
              level
        b.	   Permanent process of advertisement
              and dissemination
        c.	   Linking ID to specific incentives
        d.	   Customizing awareness campaign to
              specific groups (e.g., indigenous)
        e.	   Other, specify __________
 99.	   Are there specific policies to address the       No
        most vulnerable population groups? Yes/no
 100.	 If yes to question 73, please provide a           NA
       description of this policy
 101.	 What barriers to civil registration and identi-   The cost of acquisition is a little high given that
       fication have been identified by the respon-      each individual needs to pay 75 Dirhams. A fam-
       sible agency (ies)?                               ily of 10 may have to invest a considerable sum.
        a.	   Economic                                   It is our understanding that from time to time the
                                                         ministry of interior creates campaigns where they
        b.	   Geographic
                                                         are able to cover the enrollment and CNIE issuance
        c.	   Cultural                                   cost for a targeted group of poor or vulnerable indi-
        d.	   Legal                                      viduals in certain communities. It is also the case
                                                         that the local authorities do the same. But it is not a
        e.	   Religious
                                                         systematic policy.
        f.	   Other, specify __________
 102.	 Does the responsible agency provide free          Yes. But not systematically as they do not have a
       services for vulnerable groups of the popula-     targeting system. See answer to prior question.
       tion? Yes/no
 103.	 If yes, how are these groups designated?          Targeting is done geographically by the local
       (e.g., targeting mechanism or other criteria)     authorities.
 104.	 Does the responsible agency have formal           No
       cooperation arrangements with other agen-
       cies or organizations to improve inclusion
       and access to registration and identification
       documents?
        a.	   Yes, with other government agencies
        b.	   Yes, with the private sector
        c.	   Yes, with international agencies and
              donors
        d.	   Yes, with nongovernmental
              organizations
        e.	   Yes, with other organizations, please
              specify __________
        f.	   No



56
Part II: Program Specific ID (repeat the following questions for each program
assessed)

  1.	   What is the name of the program that uses        MASSAR. It is not an ID but an identity database
        this ID?                                         and a system for managing the identity and scho-
                                                         lastic needs of students.
  2.	   When was the current form of this ID first       Officially 2014
        issued?
  3.	   How many individual IDs were issued during       6,512,192 students have already been enrolled in
        the last year?                                   the database. On an ongoing basis it is expected
                                                         that about 600,000 students would be added
                                                         annually.
  4.	   How many individual IDs have been issued         Same as above since program is brand new
        cumulatively?
  5.	   What type of program is this?                    Ministry of Education, identity management for
        a.	   Social insurance                           schools

        b.	   Contributory pension
        c.	   Health insurance
        d.	   Social assistance
        e.	   Public works
        f.	   Social pension
        g.	   Other, please specify __________
  6.	   What is the total spending of this program       Figure not available
        (last year available and please specify year)?
  7.	   Is the card used by individuals or on behalf     No card is used
        of households?
  8.	   How many individuals are direct beneficia-       Number of students enrolled
        ries of this program?
  9.	   What type of benefit is provided by this         No direct benefits but identity management of the
        program?                                         student and includes tracking all aspects of the
        a.	   Food (in kind)                             student’s life

        b.	   Vouchers for food
        c.	   Cash
        d.	   Health care
        e.	   Access to public works employment
        f.	   Educational scholarships or stipends
        g.	   Subsidized nonfood goods (fertilizer,
              fuel, other)
        h.	   Other, please specify __________
        i.	   Multiple benefits,     please   specify
              __________
                                                                                                 (continued)




                                                                                                             57
Continued

 10.	   What is the name of the agency/ministry that   Ministry of Education
        is responsible for issuing this ID?
 11.	   What is the estimated annual budget directly   Figure not available
        related to issuing IDs?
 12.	   How many employees/staff are directly          Figure not available
        involved in issuing IDs?
 13.	   Is there an operations manual that docu-       This is a well-documented IT system; it explains
        ments the ID issuance process?                 the enrollment process that school officials need
                                                       to follow in order to enroll a student, vet that their
                                                       identity is unique and the system generates a
                                                       unique identity number for them that will follow
                                                       them throughout the scholastic life.
 14.	   What information is captured in the ID data-   •	   Name, and family name
        base for those enrolled?
                                                       •	   Father’s name or guardian’s name and their
        a.	   Name                                          national ID number (will also add mother’s
        b.	   Date of birth                                 information, currently not in system)

        c.	   Sex                                      •	   Sex

        d.	   Address                                  •	   Address

        e.	   Ethnicity                                •	   Socioeconomic variables coming from
                                                            another system called Taysir which is being
        f.	   Religion
                                                            integrated into MASSAR
        g.	   Political affiliation
        h.	   Information on parents or other family
              members
        i.	   Socioeconomic variables      (income,
              housing type, etc.)
 15.	   Is a photo captured at the time of enroll-     No
        ment? Yes/no
 16.	   What biometric information, if any, is cap-    None
        tured at enrollment?
        a.	   None
        b.	   Fingerprints
        c.	   Iris
        d.	   Digital facial image
        e.	   e. Other, please specify __________
 17.	   Are biometrics used to deduplicate? Yes/no     No
 18.	   What kind of ID card is issued?                At the moment None.
        a.	   None (no card issued)
        b.	   Paper
        c.	   Bar card
        d.	   Mag stripe
        e.	   Smart card



58
19.	   What information is printed on the face of the   NA
       card?
       a.	   ID number
       b.	   Name
       c.	   Address
       d.	   Age
       e.	   Sex
       f.	   Ethnicity
       g.	   Political affiliation
       h.	   Religion
       i.	   Other, specify __________
20.	   What information can be derived from the         NA
       card that is not visible but machine-readable?
       a.	   ID number
       b.	   Name
       c.	   Address
       d.	   Age
       e.	   Sex
       f.	   Ethnicity
       g.	   Political affiliation
       h.	   Religion
       i.	   Other, specify __________
21.	   Are biometric data stored on the card?           NA
       Yes/no
22.	   Are there transactions where the biomet-         NA
       rics on the card are used to verify identity/
       authenticate? Yes/no
23.	   What security features (aside from smart         NA
       encryption) are on the card?
       a.	   Holograms
       b.	   Microprinting
       c.	   UV printing
       d.	   Laser engraving
       e.	   Tactile
       f.	   Other, specify __________
24.	   How many digits are in the ID number?            10
25.	   Is there ‘logic’ in the number? Yes/no           1 digit—codes region
                                                        2 digits—for year of creation of number
                                                        7 digits—serial number
                                                                                                  (continued)



                                                                                                           59
Continued

 26.	   Are there clear rules for access to the data      Yes. Access is only granted to Ministry of Educa-
        maintained by the program? Yes/no                 tion authorized individuals.
 27.	   How often must the ID be replaced?                NA
        a.	   Never
        b.	   Less than every five years
        c.	   More than every five years
 28.	   How much does the ID cost to issue?               Not known
 29.	   How much is the individual enrolled charged       Nothing
        for this ID?
        a.	   Nothing
        b.	   <US 1 dollar
        c.	   1–3 US dollars
        d.	   3+ US dollars
 30.	   Is there a cost to the individual for replacing   NA
        a lost or stolen ID? Yes/no
 31.	   What documents are required to apply for          Family booklet or extract of birth record
        this ID?                                          Guardian’s national ID card
        a.	   None, issued at birth along with birth
              certificate
        b.	   Birth certificate
        c.	   ID from another government program
        d.	   Tax ID
        e.	   Driver’s license
        f.	   National ID (voter or other type)
        g.	   Community verification
        h.	   Other
 32.	   Are false IDs ever used to access program         No
        benefits? Yes/no
 33.	   If yes, does this happen                          NA
        a.	   Frequently
        b.	   Infrequently
        c.	   Rarely
 34.	   What is the age requirement for obtaining         Entry into school
        this ID?
        a.	   None
        b.	   Voting age
        c.	   Age considered as an adult
        d.	   Other, specify __________
 35.	   If yes, what is the age?                          6 years



60
36.	   Are there particular categories of the popula-    No
       tion that face geographic, cultural, economic
       or legal barriers that prevent them from
       obtaining this ID?
       a.	    Yes, migrants
       b.	    Yes, indigenous people
       c.	    Yes, women
       d.	    Yes, other groups, specify
       e.	    No
37.	   Is there a mechanism for changing informa-        NA
       tion on the ID? Yes/no
38.	   How many requests for such changes are            NA
       processed annually?
39.	   How is the ID linked to birth and death           It is not.
       registries?
       a.	    It is not
       b.	    Births and deaths are reported to the
              agency intermittently and updated
       c.	    Birth registration is regularly communi-
              cated to the ID agency
       d.	    Death registration is regularly commu-
              nicated to the ID agency
40.	   Are the IDs of those registered as dead           No
       removed or deactivated? Yes/no
41.	   Is this ID used commonly for any of the fol-      None
       lowing purposes?
       a.	    Opening a bank account
       b.	    Obtaining credit or loans
       c.	    Reporting to the tax authority
       d.	    Obtaining marriage certificate
       e.	    Obtaining private health insurance
        f.	   Enrolling in social insurance programs
       g.	    Qualifying for cash transfers, food or
              other safety net programs
       h.	    Getting a cell phone account
        i.	   Obtaining a passport
        j.	   Getting a driver’s license
       k.	    Voting
        l.	   Registering a vehicle
       m.	    Purchasing property
       n.	    Other, specify __________
                                                                      (continued)



                                                                               61
Continued

 42.	   Does the program include the national ID           No, since children do not have a national ID
        number in its database? Yes/no                     number.
 43.	   If yes, what proportion of beneficiaries have      NA
        NID numbers in the database?
 44.	   Does the program cross-check data with             No
        other programs using the NID? Yes/no
 45.	   Is the ID used for authentication at the point     No
        of benefit delivery? Yes/no
 46.	   If yes, which form of authentication is used:      NA
        a.	   Biometric, off-line verification
        b.	   Biometric, on-line verification
        c.	   PIN-based, off-line verification
        d.	   PIN-based, on-line verification
        e.	   Photo
        f.	   Match with other form of ID (like national
              ID number)
 47.	   Are there explicit rules and regulations as        No
        to how government agencies can link their
        databases using the national ID? Yes/no
 48.	   Is there an explicit list of government agen-      Only Ministry of Education organizations
        cies that are allowed to access the national
        level ID database? Yes/no
 49.	   Is there a standard format for MOUs between        No
        the ID issuing agency and other government
        agencies? Yes/no
 50.	   Is there legislation on privacy or protection      Yes
        of personal data that delimits the access
        and use of data in the national ID database?
        Yes/no
 51.	   Has a “privacy impact assessment” ever             No
        been conducted? Yes/no
 52.	   Does the legislation establishing the national     No. This program was not established by legisla-
        level ID clearly establish protection of pri-      tion. It is an administrative initiative of the Ministry
        vacy of data? Yes/no                               of Education.
 53.	   If yes to 52, are there ambiguities or broad       NA
        exceptions to this protection that could be
        abused? Yes/no
 54.	   Is the public reporting of exceptional cases       NA
        of accessing data (e.g., based on national
        security threats) required? Yes/no
 55.	   Is there a supervisory body within the gov-        Yes. CNDP
        ernment responsible for monitoring compli-
        ance with privacy and data protection rules?
        Yes/no

62
 56.	   Are the penalties for violation of the privacy   Not yet established
        rules clearly established and appropriate?
        Yes/no
 57.	   Is the process for grievance redress for indi-   Yes
        viduals who claim their privacy was violated
        clear? Yes/no
 58.	   Is the information that must be provided for     Information goes beyond minimum, since the pur-
        obtaining the national level ID the minimum      pose of the program is NOT an ID but to manage
        required for the purposes of this ID? Yes/no     the scholastic progress of a child. So in the data-
                                                         base there is information that is not identifying but
                                                         explicitly documents the history of the child and
                                                         his or her evaluation.
 Additional Information
 The significance of this program                        We noted a very high level of technical sophistica-
                                                         tion and competence associated with this program.



Part II: Program Specific ID (repeat the following questions for each program assessed)

  1.	   What is the name of the program that uses        CNSS (Caisse nationale de sécurité sociale). There
        this ID?                                         are 2 IDs with individual registration numbers. One
                                                         ID is assigned to employers and another to employ-
                                                         ees (and their family members).
  2.	   When was the current form of this ID first       With the creation of the CNSS in 1959. Individual
        issued?                                          number created with the mandatory health insur-
                                                         ance (AMO) in 2006.
  3.	   How many individual IDs were issued during       NA
        the last year?
  4.	   How many individual IDs have been issued         2.9 million in 2013 (number of affiliations to CNSS—
        cumulatively?                                    employers and employees)
                                                         14,949,000 individual numbers in the CNSS
                                                         database
                                                         1,500,000 spouses in the CNSS database
                                                         6,000,000 children in the CNSS database
  5.	   What type of program is this?                    Social insurance (pensions, family allowances,
        a.	   Social insurance                           health, work-related accidents and diseases)

        b.	   Contributory pension
        c.	   Health insurance
        d.	   Social assistance
        e.	   Public works
        f.	   Social pension
        g.	   Other, please specify __________
                                                                                                   (continued)



                                                                                                             63
Continued

  6.	   What is the total spending of this program       1643.17 million MAD (2011)
        (last year available and please specify year)?
  7.	   Is the card used by individuals or on behalf     Individuals (employers: only physical persons—
        of households?                                   and employees)
  8.	   How many individuals are direct beneficia-       2.1 M insured persons
        ries of this program?
                                                         0.5 M retirees
                                                         0.13 M employers
                                                         Number of family members unknown
                                                         Mandatory health insurance: 7.6 million
  9.	   What type of benefit is provided by this         Pensions
        program?
                                                         Family allowances
        a.	   Food (in kind)
                                                         Compensation benefits
        b.	   Vouchers for food
                                                         Some social benefits
        c.	   Cash
        d.	   Health care
        e.	   Access to public works employment
        f.	   Educational scholarships or stipends
        g.	   Subsidized nonfood goods (fertilizer,
              fuel, other)
        h.	   Other, please specify __________
        i.	   Multiple benefits,      please   specify
              __________
 10.	   What is the name of the agency/ministry that     CNSS
        is responsible for issuing this ID?
 11.	   What is the estimated annual budget directly     Figure not available
        related to issuing IDs?
 12.	   How many employees/staff are directly            Figure not available
        involved in issuing IDs?
 13.	   Is there an operations manual that docu-         There are internal rules for employer and employee
        ments the ID issuance process?                   affiliation.
 14.	   What information is captured in the ID data-     •	   Name, and family name
        base for those enrolled?
                                                         •	   Address
        a.	   Name
                                                         •	   Family composition
        b.	   Date of birth
                                                         •	   National ID number
        c.	   Sex
                                                         •	   Employer’s details
        d.	   Address
        e.	   Ethnicity
        f.	   Religion
        g.	   Political affiliation




64
       h.	   Information on parents or other family
             members
       i.	   Socioeconomic variables       (income,
             housing type, etc.)
15.	   Is a photo captured at the time of enroll-       No (hard copy is glued)
       ment? Yes/no
16.	   What biometric information, if any, is cap-      None
       tured at enrollment?
       a.	   None
       b.	   Fingerprints
       c.	   Iris
       d.	   Digital facial image
       e.	   Other, please specifcy
17.	   Are biometrics used to deduplicate? Yes/no       No
18.	   What kind of ID card is issued?                  Paper
       a.	   None (no card issued)                      Card only for employees
       b.	   Paper
       c.	   Bar card
       d.	   Mag stripe
       e.	   Smart card
19.	   What information is printed on the face of the   •	   Name, and family name
       card?
                                                        •	   Birth date
       a.	   ID number
                                                        •	   National ID number
       b.	   Name
                                                        •	   Affiliation number
       c.	   Address
                                                        •	   Date of affiliation
       d.	   Age
                                                        •	   Photo (hard copy)
       e.	   Sex
       f.	   Ethnicity
       g.	   Political affiliation
       h.	   Religion
       i.	   Other, specify __________
20.	   What information can be derived from the         None
       card that is not visible but machine-readable?
       a.	   ID number
       b.	   Name
       c.	   Address
       d.	   Age
       e.	   Sex
       f.	   Ethnicity
                                                                                     (continued)




                                                                                              65
Continued

        g.	   Political affiliation
        h.	   Religion
        i.	   Other, specify __________
 21.	   Are biometric data stored on the card?            No
        Yes/no
 22.	   Are there transactions where the biomet-          No
        rics on the card are used to verify identity/
        authenticate? Yes/no
 23.	   What security features (aside from smart          None
        encryption) are on the card?
        a.	   Holograms
        b.	   Microprinting
        c.	   UV printing
        d.	   Laser engraving
        e.	   Tactile
        f.	   Other, specify __________
 24.	   How many digits are in the ID number?             9 digits for employee
                                                          7 digits for employers
 25.	   Is there ‘logic’ in the number? Yes/no            Employee: starts by 1 and control code in the last
                                                          two digits
                                                          Employer: control code in the last two digits. Rural
                                                          regime starts by number 3
 26.	   Are there clear rules for access to the data      Yes. Only CNSS staff can consult the database.
        maintained by the program? Yes/no
 27.	   How often must the ID be replaced?                If change in the status (employer or employee)
        a.	   Never
        b.	   Less than every five years
        c.	   More than every five years
 28.	   How much does the ID cost to issue?               Not known
 29.	   How much is the individual enrolled charged       Nothing
        for this ID?
        a.	   Nothing
        b.	   <US 1 dollar
        c.	   1–3 US dollars
        d.	   3+ US dollars
 30.	   Is there a cost to the individual for replacing   NA
        a lost or stolen ID? Yes/no




66
31.	   What documents are required to apply for         The employer must submit to the CNSS a form with
       this ID?                                         the information of the employee. Copy of birth act
       a.	   None, issued at birth along with birth     extract and national ID and certificate of residence.
             certificate                                The employer must be registered in the enterprises
       b.	   Birth certificate                          register and the tax authority.
       c.	   ID from another government program
       d.	   Tax ID
       e.	   Driver’s license
       f.	   National ID (voter or other type)
       g.	   Community verification
       h.	   Other
32.	   Are false IDs ever used to access program        NA
       benefits? Yes/no
33.	   If yes, does this happen                         NA
       a.	   Frequently
       b.	   Infrequently
       c.	   Rarely
34.	   What is the age requirement for obtaining        NA
       this ID?
       a.	   None
       b.	   Voting age
       c.	   Age considered as an adult
       d.	   Other, specify __________
35.	   If yes, what is the age?                         NA
36.	   Are there particular categories of the popula-   No
       tion that face geographic, cultural, economic
       or legal barriers that prevent them from
       obtaining this ID?
       a.	   Yes, migrants
       b.	   Yes, indigenous people
       c.	   Yes, women
       d.	   Yes, other groups, specify __________
       e.	   No
37.	   Is there a mechanism for changing informa-       Yes
       tion on the ID? Yes/no
38.	   How many requests for such changes are           NA
       processed annually?
                                                                                                  (continued)




                                                                                                            67
Continued

 39.	   How is the ID linked to birth and death           Civil registry regularly sends information to
        registries?                                       the CNSS about deaths, which is not always
        a.	    It is not                                  comprehensible.

        b.	    Births and deaths are reported to the
               agency intermittently and updated
        c.	    Birth registration is regularly communi-
               cated to the ID agency
        d.	    Death registration is regularly commu-
               nicated to the ID agency
 40.	   Are the IDs of those registered as dead           Yes (Archived)
        removed or deactivated? Yes/no
 41.	   Is this ID used commonly for any of the fol-      Sometimes for obtaining credit or loans
        lowing purposes?
        a.	    Opening a bank account
        b.	    Obtaining credit or loans
        c.	    Reporting to the tax authority
        d.	    Obtaining marriage certificate
        e.	    Obtaining private health insurance
         f.	   Enrolling in social insurance programs
        g.	    Qualifying for cash transfers, food or
               other safety net programs
        h.	    Getting a cell phone account
         i.	   Obtaining a passport
         j.	   Getting a driver’s license
        k.	    Voting
         l.	   Registering a vehicle
        m.	    Purchasing property
        n.	    Other, specify __________
 42.	   Does the program include the national ID          Yes. Internal link in the CNSS database when the ID
        number in its database? Yes/no                    number exists.
 43.	   If yes, what proportion of beneficiaries have     NA
        NID numbers in the database?
 44.	   Does the program cross-check data with            No
        other programs using the NID? Yes/no
 45.	   Is the ID used for authentication at the point    No
        of benefit delivery? Yes/no
 46.	   If yes, which form of authentication is used:     NA
        a.	    Biometric, off-line verification
        b.	    Biometric, on-line verification
        c.	    PIN-based, off-line verification




68
       d.	   PIN-based, on-line verification
       e.	   Photo
       f.	   Match with other form of ID (like national
             ID number)
47.	   Are there explicit rules and regulations as        No
       to how government agencies can link their
       databases using the national ID? Yes/no
48.	   Is there an explicit list of government agen-      No
       cies that are allowed to access the national
       level ID database? Yes/no
49.	   Is there a standard format for MOUs between        No
       the ID issuing agency and other government
       agencies? Yes/no
50.	   Is there legislation on privacy or protection      Yes
       of personal data that delimits the access
       and use of data in the national ID database?
       Yes/no
51.	   Has a “privacy impact assessment” ever             NA
       been conducted? Yes/no
52.	   Does the legislation establishing the national     No specific legislation for data protection of the
       level ID clearly establish protection of pri-      CNSS database. There is a CNSS charter for data
       vacy of data? Yes/no                               protection
53.	   If yes to 52, are there ambiguities or broad       NA
       exceptions to this protection that could be
       abused? Yes/no
54.	   Is the public reporting of exceptional cases       NA
       of accessing data (e.g., based on national
       security threats) required? Yes/no
55.	   Is there a supervisory body within govern-         Yes. CNDP
       ment responsible for monitoring compli-
       ance with privacy and data protection rules?
       Yes/no
56.	   Are the penalties for violation of the privacy     Not yet established
       rules clearly established and appropriate?
       Yes/no
57.	   Is the process for grievance redress for indi-     NA
       viduals who claim their privacy was violated
       clear? Yes/no
58.	   Is the information that must be provided for       Yes
       obtaining the national level ID the minimum
       required for the purposes of this ID? Yes/no
Additional Information
The significance of this program                          CNSS is the social security scheme that protects
                                                          formal workers and their families.




                                                                                                               69
Part II: Program Specific ID (repeat the following questions for each program assessed)

  1.	   What is the name of the program that uses        RAMED (Régime d’assistance pour les
        this ID?                                         économiquement démunis) www.ramed.ma
  2.	   When was the current form of this ID first       2012
        issued?
  3.	   How many individual IDs were issued during       260,000 new beneficiaries per month.
        the last year?
                                                         2.7 million of cards (Feb 2014)
  4.	   How many individual IDs have been issued         6.5 million—Feb 2014—(target 8.5 million)
        cumulatively?
  5.	   What type of program is this?                    Social assistance (semi contributory)—health
        a.	   Social insurance                           Contribution: 120 MAD/year individuals
        b.	   Contributory pension                       40 MAD/year for poor people paid by municipalities
        c.	   Health insurance                           75% financing comes from the government
        d.	   Social assistance
        e.	   Public works
        f.	   Social pension
        g.	   Other, please specify __________
  6.	   What is the total spending of this program       1065 million MAD to February 2013
        (last year available and please specify year)?
  7.	   Is the card used by individuals or on behalf     On behalf of families
        of households?
  8.	   How many individuals are direct beneficia-       6.5 million (Feb 2014)
        ries of this program?
  9.	   What type of benefit is provided by this         Health care
        program?
        a.	   Food (in kind)
        b.	   Vouchers for food
        c.	   Cash
        d.	   Health care
        e.	   Access to public works employment
        f.	   Educational scholarships or stipends
        g.	   Subsidized nonfood goods (fertilizer,
              fuel, other)
        h.	   Other, please specify __________
        i.	   Multiple benefits,     please   specify
              __________
 10.	   What is the name of the agency/ministry that     ANAM (Agence nationale de l’assurance maladie)
        is responsible for issuing this ID?
 11.	   What is the estimated annual budget directly     Figure not available
        related to issuing IDs?




70
12.	   How many employees/staff are directly          Figure not available
       involved in issuing IDs?
13.	   Is there an operations manual that docu-       NA
       ments the ID issuance process?
14.	   What information is captured in the ID data-   Please see https://www.ramed.ma/Documents/
       base for those enrolled?                       formulaire_final.pdf
       a.	   Name                                     Name
       b.	   Date of birth                            Family name
       c.	   Sex
                                                      No. CNIE
       d.	   Address
                                                      Profession
       e.	   Ethnicity
                                                      Region
       f.	   Religion
                                                      Address
       g.	   Political affiliation
       h.	   Information on parents or other family   Type of residence (mud, zinc, free, rental, owned)
             members                                  Cost of housing
       i.	   Socioeconomic variables      (income,    Number of rooms other than kitchen or bathroom
             housing type, etc.)
                                                      Marital status
                                                      Number of wives
                                                      Demographic information about the wives
                                                      Number of children associated with the wife
                                                      Number of children supported by wife
                                                      Number of family members under one roof
                                                      Table of children
                                                      Socioeconomic data regarding water, electricity,
                                                      telephone, transportation available to individuals in
                                                      family
                                                      Data regarding property in rural areas including
                                                      number of cattle owned, farming equipment, num-
                                                      ber of trees, land surface area
                                                      Declaration of revenue
15.	   Is a photo captured at the time of enroll-     NO (Hard copy requested)
       ment? Yes/no
16.	   What biometric information, if any, is cap-    None
       tured at enrollment?
       a.	   None
       b.	   Fingerprints
       c.	   Iris
       d.	   Digital facial image
       e.	   Other, please specify __________
                                                                                                (continued)



                                                                                                           71
Continued

 17.	   Are biometrics used to deduplicate? Yes/no       No
 18.	   What kind of ID card is issued?                  Plastic with mag stripe
        a.	   None (no card issued)
        b.	   Paper
        c.	   Bar card
        d.	   Mag stripe
        e.	   Smart card
 19.	   What information is printed on the face of the   •	   Program ID number for both parents
        card?
                                                         •	   ID number for both numbers
        a.	   ID number
                                                         •	   Name for both parents
        b.	   Name
                                                         •	   Birth dates for both parents
        c.	   Address
                                                         •	   Sex for both parents
        d.	   Age
        e.	   Sex
        f.	   Ethnicity
        g.	   Political affiliation
        h.	   Religion
        i.	   Other, specify __________
 20.	   What information can be derived from the         NA
        card that is not visible but machine-readable?
        a.	   ID number
        b.	   Name
        c.	   Address
        d.	   Age
        e.	   Sex
        f.	   Ethnicity
        g.	   Political affiliation
        h.	   Religion
        i.	   Other, specify __________
 21.	   Are biometric data stored on the card?           NA
        Yes/no
 22.	   Are there transactions where the biomet-         NA
        rics on the card are used to verify identity/
        authenticate? Yes/no
 23.	   What security features (aside from smart         None
        encryption) are on the card?
        a.	   Holograms
        b.	   Microprinting
        c.	   UV printing




72
       d.	   Laser engraving
       e.	   Tactile
       f.	   Other, specify __________
24.	   How many digits are in the ID number?             14
25.	   Is there ‘logic’ in the number? Yes/no            Municipality, sex, birth date, and control key
26.	   Are there clear rules for access to the data      Yes. Only ANAM can access the data base.
       maintained by the program? Yes/no
27.	   How often must the ID be replaced?                3 years
       a.	   Never
       b.	   Less than every five years
       c.	   More than every five years
28.	   How much does the ID cost to issue?               Cost of the card (plastic): 10 MAD
29.	   How much is the individual enrolled charged       Nothing
       for this ID?
       a.	   Nothing
       b.	   <US 1 dollar
       c.	   1–3 US dollars
       d.	   3+ US dollars
30.	   Is there a cost to the individual for replacing   No
       a lost or stolen ID? Yes/no
31.	   What documents are required to apply for          The targeting is done at the municipal level and
       this ID?                                          a committee certifies the right to be covered by
       a.	   None, issued at birth along with birth      RAMED. The information from the family is then
             certificate                                 transferred to ANAM to create the IDs.

       b.	   Birth certificate                           Please see https://www.ramed.ma/Documents/
                                                         formulaire_final.pdf
       c.	   ID from another government program
       d.	   Tax ID                                      Copy of the CNIE for the applicant and dependents

       e.	   Drivers’ license                            Two photographs for the applicant and two for
                                                         spouse
       f.	   National ID (voter or other type)
       g.	   Community verification                      Disability certificate issued from an authorized
                                                         agency of the Ministry of Health
       h.	   Other
                                                         Certificate of continuing education if applicable for
                                                         children between the age of 21 and 26
                                                         Certificate of household living (proving people live
                                                         together)
                                                         Certificate proving dependency of children on
                                                         applicant
                                                         Certificate showing wages for each wage earner
                                                                                                   (continued)




                                                                                                             73
Continued

 32.	   Are false IDs ever used to access program        NA
        benefits? Yes/no
 33.	   If yes, does this happen                         NA
        a.	   Frequently
        b.	   Infrequently
        c.	   Rarely
 34.	   What is the age requirement for obtaining        No age restriction
        this ID?
        a.	   None
        b.	   Voting age
        c.	   Age considered as an adult
        d.	   Other, specify __________
 35.	   If yes, what is the age?                         NA
 36.	   Are there particular categories of the popula-   No
        tion that face geographic, cultural, economic
        or legal barriers that prevent them from
        obtaining this ID?
        a.	   Yes, migrants
        b.	   Yes, indigenous people
        c.	   Yes, women
        d.	   Yes, other groups, specify __________
        e.	   No
 37.	   Is there a mechanism for changing informa-       Yes
        tion on the ID? Yes/no
 38.	   How many requests for such changes are           NA
        processed annually?
 39.	   How is the ID linked to birth and death          It is not.
        registries?
        a.	   It is not
        b.	   Births and deaths are reported to the
              agency intermittently and updated
        c.	   Birth registration is regularly communi-
              cated to the ID agency
        d.	   Death registration is regularly commu-
              nicated to the ID agency
 40.	   Are the IDs of those registered as dead          NA
        removed or deactivated? Yes/no 	




74
41.	   Is this ID used commonly for any of the fol-        None
       lowing purposes?
       a.	    Opening a bank account
       b.	    Obtaining credit or loans
       c.	    Reporting to the tax authority
       d.	    Obtaining marriage certificate
       e.	    Obtaining private health insurance
        f.	   Enrolling in social insurance programs
       g.	    Qualifying for cash transfers, food or
              other safety net programs
       h.	    Getting a cell phone account
        i.	   Obtaining a passport
        j.	   Getting a driver’s license
       k.	    Voting
        l.	   Registering a vehicle
       m.	    Purchasing property
       n.	    Other, specify __________
42.	   Does the program include the national ID            Yes
       number in its database? Yes/no
43.	   If yes, what proportion of beneficiaries have       NA—Mainly those aged 18 or more had ID numbers
       NID numbers in the database?                        in the database.
44.	   Does the program cross-check data with              No—Project to cross-check with CNSS and CNOPS.
       other programs using the NID? Yes/no
45.	   Is the ID used for authentication at the point      Yes
       of benefit delivery? Yes/no
46.	   If yes, which form of authentication is used:       Photo
       a.	    Biometric, off-line verification             Match with national ID number
       b.	    Biometric, on-line verification
       c.	    PIN-based, off-line verification
       d.	    PIN-based, on-line verification
       e.	    Photo
        f.	   Match with other form of ID (like national
              ID number)
47.	   Are there explicit rules and regulations as         Yes with DGSN. Others under study.
       to how government agencies can link their
       databases using the national ID? Yes/no
48.	   Is there an explicit list of government agen-       No
       cies that are allowed to access the national
       level ID database? Yes/no
                                                                                                (continued)




                                                                                                         75
Continued

 49.	   Is there a standard format for MOUs between      NA
        the ID issuing agency and other government
        agencies? Yes/no
 50.	   Is there legislation on privacy or protection    No, specific to the ANAM database
        of personal data that delimits the access
        and use of data in the national ID database?
        Yes/no
 51.	   Has a “privacy impact assessment” ever           No
        been conducted? Yes/no
 52.	   Does the legislation establishing the national   NA
        level ID clearly establish protection of pri-
        vacy of data? Yes/no
 53.	   If yes to 52, are there ambiguities or broad     NA
        exceptions to this protection that could be
        abused? Yes/no
 54.	   Is the public reporting of exceptional cases     NA
        of accessing data (e.g., based on national
        security threats) required? Yes/no
 55.	   Is there a supervisory body within govern-       Yes. CNDP
        ment responsible for monitoring compliance
        with privacy and data protection rules? Yes/
        no
 56.	   Are the penalties for violation of the privacy   Not yet established
        rules clearly established and appropriate?
        Yes/no
 57.	   Is the process for grievance redress for indi-   Yes
        viduals who claim their privacy was violated
        clear? Yes/no
 58.	   Is the information that must be provided for     Yes
        obtaining the national level ID the minimum
        required for the purposes of this ID? Yes/no
 Additional Information
 The significance of this program                        RAMED provides health care to those in need and
                                                         has been operational since 2012. It is now being
                                                         reformed and cross-checks with other programs
                                                         are being implemented to reduce the risk of fraud.
                                                         ANAM does not target families. The information
                                                         of qualifying families comes from the Ministry of
                                                         Interior.




76
3
Annex


                   Population Data by Age Group
                   and Gender



Throughout this report, we use statistical data regarding the total population in Morocco and its breakdown into
age groups. This data is taken from HCP and is reproduced for 2014 in the table below.

Table 6	      Population Totals by Age Group and Gender in Morocco

                                                                   2014
      Age Group                       Female                       Male                        Total
           00–04                        1421                        1482                        2903
           05–09                        1400                        1465                        2865
           10–14                        1402                        1454                        2856
           15–19                        1471                        1521                        2991
           20–24                        1558                        1617                        3176
           25–29                        1497                        1492                        2989
           30–34                        1435                        1372                        2807
           35–39                        1228                        1135                        2363
           40–44                        1098                        1002                        2100
           45–49                         951                         861                        1812
           50–54                         932                         872                        1804
           55–59                         701                         727                        1428
           60–64                         567                         588                        1155
           65–69                         357                         333                         690
           70–74                         344                         284                         628
           75 &+                         390                         347                         737
           Total                      16752                       16552                       33304

Source: HCP




                                                                                                             77
From this table we can also derive the following more relevant data assuming a uniform distribution of the popula-
tion within each 5 year age bin in the table above.


                         Age Group                    Population in Thousands
                              0–17                                    10,419

                         18 and older                                 22,885

                              6–18                                     6,943




78
Strategic Framework
January 25, 2016
