                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin




FY15 Benin Country Opinion Survey Report


         THE WORLD BANK GROUP
            Public Opinion Research Group




                          1
                                                                         April 2016
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin




Acknowledgements
The Benin Country Opinion Survey is part of the County Opinion Survey Program series of the
World Bank Group. This report was prepared by the Public Opinion Research Group (PORG) team
led by Sharon Felzer (Senior Communications Officer, Head of PORG), Jessica Cameron, Svetlana
Markova, and Jing Guo. Calita Woods and Dania Mendoza provided data support. The report was
prepared under the overall guidance and supervision of Sumir Lal (Director, ECRGP). PORG
acknowledges the significant contribution from the Benin country team and the local fielding agency
CEFORP. In particular, PORG is grateful for the support from Sylvie Nenonene (Senior
Communications Officer) who coordinated the survey related activities from Lome, Togo, and
Kochikpa Abdou Raman Olodo (Consultant) in Cotonou, Benin.




                                               1
                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin




Table of Contents

     I. Objectives ...................................................................................3

     II. Methodology ...............................................................................3

    III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................4

    IV. General Issues Facing Benin ........................................................8

    V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group .......................13

    VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness......................................21

   VII. How the World Bank Group Operates .......................................29

   VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments .....................35

    IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Benin ...................41

     X. Communication and Outreach ..................................................46

    XI. Appendices ................................................................................53




                           BENIN




                                                    2
                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to assist the World Bank Group (WBG) in gaining a better understanding
of how stakeholders in Benin perceive the WBG. The survey explored:
     General Issues Facing Benin
     Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
     World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
     The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
     Working with the World Bank Group
     The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Benin
     Communication and Information Sharing
     Background Information

II. Methodology
From April to June 2015, 545 stakeholders of the WBG in Benin were invited to provide their
opinions on the WBG’s work in the country by participating in a country opinion survey.
Participants were drawn from the office of the President/Prime Minister, office of a Minister,
office of a Parliamentarian, employees of ministries/ministerial departments/implementation
agencies, Project Management Units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of WBG projects or
consultants/contractors working on WBG-supported projects/programs, local governments,
bilateral/multilateral agencies, private sector organizations, the financial sector/private banks,
NGOs/community-based organizations, the media, independent government institutions, trade
unions, faith-based groups, youth groups, academia/research institutes/think tanks, and the
judiciary branch. A total of 442 stakeholders participated in the survey (81% response rate).

Respondents completed the questionnaires with a representative from the local fielding agency.
Respondents were asked about: general issues facing Benin; their overall attitudes toward the
WBG; the WBG’s effectiveness and results; the WBG’s knowledge work and activities; working
with the WBG; the WBG’s future role in Benin; and the WBG’s communication and information
sharing in Benin.

Every country that engages in the Country Opinion Survey must include specific indicator
questions that will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.
These questions are identified throughout the survey report.

The results in this year’s Country Survey were compared to those in the Country Survey
conducted in FY’12 (response rate is 87%, N=600). The data were weighted to reach similar
stakeholder compositions across the two survey years, allowing for more statistically reliable
comparisons. Stakeholders who identified themselves as “Other? in the stakeholder category
options were not included in these comparisons. As a result, mean ratings, percentages of
respondents, and the total number of respondents in both years are slightly different from those
of the original data reported in the FY ’12 COS report and the non-weighted data presented in
this report. For the weighted stakeholder breakdown and year comparison results, please refer to
Appendix E (see page 101).


                                                  3
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



III. Demographics of the Sample
Current Position
      For further analyses, the small number of respondents from the office of a Minister were
       combined with those from the Office of the President/Prime Minister, and respondents
       from the financial sector/private banks were combined with those from private sector
       organizations. The few respondents from youth groups, trade unions, and faith-based
       groups were combined with those from NGOs/CBOs to form a “Civil Society? category.
       There were no respondents from the National Assembly or the judiciary branch.




                                               4
                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Area of Primary Specialization




                                 5
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Geographic Locations
     For further analyses, the small number of respondents from Porto Novo, Parakou, and
      Come/Ouidah were combined with those from Autres villes. Analyses comparing
      geographic location responding to indicator questions are presented in Appendix C (see
      page 91).




Exposure to Agencies within the World Bank Group




                                              6
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Familiarity with the World Bank Group
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey indicated significantly
         lower levels of familiarity with the WBG compared to respondents from the FY ’12
         Country Survey (weighted mean in FY ’15 = 5.4; weighted mean in FY ’12 = 6.0)1.
        Stakeholders: As shown in the chart below, respondents from PMUs/Consultants on
         WBG-supported projects gave the highest ratings of familiarity with the WBG whereas
         respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks, other organizations,
         local government, and academia gave significantly lower familiarity ratings.
        Impact of Familiarity: Respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the WBG were
         significantly, strongly correlated with their ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in
         Benin, and moderately, significantly correlated with the extent to which the WBG plays a
         relevant role in development in Benin and the extent to which the WBG’s work helps to
         achieve development results in the country.




 1
  Please refer to Appendix E (page 101) for more details on weighting. The means in the chart were calculated
 based on un-weighted data.

                                                       7
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



IV. General Issues Facing Benin
Headed in the Right Direction
        Year comparison: As shown in the chart below, respondents in this year’s Country
         Survey were significantly more likely to indicate that Benin is headed in the right
         direction and significantly less likely to indicate that Benin is headed in the wrong
         direction or that they are not sure compared to respondents from the FY’12 Country
         Survey2.

        Stakeholders: Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and independent
         government institutions were significantly more likely to indicate that Benin is headed
         in the wrong direction compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




 2
  The means in the chart were calculated based on weighted data. Please refer to Appendix E (page 101) for more
 details on weighting.

                                                      8
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



IV. General Issues Facing Benin (continued)
Development Priority
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that the most
      important development priority in Benin was education (percentage of respondents =
      61%), followed by health (33%) and rural development (29%).




                                            9
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



IV. General Issues Facing Benin (continued)
Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that education
       would contribute most to poverty reduction in Benin (percentage of respondents = 40%),
       followed by health (28%), agricultural development (27%), and rural development (26%).




                                             10
                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



IV. General Issues Facing Benin (continued)
Factors Contributing to “Shared Prosperity?




                                       11
                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



IV. General Issues Facing Benin (continued)
Gap between the Rich and the Poor




Global Climate Change




                                    12
                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin




V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
Attributing Failed/Slow Reform Efforts
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that they most
       often attributed failed or slow WBG assisted reform efforts to an inadequate level of
       citizen/civil society participation (percentage of respondents = 40%), political pressures
       and obstacles (39%), reforms not being well thought out in light of country challenges
       (38%), and the government working inefficiently/slowly (36%).
      Stakeholders: Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies were significantly more
       likely to indicate that they attributed slow/failed reform efforts to the government
       working inefficiently and lack of capacity in government, and significantly less likely to
       indicate political pressures/obstacles and reforms not being well thought out in light of
       country challenges compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups. Respondents
       from the media were significantly more likely to indicate that they attributed slow/failed
       reform efforts to an inadequate level of citizen/civil society participation compared to
       respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                13
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

As noted in the “Methodology? section, the indicator questions referred to throughout the survey
report are questions that are asked in every country that engages in the Country Opinion Survey.
These will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.


The World Bank Group’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)

        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had significantly lower
         ratings for the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Benin (weighted mean = 6.6) compared to
         respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted mean = 6.9)3.

        Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects gave
         the highest ratings for the WBG’s overall effectiveness whereas respondents from private
         sector/financial sector/private banks, independent government institutions, and academia
         gave significantly lower ratings.
        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
         higher ratings for the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Benin (mean rating = 7.2)
         compared to respondents who are not collaborating (mean rating = 5.9).




3
 Please refer to Appendix E (page 101) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in the charts were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             14
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Achieving Development Results (Indicator Question)

        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey gave statistically similar
         ratings for the extent to which the WBG achieves development results (weighted mean =
         7.1) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted mean = 7.0) 4.




WBG Staff Preparedness

        Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects gave
         the highest ratings for the WBG’s staff being well prepared whereas respondents from
         bilateral/multilateral agencies, the private sector/financial sector/private banks, and
         independent government institutions gave significantly lower ratings.
        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
         higher ratings for the WBG’s staff being well prepared (mean rating = 7.6) compared to
         respondents who are not collaborating (mean rating = 6.7).




4
 Please refer to Appendix E (page 101) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in the charts were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             15
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions by Stakeholder Groups
      Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects had the
       highest mean rating for the aggregated responses to the twenty-five COS indicator
       questions whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks,
       academia, and independent government institutions had significantly lower mean ratings.
       Responses for individual indicator questions by stakeholder groups can be found in
       Appendix B (see page 71).
      Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had a significantly higher
       mean rating for the aggregated responses to the twenty-five COS indicator questions
       (mean rating = 7.1) compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG
       (mean rating = 6.4). Responses for individual indicator questions by exposure to the
       WBG can be found in Appendix F (see page 107).




                                              16
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Greatest Value
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that the WBG’s
      greatest value to Benin was its financial resources (percentage of respondents = 57%),
      followed by its technical assistance (29%), policy advice (27%), training/capacity
      building (26%), and mobilizing third party financial resources (24%).




                                             17
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Effectiveness of WBG’s Instruments in Reducing Poverty
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that the World
      Bank’s most effective instrument at reduce poverty in Benin was its investment lending
      (percentage of respondents = 67%), followed by its capacity development (31%) and
      policy based lending/budget support to the Government (30%).




                                             18
                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Importance and Effectiveness of WBG’s Capacity Building Work
   Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects and other
    organizations gave the highest ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at project implementation
    whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks, independent
    government institutions, and academia gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from
    PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects, local government, and other organizations
    gave the highest ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at citizen engagement whereas
    respondents from independent government institutions and bilateral/multilateral agencies
    gave significantly lower ratings. Responses for all capacity building questions by stakeholder
    groups can be found in Appendix B (see page 71).

   Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly higher
    ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at citizen engagement and project implementation (mean
    ratings = 7.5 and 6.3, respectively) compared to respondents who are not collaborating (mean
    ratings = 6.9 and 5.4, respectively).




                                                19
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Greatest Weakness
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that the WBG’s
      greatest weakness in its work in Benin was its imposing technocratic solutions without
      regard to political realities (percentage of respondents = 35%), being too influenced by
      developed countries (31%), and not enough public disclosure of its work (27%).




                                              20
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness
Importance of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas




                                     21
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Importance of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas (continued)
     Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across just three of
      these twenty-three development areas (refer to Appendix B, page 71, for a complete
      breakdown). Those development areas with significant stakeholder group differences
      were:
          Employees of ministries and respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-
           supported projects gave the highest ratings for the importance of the WBG being
           involved in natural resource management and environmental sustainability
           whereas respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and academia gave
           significantly lower importance ratings;
          Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects, the media, and
           independent government institutions gave the highest ratings for the importance
           of the WBG being involved in water and sanitation whereas respondents from
           bilateral/multilateral agencies gave significantly lower importance ratings; and
          Respondents from local government and bilateral/multilateral agencies gave the
           highest ratings for the importance of the WBG being involved in gender equity
           whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and
           academia gave significantly lower importance ratings.




                                              22
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas5




5
 Note, primarily informed stakeholders responded to these questions. Respondents were given the option of “don’t know? if they
did not have exposure to the WBG’s work in certain development areas. See Appendix A (page 56) for details.

                                                              23
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas (continued)

      Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across six of these
       nineteen development areas (refer to Appendix B, page 71, for a complete breakdown).
       For the most part, respondents from local government, PMUs/Consultants on WBG-
       supported projects, bilateral/multilateral agencies, and the media tended to give the
       highest ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness in these areas whereas respondents from the
       private sector/financial sector/private banks and academia tended to give significantly
       lower ratings of effectiveness. Those development areas with significant stakeholder
       group differences were:
            Education;
            Community development;
            Private sector development;
            Poverty reduction;
            Youth employment; and
            Economic growth.




                                              24
                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas: Collaboration




                                       25
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas: Year Comparison6




6
 All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 101) for details.

                                                               26
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
The WBG Promoting Private Public Partnerships
     Stakeholders: Respondents from the media gave the highest mean ratings for the extent
      to which the WBG’s work helps to promote private public partnerships in Benin whereas
      respondents from academia gave significantly lower mean ratings.
     Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher
      ratings for the extent to which the WBG’s work helps to promote private public
      partnerships in Benin (mean rating = 7.1) compared to respondents who do not
      collaborate with the WBG (mean rating = 6.4).




Helping the Poorest




                                            27
                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Drivers of Effectiveness
To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall
effectiveness and ratings of its ability to help achieve development results in Benin, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the nineteen specific areas of
effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development
results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one
specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness
or perceptions of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results.

      Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
       correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the WBG’s
       overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
       drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Benin. The areas
       determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
              The WBG’s effectiveness at poverty reduction; and
              The WBG’s effectiveness at public sector governance.

      Achieving Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-
       Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the
       WBG’s ability to help achieve development results in Benin, suggesting that ratings of
       effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s ability to
       help achieve development results. The areas determined to be key drivers from these
       analyses were:
            The WBG’s effectiveness at poverty reduction; and
            The WBG’s effectiveness at public sector governance.




                                                28
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates
The World Bank Group’s Work in Benin
     Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
      levels of agreement regarding these aspects of the WBG’s work in Benin compared to
      respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (refer to Appendix E, page 101, for a
      complete breakdown).
     Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects had the
      highest levels of agreement for all three of these aspects of the WBG’s work in Benin
      whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and
      independent government institutions had significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                             29
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin




VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions
   Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across most of these
    aspects of how the WBG operates (refer to Appendix B, page 71, for a complete breakdown).
    For the most part, respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects tended
    to have the highest levels of agreement whereas respondents from independent government
    institutions tended to have significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                             30
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions: Year Comparison7




7
 All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 101) for details.

                                                               31
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The WBG as an Effective Development Partner
     Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across several of
      these aspects of how the WBG operates in Benin (refer to Appendix B, page 71, for a
      complete breakdown). For the most part, respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-
      supported projects tended to have the highest levels of agreement whereas respondents
      from academia tended to have significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                            32
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The WBG as an Effective Development Partner: Year Comparison8




8
 All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 101) for details.

                                                               33
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
Internal Measuring and Monitoring
     Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects and the
      media gave the highest mean ratings for the extent to which the WBG measures and
      corrects its work in real time in Benin whereas respondents from independent
      government institutions and academia gave significantly lower mean ratings.
     Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
      higher ratings that the WBG measures and corrects its work in real time (mean rating =
      7.4) compared to those who are not collaborating (mean rating = 6.7).




                                             34
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments
Frequency of Consulting WBG Knowledge Work and Activities
     Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects and the
      office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister indicated the most frequent usage of the
      WBG’s knowledge work and activities (percentage of respondents = 38% and 33%
      weekly/monthly, respectively) whereas respondents from local government indicated
      significantly less frequent usage (74% rarely/never).




                                             35
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Benin’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)

   Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar levels
    of agreement that the WBG meets Benin’s needs for knowledge services (weighted mean =
    6.2) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted mean = 6.5)9.

   Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly higher
    levels of agreement that the WBG meets Benin’s needs for knowledge services (mean rating
    = 6.5) compared to respondents who are not collaborating with the WBG (mean rating = 5.8).




Contribution of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         ratings for the significance of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work and
         activities (weighted mean = 7.3) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country
         Survey (weighted mean = 7.1)9.




9
 Please refer to Appendix E (page 101) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in these charts were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             36
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Technical Quality of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         ratings for the technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (weighted
         mean = 7.4) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted
         mean = 7.6)10

        Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects gave
         the highest ratings for the technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities
         whereas respondents from academia gave significantly lower ratings.

        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG gave significantly
         higher ratings for the technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities
         (mean rating = 7.6) compared to respondents who are not collaborating with the WBG
         (mean rating = 7.2).




10
  Please refer to Appendix E (page 101) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in these charts were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             37
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities
     Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across several of
      these aspects of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (refer to Appendix B, page
      71, for a complete breakdown). For the most part, respondents from PMUs/Consultants
      on WBG-supported projects tended to give the highest ratings whereas respondents from
      academia tended to give significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                            38
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities: Year Comparison11




11
  All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 101) for details.

                                                               39
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Benin’s Needs for Financial Instruments (Indicator Question)

        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
         levels of agreement that the WBG’s financial instruments meet Benin’s needs (weighted
         mean = 6.8) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted mean =
         6.5)12.

        Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects had the
         highest levels of agreement that the WBG’s financial instruments meet Benin’s needs
         whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and
         independent government institutions had significantly lower levels of agreement.

        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly
         higher levels of agreement that the WBG’s financial instruments meet Benin’s needs
         (mean rating = 7.2) compared to respondents who are not collaborating (mean rating =
         6.3).




12
  Please refer to Appendix E (page 101) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in the chart were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             40
                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Benin
The World Bank Group’s Local Presence in Benin




Selectivity of the World Bank Group’s Support




                                      41
                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Benin (continued)
Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value
   Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that, to make itself
    of greater value, the WBG should reduce the complexity of obtaining WBG financing
    (percentage of respondents = 46%), followed by improving the quality of its experts as
    related to Benin’s specific challenges (35%), improve the competitiveness of its financing
    compared to markets (28%), and offer more innovative financial products (27%).
   Stakeholders: Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks, the media,
    and civil society were the most likely to indicate that the WBG should reach out to more
    groups outside of Government whereas respondents from the office of the President/ Prime
    Minister/Minister were significantly less likely to indicate this. Respondents from
    bilateral/multilateral agencies were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should
    provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics on Benin’s economy compared to
    respondents from other stakeholder groups. Respondents from independent government
    institutions were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should collaborate more
    effectively with Government clients compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                42
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Benin (continued)
World Bank Group Should Collaborate More with…
   Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that the WBG
    should collaborate more with NGOs (percentage of respondents = 41%), local government
    (40%), and private sector (33%) to ensure better development results.
   Stakeholders: Compared to other stakeholder groups, respondents from the private sector/
    financial sector/private banks were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should
    collaborate more with the private sector, respondents from local government were
    significantly more likely to indicate more collaboration with local government, respondents
    from civil society were significantly more likely to indicate more collaboration with
    NGOs/CBOs, respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies were significantly more likely
    to indicate more collaboration with the donor community, respondents from academia were
    significantly more likely to indicate more collaboration with academia, and respondents from
    the media were significantly more likely to indicate more collaboration with the media.




                                               43
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Benin (continued)
Where the World Bank Group Should Focus its Resources
     Year comparison: Respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that the WBG
      should focus its resources on education (percentage of respondents = 55%), followed by
      rural development (32%), agricultural development (28%), and health (27%).




                                            44
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Benin (continued)
Future Combination of the WBG services
     Stakeholders: Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and independent
      government institutions were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should
      offer more knowledge products in Benin compared to respondents from other stakeholder
      groups.




                                            45
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



X. Communication and Outreach
When considering the World Bank Group’s future outreach with key constituencies, please see
Appendix B (page 71) for all responses by stakeholder groups.

Information Sources
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that they got
       most of their information about economic and social development issues from local
       television (percentage of respondents = 47%), local newspapers (46%), and the
       Internet (39%).




                                              46
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
Preferred Information Sources
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that they
      preferred to get their information from the WBG’s website (percentage of respondents =
      55%), WBG’s seminars/workshops/conferences (39%), WBG’s publications and other
      written materials (36%), and direct contact with the WBG (28%).




                                             47
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
Access to Information




     Stakeholders: Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies were significantly more
      likely to have requested information from the WBG in the past year compared to
      respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                             48
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
Access to the Internet
      Stakeholders: Respondents from civil society and other organizations were significantly
       less likely to have Internet access compared to respondents from other stakeholder
       groups.




WBG Website Usage
      Stakeholders: Respondents from independent government institutions, PMUs/
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects, and bilateral/multilateral agencies were the
       most likely to indicate utilization of the WBG website whereas respondents from local
       government and the private sector/financial sector/private banks were significantly less
       likely to indicate utilization of the WBG website.




                                               49
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
WBG Website Evaluation

     Stakeholders: Employees of ministries and respondents from the media had the highest
      levels of agreement that the information on the WBG’s websites is useful whereas
      respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and local government
      had significantly lower levels of agreement. Employees of ministries and respondents
      from bilateral/multilateral agencies had the highest levels of agreement that they find the
      WBG’s website easy to navigate whereas respondents from the private sector/financial
      sector/private banks and local government had significantly lower levels of agreement.

     Collaboration: Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG had
      significantly higher levels of agreement that the information on the WBG’s websites is
      useful and that they find the WBG’s website easy to navigate (mean rating = 7.6 and 7.0,
      respectively) compared to respondents who are not collaborating (mean rating = 6.7 and
      6.2, respectively).




                                               50
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
Use and Evaluation of the WBG’s Social Media Channels




                                     51
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)
Information Sharing

     Stakeholders: Respondents from PMUs/Consultants on WBG-supported projects had the
      highest levels of agreement that the WBG is responsive to their information requests and
      inquiries whereas respondents from independent government institutions had
      significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies
      had the highest levels of agreement that when they need information from the WBG they
      know how to find it whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private
      banks, independent government institutions, and academia had significantly lower levels
      of agreement.

     Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly
      higher levels of agreement that the WBG is responsive to their information requests and
      that when they need information from the WBG they know how to find it (mean ratings =
      6.8 and 6.6, respectively) compared to respondents who are not collaborating (mean
      rating = 4.9 and 5.2, respectively).




                                              52
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin



XI. Appendices

     A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents...................... 54

     B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ...................... 69

     C. Responses to Indicator Questions by Geographic Location........... 89

     D. Responses to Select Questions by Collaboration with WBG ......... 92

     E. Responses to Select Questions by Year......................................... 99

     F. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG ........ 105

     G. WBG Country Opinion Survey FY15– Benin Questionnaire ........ 106

                                         BENIN




                                            53
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=442)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the
number of respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know? (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean),
and the standard deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).

A. General Issues Facing Benin

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
1. In general would you say that Benin is headed in ... ?                                    (N=422)
The right direction                                                                           58.3%
The wrong direction                                                                           17.3%
Not sure                                                                                      24.4%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Benin. Please
identify which of the following you consider the most important development       Percentage of Respondents
priorities in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE)                                  (Responses Combined; N=428)
Agricultural development                                                                      53.0%
Education                                                                                     51.2%
Public sector governance (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                              39.3%
management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Health                                                                                        22.2%
Poverty reduction                                                                             21.0%
Private sector development (incl. foreign direct investment, trade and
                                                                                              18.5%
competitiveness)
Energy and extractives                                                                        16.4%
Food security and nutrition                                                                   11.0%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                         9.8%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                              9.6%
Natural resource management and environmental sustainability                                  9.1%
Water and sanitation                                                                          8.9%
Economic growth                                                                               6.3%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                       4.9%
Rural development                                                                             4.9%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                2.6%
Gender equity                                                                                 2.1%
Information and communications technology                                                     1.9%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                 1.9%
Finance and markets                                                                           1.4%
Global/regional integration                                                                   1.2%
Urban development                                                                             0.7%
Crime and violence                                                                            0.2%




                                                        54
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


A. General Issues Facing Benin (continued)

3. The World Bank Group has committed itself to twin goals: ending extreme
poverty by 2030 and boosting shared prosperity. Poverty reduction is a broad
term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of
development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing         Percentage of Respondents
poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE)                                     (Responses Combined; N=437)
Agricultural development                                                                      42.3%
Education                                                                                     38.9%
Private sector development (incl. foreign direct investment, trade and
                                                                                              34.6%
competitiveness)
Public sector governance (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                              30.0%
management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Economic growth                                                                               23.3%
Health                                                                                        19.5%
Rural development                                                                             17.2%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                         15.8%
Water and sanitations                                                                         15.3%
Food security and nutrition                                                                   14.4%
Energy and extractives                                                                        10.8%
Natural resource management and environmental sustainability                                  8.7%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                              7.1%
Gender equity                                                                                 5.5%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                4.3%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                       2.7%
Global/regional integration                                                                   1.8%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                 1.6%
Urban development                                                                             1.6%
Finance and markets                                                                           1.1%
Information and communications technology                                                     0.9%
Crime and violence                                                                            0.9%




                                                      55
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


A. General Issues Facing Benin (continued)

4. The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity? goal captures two key elements,
economic growth and equity. It will seek to foster income growth among the
bottom 40 percent of a country’s population. Improvement in the Shared
Prosperity Indicator requires growth and well-being of the less well-off. When
thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the
following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Benin? (Choose no          Percentage of Respondents
more than TWO)                                                                         (Responses Combined; N=409)
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                         37.9%
Better employment opportunities for young people                                                  24.2%
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                               22.2%
Consistent economic growth                                                                        18.1%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                      17.8%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                           16.4%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized
                                                                                                  14.9%
businesses)
Better quality public services                                                                    13.4%
More reliable social safety net                                                                   9.0%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability                8.8%
Better employment opportunities for women                                                         4.4%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                   3.9%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                           3.7%
A growing middle class                                                                            3.2%
Other                                                                                             1.7%

5. Do you think the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem, a
moderately big problem, a small problem or not a problem at all in Benin?              Percentage of Respondents
(Select only ONE response)                                                                        (N=438)
A very big problem                                                                                33.3%
A moderately big problem                                                                          42.0%
A small problem                                                                                   13.2%
Not a problem at all                                                                              6.4%
Don’t know                                                                                        5.0%

6. In your view, is global climate change a very serious problem, somewhat             Percentage of Respondents
serious, not too serious, or not a problem? (Select only ONE response)                            (N=437)
A very serious problem                                                                            52.9%
A somewhat serious problem                                                                        38.0%
Not too serious problem                                                                           6.4%
Not a problem                                                                                      .9%
Don’t know                                                                                        1.8%




                                                         56
                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

Familiarity                                                                         N        DK      Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Benin?
                                                                                   425        0       5.45     2.48
    (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)

Effectiveness*                                                                      N        DK      Mean       SD
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                   371        60      6.67     2.42
    effectiveness in Benin? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

Staff Preparedness                                                                  N        DK      Mean       SD
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well
     prepared to help Benin solve its most complicated development                 336        95      7.27     2.18
     challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact
on development results in Benin, in which sectoral areas do you believe the
World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge             Percentage of Respondents
services) in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE)                                          (Responses Combined; N=439)
Agricultural development                                                                           52.6%
Education                                                                                          41.9%
Public sector governance (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                                   33.5%
management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Private sector development (incl. foreign direct investment, trade and
                                                                                                   23.0%
competitiveness)
Health                                                                                             21.4%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                   15.5%
Poverty reduction                                                                                  15.0%
Energy and extractives                                                                             14.4%
Economic growth                                                                                    14.4%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                              12.1%
Water and sanitation                                                                               9.3%
Natural resource management and environmental sustainability                                       8.7%
Food security and nutrition                                                                        8.4%
Rural development                                                                                  7.1%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                     4.3%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                            3.4%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                      3.2%
Gender equity                                                                                      2.7%
Crime and violence                                                                                 1.8%
Information and communications technology                                                          1.6%
Finance and markets                                                                                1.4%
Global/regional integration                                                                        0.9%
Urban development                                                                                  0.7%




                                                           57
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which                  Percentage of Respondents (N=418)
                                                                                         nd
activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is        Greatest      2 Greatest
of second greatest value in Benin?                                         Value            Value     Combined
Financial resources                                                        31.3%            15.6%       46.9%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                           22.5%            18.0%       40.5%
Capacity development                                                       13.4%            17.1%       30.5%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                 14.1%            10.7%       24.8%
Technical assistance                                                       5.0%             14.9%       19.9%
Donor coordination                                                         7.9%             9.8%        17.7%
Convening/facilitating                                                     3.8%             4.4%         8.2%
Data                                                                       1.4%             4.4%         5.8%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge
                                                                            0.5%              5.1%            5.6%
sharing)
Other                                                                       0.0%              0.0%            0.0%

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity                 Effectiveness
building work it does in each of the following areas in Angola? (1-Not effective at
all, 10-Very effective)                                                                 N      DK     Mean      SD
6.   Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                    327      98    7.28     1.90
7.   Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)              265     155    5.95     2.53
8.   Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)    307     113    7.00     2.16

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Angola to help ensure                  Importance
better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the
World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
(1-Not important all, 10-Very important)                                                N      DK     Mean      SD
9. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                      367     53     8.38     1.88
10. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)               342     77     8.47     1.78
11. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)     354     69     8.49     1.85

12. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest          Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)                          (Responses Combined; N=431)
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                            31.6%
Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the Government                                   27.1%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow and complex                                                   23.4%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                        18.6%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                               14.2%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                               11.4%
Don’t know                                                                                          10.2%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Benin                                     9.3%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                              8.4%
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving                       7.4%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                            6.0%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                                 3.9%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                                 3.7%
Not client focused                                                                                  2.6%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                            2.3%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                               1.2%
Other                                                                                               0.9%



                                                         58
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

13. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the most effective      Percentage of Respondents
  in reducing poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)                           (Responses Combined; N=430)
Investment lending (financing specific projects)                                                 61.9%
Capacity development                                                                             42.6%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                                          36.0%
Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)                     25.1%
Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)                            9.5%
Trust Fund management                                                                            9.1%
Don’t know                                                                                       4.9%
Other                                                                                            1.6%

14. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support      Percentage of Respondents
  help the poorest in Benin? (Select only ONE response)                                        (N=423)
To a fully sufficient degree                                                                     5.9%
To a somewhat sufficient degree                                                                  45.4%
To a somewhat insufficient degree                                                                23.9%
To a very insufficient degree                                                                    16.1%
Don't know                                                                                       8.7%

15. In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which
  TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with          Percentage of Respondents
  more in your country? (Choose no more than TWO)                                   (Responses Combined; N=436)
Private sector                                                                                   45.4%
Local government                                                                                 40.1%
NGOs/Community-based organizations (CBOs)                                                        32.8%
Beneficiaries                                                                                    24.3%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                         20.4%
Donor community                                                                                  9.4%
Youth/university groups                                                                          7.8%
Media                                                                                            7.1%
Parliament                                                                                       3.7%
Don’t know                                                                                       2.1%
Other                                                                                            1.6%
Foundations                                                                                      0.9%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World                Level of Agreement
Bank Group’s work in Benin? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                 N       DK Mean        SD
16. Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development
                                                                                    398     23      7.61    2.21
    in Benin*
17. The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                    370     43      6.84    2.47
    development priorities for Benin*
18. The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic for
                                                                                    371     43      6.97    2.46
    Benin
19. The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Benin with respect      304     105     6.71    2.52




                                                       59
                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in                  Level of Agreement
Benin, in terms of each of the following?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                                 N      DK     Mean      SD
20. Responsiveness*                                                                     255     131    6.22     2.21
21. Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                  268     118    5.89     2.26
22.   Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                         278     102    6.06     2.21
23.   Being inclusive*                                                                  224     149    6.65     5.89
24.   Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                    315     77     6.71     2.47
25.   Staff accessibility*                                                              296     89     5.78     2.62
26.   Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                  266     121    7.11     2.40
27. Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                        275     120    5.68     2.72
    decisions important to my work*
28. Collaboration with civil society*                                                   259     136    6.17     2.40
29. Collaboration with the Government*                                                  344     53     8.19     1.81
30.   Collaboration with other donors and development partners*                         262     129    7.55     2.16
31.   Collaboration with the private sector*                                            249     145    5.73     2.44
32.   The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                     306     88     6.68     2.28
33.   Being a long-term partner*                                                        340     62     8.45     1.93

34. To be more effective development partner in Benin, do you believe that the          Percentage of Respondents
  World Bank Group should have…? (Select only ONE response)                                        (N=436)
More local presence                                                                                72.6%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                                    17.8%
Don't know                                                                                         5.9%
Less local presence                                                                                3.7%

35. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take              Percentage of Respondents
place, which of the following would you attribute to? (Choose no more than TWO)         (Responses Combined; N=425)
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                  30.8%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                              28.7%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                    28.2%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                   21.9%
ground
The Government works inefficiently                                                                 20.7%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                                20.5%
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                 16.7%
Poor donor coordination                                                                            11.1%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                              8.9%
Other                                                                                              2.6%




                                                           60
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved                    Importance
in the following areas of development in Benin?
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                                                  N     DK     Mean      SD
1.    Agricultural development                                                              400     9     8.92     1.59
2.    Education                                                                             385     5     8.89     1.58
3.    Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                        342    21     6.22     2.41
4.    Food security and nutrition                                                           367     10     8.23    1.89
5.    Health                                                                                372      8     8.76    1.60
6.    Natural resource management and environmental sustainability                          369     12     7.87    1.95
7.    Water and sanitation                                                                  372     13     8.34    1.80
8.    Urban development                                                                     349     21     7.07    2.06
9.    Rural development                                                                     356     17     8.37    1.74
10.   Private sector development (incl. foreign direct investment, trade and
                                                                                            374     12     8.34    1.92
      competitiveness)
11.   Finance and markets                                                                   342     28     7.32    2.16
12.   Public sector governance (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                            375     11     8.56    2.02
      management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
13.   Poverty reduction                                                                     388      7     8.84    1.78
14.   Energy and extractives                                                                360     11     8.19    2.18
15.   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                      361     13     8.18    2.07
16.   Information and communications technology                                             372     11     7.46    2.21
17.   Economic growth                                                                       370     10     8.31    1.92
18.   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                               361     19     7.60    2.17
19.   Crime and violence                                                                    351     27     6.57    2.62
20.   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                         359     18     7.89    2.05
21.   Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                 366     15     8.25    2.05
22.   Gender equity                                                                         359     17     7.03    2.39
23. Global/regional integration                                                             363     23     7.34    2.31




                                                            61
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it                    Effectiveness
does in the following areas of development in Benin?
 (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                                 N     DK     Mean      SD
1.    Agricultural development                                                              276    137    6.24     2.43
2.    Education                                                                             263    128    6.81     2.29
3.    Community development (i.e., social services, Safety Nets)                            249    146    6.33     2.32
4.  Nutrition                                                                               240    149     6.41    2.22
5.  Health (e.g., maternal and child health, health system performance)                     284    116     7.29    2.04
6.  Environmental protection (i.e., forests and protected areas management)                 249    148     6.70    2.27
7.  Water and sanitation                                                                    262    138     6.95    2.11
8.  Urban development (e.g., roads, sanitation, mitigation of the impacts of floods,
                                                                                            263    140     6.64    2.32
    access to urban services)
9. Private sector development                                                               238    154     5.53    2.43
10. Business climate improvement                                                            225    168     5.83    2.47
11. Public sector governance                                                                250    144     6.00    2.41
12. Poverty reduction                                                                       317     82     6.77    2.47
13. Energy                                                                                  249    145     5.93    2.65
14. Telecommunications (ICT)                                                                192    198     5.67    2.34
15. Macroeconomics and fiscal management                                                    185    206     6.14    2.28
16. Youth employment                                                                        246    153     5.58    2.66
17. Institutional strengthening                                                             241    156     6.51    2.21
18. Trade and transport facilitation (e.g., infrastructure development, customs
                                                                                            229    170     6.24    2.44
    modernization)
19. Economic growth                                                                         269    132     6.61    2.32

3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the              Percentage of Respondents
   program in Benin? (Select only ONE response)                                                      (N=426)
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                             67.4%
In the country                                                                                       10.3%
Don't know                                                                                           22.3%

Achieving Development Results*                                                               N     DK     Mean      SD
4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development
                                                                                            345     87     7.11    1.99
    results in Benin? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank
Group in Benin? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                     N     DK     Mean      SD
5. The World Bank’s financial instruments meet the needs of Benin*                          375     54    6.78     2.31
6. The World Bank Group meets Benin’s needs for knowledge services*                         320    101    6.20     2.37

Internal monitoring                                                                          N     DK     Mean      SD
7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its
                                                                                            301    130     7.09    2.20
    work in real time in Benin? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                           62
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and                        Percentage of Respondents
activities in the work you do?                                                                           (N=421)
Weekly                                                                                                      6.7%
Monthly                                                                                                     11.2%
A few times a year                                                                                          41.8%
Rarely                                                                                                      27.8%
Never                                                                                                       12.6%

In Benin, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge                            Degree
work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                   N     DK Mean          SD
2. Are timely                                                                                  334     70    7.57     1.94
3. Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                     287    116    6.20     2.28
4. Lead to practical solutions                                                                 320     79    6.63     2.08
5. Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                        317     83    6.53     2.26
6. Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                 311     87    7.38     2.13
7.   Are adequately disseminated                                                               314     84      5.45   2.48
8.   Are translated enough into local language                                                 284    118      3.71   2.65
9.   Are adaptable to Benin’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                               324     84      6.17   2.34
     circumstances*

Overall Evaluations                                                                             N     DK      Mean     SD
10. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group’s
    knowledge work and activities make to development results in your country?*                347     79      7.34   2.04
     (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
11. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group’s
    knowledge work and activities?*                                                            344     86      7.45   1.89
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)


E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?                               Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                                        N     DK Mean        SD
1.   The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                             324    93     5.18   2.81
2.   The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                               378     40      7.88   2.13
     programs it supports
3.   The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                 320    96       6.47   2.38
4.   The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable                     266    149      6.86   2.23
5.   The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                           272    142      6.74   2.29
6.   The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Benin*                                    264    145      5.62   2.42
7.   Working with the World Bank Group increases Benin’s institutional capacity                347    63       7.25   2.14
8.   Where country systems (e.g., procurement, financial management, etc.) are
                                                                                               310    107      7.79   2.08
     adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of them*
9.   The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support (i.e.,
                                                                                               358     58      7.75   2.12
     supervision of projects)




                                                                63
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Promoting PPP in Benin                                                                     N     DK     Mean      SD
10. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find
    solutions that promote private public partnerships in Benin?                              312    115      6.79   2.17
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

11. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates              Percentage of Respondents
  in Benin? (Select only one response)                                                                  (N=427)
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Benin                                                         3.5%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Benin                                                   30.2%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                                    33.7%
Don't know                                                                                                32.6%

12. Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in                  Percentage of Respondents
  Benin? (Select only one response)                                                                     (N=421)
The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the most important
                                                                                                          62.7%
development challenges in Benin
The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Benin, and it is involved in too
                                                                                                          13.3%
many areas of development
Don’t know                                                                                                24.0%

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Benin

1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of                 Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)                                      (Responses Combined; N=430)
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                                        48.6%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                                         29.8%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                             26.3%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                              19.5%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Benin’s economy                            18.6%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)                   13.3%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost,
                                                                                                      10.0%
timeliness, other terms)
Work faster                                                                                            9.3%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                                 7.9%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Benin’s specific challenges                           6.0%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                               5.6%
Other                                                                                                  1.6%

2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group
offers in Benin, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE
of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in               Percentage of Respondents
Benin? (Select only ONE response)                                                                     (N=414)
Financial services                                                                                    18.6%
Knowledge products                                                                                    15.7%
Convening services                                                                                    1.4%
None of the above                                                                                     1.0%
The combination is appropriate for Benin                                                              60.1%
Don't know                                                                                            3.1%




                                                                64
                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


G. Communication and Information Sharing

1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social                 Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)                             (Responses Combined; N=426)
Local television                                                                                43.0%
Internet                                                                                        41.3%
Local newspapers                                                                                25.4%
Local radio                                                                                     23.0%
International newspapers                                                                        14.1%
International television                                                                        13.1%
Periodicals                                                                                     12.9%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                        7.7%
International radio                                                                             6.6%
Other                                                                                           5.2%

2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?            Percentage of Respondents
(Choose no more than TWO)                                                            (Responses Combined; N=426)
e-Newsletters                                                                                   39.4%
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/ conferences                                              39.0%
World Bank Group’s website                                                                      38.3%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                                     37.6%
Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)                  28.6%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                        10.6%
Other                                                                                           1.9%

3. Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under
which the WBG will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on     Percentage of Respondents
a list of exceptions?                                                                           (N=406)
Yes                                                                                             12.6%
No                                                                                              87.4%

4. Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities        Percentage of Respondents
    in the past year?                                                                           (N=405)
Yes                                                                                             9.6%
No                                                                                              90.4%

                                                                                     Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                                    (N=37)
Yes                                                                                             91.9%
No                                                                                              8.1%

                                                                                     Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                          (N=402)
Yes                                                                                             90.8%
No                                                                                              9.2%

                                                                                     Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                       (N=407)
Yes                                                                                             49.1%
No                                                                                              50.9%




                                                        65
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

8. Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites (e.g., blogs,      Percentage of Respondents
    Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)?                                                         (N=409)
Yes                                                                                              17.8%
No                                                                                               82.2%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                           Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                          N        DK      Mean     SD
9.   I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                    215       168      6.64   2.42
10. I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.            209      158       7.28     2.30
11. The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                                 139      254       6.71     2.84
    information about the institution
12. When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to
                                                                                 276      120       5.95     3.01
    find it
13. The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                 175      209       5.92     2.93
    inquiries

H. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                        Percentage of Respondents
(Select only ONE response)                                                                       (N=425)
Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency                          20.9%
PMU overseeing implementation of project/Consultant/Contractor working on
                                                                                                 16.5%
WBG supported project/program
NGO/ Community-Based Organization                                                                11.3%
Local Government Office or Staff                                                                 9.2%
Private Sector Organization                                                                      8.0%
Media                                                                                            7.1%
Other                                                                                            6.4%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                           5.9%
Office of Minister                                                                               3.8%
Bilateral/ Multilateral Agency                                                                   2.4%
Independent Government Institution                                                               2.4%
Office of the President, Prime Minister                                                          1.9%
Trade Union                                                                                      1.9%
Faith-Based Group                                                                                1.4%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                                     .7%
Youth Group                                                                                       .5%




                                                        66
                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


H. Background Information

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                          Percentage of Respondents
(Select only ONE response)                                                                      (N=420)
Agriculture                                                                                     19.8%
Other                                                                                           12.6%
Education                                                                                       8.1%
Health, nutrition, and population                                                               7.1%
Urban, rural, and social development                                                            6.7%
Generalist (specialized in multiple sectors)                                                    6.4%
Environment and natural resources                                                               5.7%
Governance                                                                                      5.5%
Energy and extractives                                                                          5.0%
Finance and markets                                                                             4.5%
Transport and ICT                                                                               4.0%
Social protection and labor                                                                     3.1%
Jobs                                                                                            2.1%
Trade and competitiveness                                                                       1.9%
Poverty                                                                                         1.9%
Water                                                                                           1.2%
Public-private partnerships                                                                     1.2%
Macroeconomics and fiscal management                                                            1.2%
Gender                                                                                          1.0%
Fragility, conflict and violence                                                                 .5%
Climate change                                                                                   .5%

3. Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the      Percentage of Respondents
World Bank Group in your country? (Select only ONE response)                                    (N=415)
I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group                                               28.9%
I have previously collaborated with the World Bank Group                                        13.0%
Both of the above (I currently collaborate and previously have collaborated with
                                                                                                23.6%
the World Bank Group)
I have never collaborated with the World Bank Group                                             34.5%

4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily          Percentage of Respondents
  engage with in Benin? (Select only ONE response)                                              (N=357)
The World Bank (IDA)                                                                            82.6%
Other                                                                                           12.9%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                     2.8%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                             1.7%

                                                                                     Percentage of Respondents
5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?                                   (N=329)
Yes                                                                                             11.9%
No                                                                                              88.1%




                                                        67
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


H. Background Information (continued)

6. If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in         Percentage of Respondents
  Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)                                                            (N=38)
The two institutions work well together                                                       44.7%
The way the two institutions work together needs improvement                                  21.1%
Don't know                                                                                    21.1%
The two institutions do not work well together                                                13.2%

7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank        Percentage of Respondents
  Group in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)                                        (Responses Combined; N=390)
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                                 46.7%
Observer                                                                                      29.7%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                                27.2%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                             20.0%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                            17.2%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
8. What’s your gender?                                                                        (N=428)
Female                                                                                        13.8%
Male                                                                                          86.2%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
9. Which best represents your geographic location?                                            (N=433)
Cotonou / Abomey Calavi                                                                       56.8%
Autres villes                                                                                 18.2%
Porto Novo                                                                                    9.9%
Zones rurales                                                                                 8.3%
Parakou                                                                                       5.1%
Come / Ouidah                                                                                 1.6%




                                                      68
                                                                                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups13
Office of the President, Prime Minister, Minister N=24  Employee of a Ministry N=89             PMU/Consultant N=70  Local Government N=39
Bilateral/ Multilateral Agency N=10        Private Sector/Financial Sector/Private Bank N=37  CSO N=64 Media N=30
 Independent Government Institution N=10Academia/Research Institute/Think Tanks N=25 Other N=27
A. General Issues facing Benin
In general, would you say that Benin is headed in...?*
                                                         Office of President/                                           Bilateral/      Private Sector/                        Independent      Academia/
                                                          Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/             Local      Multilateral    Financial Sector/                            Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                      Minister       a Ministry Consultant          Gov.        Agency          Private Bank        CSO      Media     Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
The right direction                                             65.2%           62.4%      65.1%            78.9%         30.0%              51.4%          45.2%     53.3%        50.0%           47.8%         64.0%
The wrong direction                                              0.0%            9.4%      14.3%             7.9%         50.0%              29.7%          24.2%     23.3%        50.0%           30.4%          4.0%
Not sure                                                        34.8%           28.2%      20.6%            13.2%         20.0%              18.9%          30.6%     23.3%         0.0%           21.7%         32.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Benin. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Benin?
(Choose no more than THREE)
                                                         Office of President/                                           Bilateral/      Private Sector/                        Independent      Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                                 Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/             Local      Multilateral    Financial Sector/                            Gov.     Research Institute/
(Responses combined)                                           Minister       a Ministry Consultant          Gov.        Agency          Private Bank        CSO      Media     Institutions    Think Tanks        Other
Agricultural development                                        47.8%           56.3%      53.7%            55.3%         33.3%              72.2%          41.0%     58.6%        70.0%           37.5%           51.9%
Education                                                       52.2%           48.3%      40.3%            50.0%         55.6%              55.6%          50.8%     51.7%        50.0%           58.3%           66.7%
Social protection                                                0.0%            1.1%       4.5%             0.0%          0.0%               0.0%           4.9%      3.4%        10.0%            0.0%            3.7%
Food security and nutrition                                     30.4%           10.3%       7.5%            10.5%         11.1%               2.8%           8.2%     13.8%        10.0%           20.8%           11.1%
Public sector governance                                        39.1%           37.9%      46.3%            34.2%         55.6%              41.7%          34.4%     27.6%        50.0%           54.2%           40.7%
Water and sanitation                                             0.0%           12.6%       3.0%            21.1%          0.0%              11.1%          11.5%      6.9%        10.0%            0.0%            7.4%
Urban development                                                0.0%            1.1%       1.5%             0.0%          0.0%               0.0%           1.6%      0.0%         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
Rural development                                                0.0%            3.4%       7.5%             2.6%         11.1%               0.0%           9.8%      0.0%         0.0%            4.2%           11.1%
Finance and markets                                              8.7%            0.0%       0.0%             0.0%          0.0%               2.8%           3.3%      0.0%         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                            8.7%           11.5%      10.4%             5.3%         33.3%              11.1%           8.2%      3.4%         0.0%           12.5%           11.1%
Health                                                          26.1%           23.0%      14.9%            28.9%         33.3%              11.1%          21.3%     34.5%        10.0%           29.2%           22.2%
Gender equity                                                    0.0%            1.1%       1.5%             2.6%          0.0%               2.8%           8.2%      0.0%         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
Poverty reduction                                               26.1%           24.1%      25.4%            15.8%          0.0%              11.1%          23.0%     24.1%        10.0%           16.7%           25.9%
Energy and extractives                                           8.7%           19.5%      20.9%             7.9%         11.1%              16.7%          14.8%     20.7%        10.0%           25.0%           14.8%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                 8.7%            4.6%      16.4%            18.4%          0.0%               8.3%           9.8%     10.3%        30.0%            4.2%            3.7%
Information and communications technology                        0.0%            1.1%       0.0%             2.6%          0.0%               2.8%           3.3%      3.4%         0.0%            0.0%            3.7%
Private sector development*                                     30.4%           14.9%      20.9%             7.9%         33.3%              38.9%          11.5%     13.8%        10.0%           20.8%           11.1%
Economic growth                                                  0.0%            8.0%       3.0%            10.5%          0.0%               8.3%           4.9%      3.4%        10.0%            8.3%            3.7%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)*                         0.0%            4.6%       1.5%             7.9%         22.2%               0.0%          11.5%     10.3%        10.0%            0.0%            0.0%
Crime and violence                                               0.0%            0.0%       0.0%             0.0%          0.0%               0.0%           0.0%      0.0%         0.0%            0.0%            3.7%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                    0.0%            1.1%       3.0%             5.3%          0.0%               2.8%           1.6%      0.0%         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
Global/regional integration                                      0.0%            1.1%       0.0%             0.0%          0.0%               0.0%           4.9%      0.0%        10.0%            0.0%            0.0%
Natural resource management and environmental
                                                                13.0%             10.3%         14.9%       10.5%          0.0%               0.0%           9.8%      10.3%        0.0%            8.3%           3.7%
sustainability
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

13
     Only 425 respondents provided the information about their current positions. Thus, only these respondents were included in the across-stakeholder analysis presented in this appendix.
                                                                                                               69
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


A. General Issues facing Benin (continued)

The World Bank Group has committed itself to twin goals: ending extreme poverty by 2030 and boosting shared prosperity. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many
different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                      Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                              Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
(Responses combined)                                        Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.     Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Water and sanitation*                                        16.7%           13.8%       8.7%      35.9%       0.0%             21.6%         11.3%   10.0%       10.0%           12.0%         14.8%
Economic growth                                              12.5%           28.7%      24.6%      23.1%      30.0%             27.0%         16.1%   16.7%       50.0%           24.0%         14.8%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                 4.2%            1.1%       0.0%       2.6%       0.0%              2.7%          0.0%    3.3%        0.0%            0.0%          3.7%
Global/regional integration                                   0.0%            1.1%       0.0%       0.0%      10.0%              5.4%          4.8%    0.0%        0.0%            0.0%          3.7%
Gender equity                                                 0.0%            4.6%       8.7%       5.1%      10.0%              2.7%          8.1%    6.7%       10.0%            0.0%          7.4%
Private sector development (incl. foreign direct
                                                            29.2%           35.6%       26.1%      41.0%     20.0%             35.1%          41.9%   36.7%      40.0%           20.0%         29.6%
investment, trade and competitiveness)
Rural development                                           12.5%           17.2%       21.7%      15.4%     30.0%             10.8%          16.1%   13.3%      10.0%           20.0%         25.9%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      0.0%            4.6%        4.3%       0.0%      0.0%              0.0%           4.8%    3.3%       0.0%            0.0%          0.0%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)*            8.3%            5.7%        8.7%      17.9%      0.0%              0.0%           1.6%    6.7%      20.0%            4.0%         18.5%
Crime and violence                                           4.2%            0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%              0.0%           1.6%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%          3.7%
Natural resource management and environmental
                                                            12.5%           9.2%        10.1%      5.1%       0.0%              5.4%          11.3%   6.7%       0.0%            16.0%         7.4%
sustainability
Information and communications technology                   0.0%            2.3%        0.0%       2.6%       0.0%              0.0%          0.0%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%          0.0%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
                                                            0.0%            4.6%        4.3%       2.6%      10.0%              5.4%          8.1%    6.7%       10.0%           0.0%          0.0%
assistance)
Urban development                                            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%       2.6%     10.0%              2.7%           4.8%    0.0%       0.0%            4.0%          0.0%
Education                                                   37.5%           44.8%       40.6%      30.8%     30.0%             35.1%          33.9%   50.0%      20.0%           44.0%         37.0%
Energy and extractives                                       0.0%           11.5%       17.4%       7.7%      0.0%             13.5%           6.5%   16.7%       0.0%            8.0%         14.8%
Public sector governance (i.e., government
effectiveness, public financial management, public          50.0%           29.9%       27.5%      23.1%     40.0%             32.4%          35.5%   16.7%      30.0%           40.0%         29.6%
expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Health                                                      25.0%           17.2%       17.4%      15.4%     10.0%             21.6%          22.6%   26.7%      10.0%           12.0%         25.9%
Agricultural development                                    33.3%           41.4%       44.9%      28.2%     40.0%             54.1%          37.1%   53.3%      50.0%           48.0%         48.1%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                       12.5%           14.9%       18.8%      20.5%     50.0%             18.9%          16.1%   10.0%      20.0%           12.0%          7.4%
Finance and markets                                          0.0%            0.0%        1.4%       2.6%      0.0%              0.0%           1.6%    3.3%       0.0%            0.0%          0.0%
Food security and nutrition*                                29.2%            9.2%       14.5%      17.9%     10.0%              2.7%          16.1%   13.3%      20.0%           36.0%          7.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                    70
                                                                                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


A. General Issues facing Benin (continued)
The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity? goal captures two key elements, economic growth and equity. It will seek to foster income growth among the bottom 40 percent of a country’s
population. Improvement in the Shared Prosperity Indicator requires growth and well-being of the less well-off. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which
of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                       Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                               Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
(Responses combined)                                         Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.     Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Better employment opportunities for young people               9.1%           21.4%      18.5%      26.5%      40.0%             30.6%         20.7%   50.0%       11.1%           27.3%         22.2%
Better employment opportunities for women                      4.5%            6.0%       4.6%       0.0%       0.0%              8.3%          1.7%    0.0%       11.1%            9.1%          0.0%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor*                 18.2%           11.9%      15.4%      11.8%       0.0%             27.8%         29.3%   25.0%       22.2%            0.0%         29.6%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help
                                                             9.1%            4.8%        4.6%       5.9%      20.0%              2.8%          19.0%   7.1%       11.1%           13.6%         14.8%
ensure greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens          36.4%           25.0%       21.5%      20.6%     10.0%             16.7%          17.2%   32.1%      33.3%           13.6%         22.2%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                         13.6%           14.3%       12.3%      14.7%     30.0%             11.1%          17.2%   14.3%      22.2%            9.1%         18.5%
A growing middle class                                        4.5%            2.4%        9.2%       2.9%     10.0%              0.0%           0.0%    0.0%       0.0%            9.1%          0.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural
                                                             13.6%           15.5%       20.0%      29.4%     20.0%             30.6%          8.6%    3.6%       11.1%           18.2%         11.1%
areas
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban
                                                             0.0%            6.0%        0.0%       5.9%      10.0%             11.1%          1.7%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%          3.7%
areas
Consistent economic growth                                   36.4%           19.0%       12.3%      26.5%     10.0%             11.1%          13.8%   10.7%      33.3%           31.8%         18.5%
More reliable social safety net                               9.1%            7.1%       12.3%       0.0%     10.0%              0.0%          17.2%   17.9%      11.1%            4.5%          7.4%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                               4.5%            6.0%        0.0%       8.8%      0.0%              8.3%           1.7%    3.6%       0.0%            4.5%          0.0%
Education and training that better ensure job
                                                             27.3%           39.3%       49.2%      35.3%     30.0%             25.0%          36.2%   32.1%      22.2%           45.5%         40.7%
opportunity
Better quality public services                               13.6%           20.2%       13.8%      11.8%     10.0%             13.9%          13.8%   3.6%       11.1%           13.6%         11.1%
Other                                                         0.0%            1.2%        6.2%       0.0%      0.0%              2.8%           1.7%   0.0%        0.0%            0.0%          0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
Do you think the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem, a moderately big problem, a small problem or not a problem at all in Benin?
                                                       Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
                                                        Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                    Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.     Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
A very big problem                                            33.3%           29.5%      31.3%      25.6%      30.0%             18.9%         50.0%   53.3%       40.0%           24.0%         33.3%
A moderately big problem                                      41.7%           46.6%      40.3%      46.2%      60.0%             40.5%         28.1%   26.7%       50.0%           48.0%         51.9%
A small problem                                               12.5%           12.5%      16.4%      20.5%      10.0%             24.3%          9.4%   13.3%        0.0%           16.0%          3.7%
Not a problem at all                                           4.2%           10.2%       7.5%       2.6%       0.0%              5.4%          7.8%    3.3%       10.0%            4.0%          3.7%
Don’t know                                                     8.3%            1.1%       4.5%       5.1%       0.0%             10.8%          4.7%    3.3%        0.0%            8.0%          7.4%
In your view, is global climate change a very serious problem, somewhat serious, not too serious, or not a problem?
                                                       Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
                                                        Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                    Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.     Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
A very serious problem                                        54.2%           53.4%      59.7%      59.0%      10.0%             59.5%         50.0%   62.1%       60.0%           44.0%         44.4%
A somewhat serious problem                                    37.5%           42.0%      34.3%      35.9%      60.0%             37.8%         31.3%   34.5%       30.0%           36.0%         44.4%
Not too serious problem                                        4.2%            3.4%       4.5%       2.6%      20.0%              2.7%         12.5%    3.4%       10.0%           16.0%          3.7%
Not a problem                                                  0.0%            1.1%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%              0.0%          3.1%    0.0%        0.0%            0.0%          3.7%
Don’t know                                                     4.2%            0.0%       1.5%       2.6%      10.0%              0.0%          3.1%    0.0%        0.0%            4.0%          3.7%


                                                                                                     71
                                                                                                                                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                                                 Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                            Office of President/                                                      Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                                      Independent            Academia/
                                              Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/            Local       Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                                     Government          Research Institute/
                                                  Minister            Ministry         Consultant     government       Agency            Private Bank           CSO                          Media            Institutions         Think Tanks              Other
                                             N     Mean SD         N   Mean     SD    N Mean SD      N Mean SD     N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N              Mean SD        N Mean SD             N Mean SD            N    Mean    SD
How familiar are you with the work of the
                                            24     5.79    2.57    85   5.42   2.26   68   6.78 1.81 39    4.69   2.23     10    5.30   2.50   36   4.83   2.65   64   5.42   2.94      26   5.27    2.41   10     5.90   1.97    25   4.28    2.03    27   4.78    2.85
World Bank Group in Benin?*
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                                 Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                            Office of President/                                                      Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                                      Independent            Academia/
                                              Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/            Local       Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                                     Government          Research Institute/
                                                  Minister            Ministry         Consultant     government       Agency            Private Bank           CSO                          Media            Institutions         Think Tanks              Other
                                             N     Mean SD         N   Mean     SD    N Mean SD      N Mean SD     N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N              Mean SD        N Mean SD             N Mean SD            N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your impression of
the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in     22     6.36    2.19    75   6.53   2.31   67   7.96 1.50 29    6.62   2.44      8    6.25   2.71   31   5.55   2.32   55   6.38   2.93      26   6.69    2.51   9      5.78   1.56    17    5.47   3.08    21   6.81    2.11
Benin.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                                         Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                            Office of President/                                                              Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                                 Independent         Academia/
                                              Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/               Local            Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                                Government       Research Institute/
                                                  Minister            Ministry         Consultant        government            Agency            Private Bank           CSO                  Media               Institutions      Think Tanks              Other
                                             N    Mean     SD      N    Mean    SD    N    Mean SD   N     Mean   SD       N    Mean    SD     N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD       N    Mean    SD     N      Mean    SD     N    Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the World
Bank Group’s staff is well prepared to
                                            21     7.05    1.96    66   7.20   1.93   61   8.07 1.57 31    7.71   1.90      9    6.11   2.42   30   5.93   2.53   49   7.37   2.66      22   7.45    2.15   8      5.75   1.49    10    7.80   2.35    17   6.76    1.82
help Benin solve its most complicated
development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                72
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Benin, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most
of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                      Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                              Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
(Responses combined)                                        Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.     Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks        Other
Social protection                                             0.0%            3.4%       5.7%       0.0%       0.0%              8.1%          7.8%    6.7%       10.0%            0.0%            0.0%
Crime and violence                                            0.0%            0.0%       0.0%       2.6%       0.0%              2.7%          4.7%    0.0%        0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)              8.3%           17.0%      21.4%      15.4%       0.0%             18.9%         10.9%   20.0%       40.0%            4.0%           18.5%
Agricultural development                                     50.0%           53.4%      50.0%      48.7%      44.4%             64.9%         46.9%   56.7%       40.0%           52.0%           66.7%
Global/regional integration                                   0.0%            0.0%       0.0%       2.6%       0.0%              0.0%          4.7%    0.0%        0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
Gender equity                                                 0.0%            2.3%       2.9%       2.6%       0.0%              0.0%          7.8%    3.3%        0.0%            0.0%            3.7%
Public sector governance                                     41.7%           31.8%      30.0%      28.2%      66.7%             35.1%         31.3%   26.7%       50.0%           44.0%           29.6%
Health                                                       20.8%           21.6%      20.0%      23.1%       0.0%             18.9%         18.8%   30.0%       20.0%           36.0%           22.2%
Education                                                    45.8%           43.2%      41.4%      43.6%      11.1%             43.2%         37.5%   40.0%       20.0%           48.0%           55.6%
Energy and extractives                                        4.2%           17.0%      17.1%      12.8%       0.0%             18.9%         10.9%   10.0%       10.0%           16.0%           22.2%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                        20.8%           11.4%      12.9%      10.3%      22.2%             10.8%         14.1%   13.3%       10.0%            8.0%            7.4%
Urban development                                             4.2%            2.3%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%              0.0%          0.0%    0.0%        0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
Private sector development                                   29.2%           22.7%      20.0%      12.8%      44.4%             35.1%         31.3%   13.3%       20.0%           16.0%           11.1%
Water and sanitation                                          8.3%           11.4%       5.7%      23.1%      11.1%              8.1%          7.8%    3.3%       10.0%            4.0%            7.4%
Food security and nutrition                                  20.8%            8.0%       7.1%      10.3%      11.1%              2.7%          4.7%    6.7%       10.0%           16.0%           11.1%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                 0.0%            3.4%       1.4%       7.7%       0.0%              5.4%          3.1%    3.3%        0.0%            0.0%            3.7%
Poverty reduction                                             8.3%           17.0%      22.9%      15.4%      22.2%             13.5%         12.5%   20.0%       20.0%            8.0%            7.4%
Rural development                                             8.3%            6.8%       5.7%      10.3%      22.2%              2.7%          7.8%    3.3%        0.0%            8.0%           11.1%
Economic growth                                               8.3%           14.8%      12.9%      12.8%      22.2%              5.4%         12.5%   20.0%       30.0%           24.0%           14.8%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                       4.2%            3.4%       1.4%       2.6%       0.0%              2.7%          7.8%    3.3%       10.0%            0.0%            0.0%
Finance and markets*                                         12.5%            1.1%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%              2.7%          1.6%    0.0%        0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
Information and communications technology                     0.0%            1.1%       1.4%       2.6%       0.0%              0.0%          0.0%    3.3%        0.0%            4.0%            3.7%
Natural resource management and environmental
                                                            0.0%            5.7%        17.1%      12.8%     22.2%              0.0%          10.9%   6.7%        0.0%             8.0%           3.7%
sustainability*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Benin?
                                                      Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
Greatest Value                                         Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                   Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.     Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks        Other
Convening/facilitating                                        0.0%            5.9%       7.2%       0.0%       0.0%              0.0%          4.9%    3.3%        0.0%            4.2%            0.0%
Data                                                          0.0%            2.4%       0.0%       2.9%      11.1%              0.0%          1.6%    3.3%        0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                            27.3%           30.6%      14.5%      14.3%      33.3%             24.2%         23.0%   16.7%       60.0%            8.3%           19.2%
Financial resources                                          22.7%           25.9%      44.9%      40.0%      44.4%             27.3%         31.1%   23.3%       20.0%           37.5%           26.9%
Capacity development                                          9.1%           14.1%      13.0%      17.1%       0.0%             15.2%         13.1%   10.0%        0.0%           25.0%            7.7%
Technical assistance                                         18.2%            3.5%       5.8%       2.9%       0.0%              6.1%          3.3%    0.0%       10.0%            0.0%            7.7%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                    9.1%           10.6%       8.7%       8.6%      11.1%             24.2%         18.0%   26.7%        0.0%           20.8%           19.2%
Donor coordination                                           13.6%            7.1%       5.8%      11.4%       0.0%              3.0%          4.9%   16.7%       10.0%            4.2%           15.4%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                 0.0%            0.0%       0.0%       2.9%       0.0%              0.0%          0.0%    0.0%        0.0%            0.0%            3.8%
Other                                                         0.0%            0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%              0.0%          0.0%    0.0%        0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                                    73
                                                                                                                                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

                                                               Office of President/                                                     Bilateral/          Private Sector/                                 Independent      Academia/
 nd
2 Greatest Value                                                Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/                       Local      Multilateral        Financial Sector/                                     Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                            Minister       a Ministry Consultant                    Gov.        Agency              Private Bank            CSO        Media        Institutions    Think Tanks              Other
Convening/facilitating                                                 9.1%            7.1%       4.5%                       2.9%          0.0%                   0.0%               1.7%        0.0%            0.0%            4.2%                 11.1%
Data                                                                   0.0%            7.1%       4.5%                       2.9%          0.0%                   0.0%               8.5%        3.6%            0.0%            4.2%                  3.7%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                                     27.3%           11.9%       4.5%                      20.6%         50.0%                  24.2%              18.6%       21.4%           30.0%           29.2%                 22.2%
Financial resources                                                   22.7%           25.0%      11.9%                      20.6%         12.5%                   6.1%               5.1%       14.3%           20.0%           12.5%                  7.4%
Capacity development                                                   4.5%           13.1%      25.4%                      11.8%         25.0%                  24.2%              16.9%       14.3%           20.0%           20.8%                 22.2%
Technical assistance                                                  18.2%            8.3%      22.4%                      14.7%         12.5%                  21.2%              15.3%       14.3%           10.0%           20.8%                  3.7%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                             4.5%           11.9%       9.0%                       8.8%          0.0%                   6.1%              23.7%       10.7%            0.0%            4.2%                 11.1%
Donor coordination                                                    13.6%            8.3%       9.0%                       8.8%          0.0%                  15.2%               6.8%       17.9%           10.0%            0.0%                 18.5%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
                                                                     0.0%                 7.1%          9.0%                8.8%            0.0%                     3.0%            3.4%        3.6%          10.0%                4.2%              0.0%
knowledge sharing)
Other                                                                0.0%                 0.0%          0.0%                0.0%            0.0%                     0.0%            0.0%        0.0%           0.0%                0.0%              0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Benin? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                                     Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                        Office of President/                                                             Bilateral/          Private Sector/                                            Independent          Academia/
                                          Prime Minister/       Employee of a         PMU/            Local             Multilateral        Financial Sector/                                           Government        Research Institute/
                                              Minister            Ministry          Consultant     government            Agency               Private Bank            CSO                Media           Institutions       Think Tanks              Other
                                         N     Mean SD         N   Mean     SD     N Mean SD      N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N     Mean   SD     N    Mean SD       N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other
                                        19     7.16    1.54    68   7.32    1.79   66   8.12 1.38 30   7.40   1.54      7     6.86   1.57   26   6.27   2.29    41    6.95   2.46   17   7.12   2.29    9   6.22   1.72    18   6.44    1.72    16   7.88    1.50
organizational strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                        17     6.12    2.18    54   6.15    2.20   42   6.81 2.35 27   6.59   2.36      7     4.57   1.81   23   5.09   2.68    39    5.46   3.01   17   5.35   2.69    6   4.83   1.94    12   5.08    2.54    12   6.75    2.26
citizens' voices into development)*
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development       20     6.70    1.72    69   6.86    2.36   51   7.73 1.78 27   7.37   1.86      8     7.50   .93    22   7.09   2.11    41    6.54   2.52   22   6.91   2.37    9   5.89   2.09    16   6.06    2.05    14   7.93    1.44
goals)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Benin to help ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in
the following aspects of capacity building? (1-Not important all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                                              Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                        Office of President/                                                       Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                                    Independent          Academia/
                                          Prime Minister/       Employee of a         PMU/            Local       Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                                   Government        Research Institute/
                                              Minister            Ministry          Consultant     government       Agency            Private Bank           CSO                         Media           Institutions       Think Tanks              Other
                                         N     Mean SD         N   Mean     SD     N Mean SD      N Mean SD     N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N             Mean SD       N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other
                                        21     8.62    1.72    74   8.70    1.48   65   8.72 1.45 33   8.33   1.74      8     6.63   3.07   30   7.87   2.27    52    7.88   2.22   23   8.17   2.10    8   8.88   1.25    20    8.20   1.99    23   9.13    1.29
organizational strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                        20     8.50    1.47    71   9.01    1.35   53   8.70 1.23 34   7.79   2.32      7     6.86   1.95   30   8.17   2.20    46    8.22   1.98   24   8.38   1.86   10   8.10   2.13    18    8.17   2.04    19   9.21    1.08
citizens' voices into development)*
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development       20     9.00    1.12    76   8.43    1.96   55   8.85 1.39 34   8.24   1.78      9     8.44   1.59   30   8.47   2.05    46    8.17   2.11   23   8.30   2.27    9   9.33   .87     21    8.48   2.14    20   8.75    1.48
goals)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                             74
                                                                                                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                         Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                                 Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
(Responses combined)                                           Minister       a Ministry Consultant   Gov.      Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Staff too inaccessible                                           4.2%           7.9%       4.5%       5.1%       30.0%              8.1%         11.5%   13.8%       10.0%            8.0%         7.4%
Not exploring alternative policy options*                        8.3%           3.4%       1.5%       0.0%        0.0%             18.9%          6.6%    6.9%       10.0%           16.0%         7.4%
Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside
                                                               12.5%           13.5%       22.7%      38.5%     20.0%             40.5%          44.3%   24.1%      10.0%           24.0%         37.0%
the Government*
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to
                                                               8.3%            7.9%        12.1%      7.7%       0.0%              2.7%          6.6%    6.9%       0.0%            12.0%         7.4%
practical problem solving
Not enough public disclosure of its work                       37.5%           25.8%       39.4%      33.3%     20.0%             24.3%          29.5%   31.0%      30.0%           40.0%         29.6%
Arrogant in its approach*                                      12.5%            3.4%        0.0%       0.0%     10.0%              0.0%           1.6%    0.0%      10.0%            0.0%          0.0%
Not client focused                                              0.0%            3.4%        3.0%       0.0%     20.0%              0.0%           4.9%    0.0%       0.0%            4.0%          0.0%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                           0.0%            3.4%        0.0%       2.6%      0.0%              0.0%           1.6%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%          0.0%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow and
                                                               33.3%           23.6%       30.3%      35.9%     20.0%             27.0%          13.1%   13.8%      30.0%           20.0%         18.5%
complex
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform
                                                               8.3%            25.8%       27.3%      5.1%      20.0%              8.1%          21.3%   20.7%      40.0%           8.0%          3.7%
efforts in the country
Too influenced by developed countries                          20.8%           15.7%       13.6%      23.1%     10.0%              5.4%          11.5%   13.8%      0.0%            16.0%         18.5%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to
                                                               16.7%           14.6%       6.1%       5.1%      10.0%             24.3%          8.2%    10.3%      10.0%           8.0%          14.8%
political realities
Not aligned with other donors’ work                            8.3%            2.2%        4.5%       7.7%      20.0%              0.0%          3.3%    0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          7.4%
Not aligned with country priorities                            0.0%            3.4%        1.5%       7.7%       0.0%              5.4%          6.6%    6.9%       10.0%           4.0%          0.0%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities
                                                               16.7%           11.2%       4.5%       5.1%       0.0%             10.8%          4.9%    6.9%       20.0%           20.0%         7.4%
in Benin
Other                                                          0.0%             2.2%       0.0%       2.6%       0.0%              2.7%          0.0%     0.0%      0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
Don’t know                                                     4.2%            14.6%       4.5%       7.7%      10.0%              8.1%          9.8%    20.7%      0.0%            8.0%          14.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                         Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                                 Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
(Responses combined)                                           Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.     Agency         Private Bank      CSO     Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Trust Fund management                                            4.2%           6.7%       13.0%      10.8%      30.0%             5.4%          8.1%    3.7%        10.0%           12.0%         11.5%
Knowledge products/services (analytical work,
                                                               16.7%           9.0%        7.2%       2.7%      20.0%              2.7%          22.6%   7.4%       0.0%            4.0%          11.5%
studies, surveys, etc.)*
Investment lending (financing specific projects)               54.2%           61.8%       66.7%      78.4%     40.0%             56.8%          61.3%   63.0%      80.0%           48.0%         57.7%
Technical assistance (advice, best practice,
                                                               25.0%           19.1%       26.1%      10.8%     30.0%             40.5%          16.1%   48.1%      30.0%           24.0%         38.5%
international experience, etc.)*
Capacity development                                           41.7%           40.4%       49.3%      48.6%     20.0%             40.5%          41.9%   33.3%      30.0%           52.0%         38.5%
Policy based lending / budget support to the
                                                               58.3%           48.3%       24.6%      45.9%     10.0%             37.8%          24.2%   33.3%      30.0%           28.0%         34.6%
Government*
Other                                                          0.0%            2.2%        1.4%       0.0%       0.0%              2.7%           3.2%   0.0%        0.0%            4.0%         0.0%
Don’t know*                                                    0.0%            2.2%        2.9%       0.0%      20.0%              5.4%          11.3%   0.0%       10.0%           12.0%         3.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                       75
                                                                                                                                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support help the poorest in Benin? *
                                                                 Office of President/                                                         Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                   Independent      Academia/
                                                                  Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/                       Local          Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                       Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                              Minister       a Ministry Consultant                    Gov.            Agency            Private Bank            CSO         Media         Institutions    Think Tanks              Other
To a fully sufficient degree                                             0.0%           11.4%       3.0%                       2.8%              0.0%                 0.0%               8.1%         7.7%            10.0%            4.0%                 11.5%
To a somewhat sufficient degree                                         45.8%           39.8%      73.1%                      50.0%             70.0%                36.1%              29.0%        42.3%            20.0%           36.0%                 42.3%
To a somewhat insufficient degree                                       33.3%           22.7%      16.4%                      22.2%             10.0%                22.2%              24.2%        30.8%            50.0%           32.0%                 23.1%
To a very insufficient degree                                           16.7%           13.6%       6.0%                      19.4%             10.0%                30.6%              29.0%        11.5%            10.0%           16.0%                  3.8%
Don't know                                                               4.2%           12.5%       1.5%                       5.6%             10.0%                11.1%               9.7%         7.7%            10.0%           12.0%                 19.2%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country?
(Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                 Office of President/                                                         Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                   Independent      Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                                         Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/                       Local          Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                       Gov.     Research Institute/
(Responses combined)                                                   Minister       a Ministry Consultant                   Gov.             Agency            Private Bank            CSO         Media         Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Academia/think tanks/research institutes*                               16.7%           23.0%      14.3%                       2.6%            40.0%                    21.6%           18.8%         6.7%            40.0%           76.0%          7.4%
Donor community*                                                        12.5%            9.2%      10.0%                       5.1%            50.0%                     8.1%            3.1%         6.7%            10.0%            8.0%         18.5%
Media*                                                                   8.3%            0.0%       4.3%                       0.0%             0.0%                     2.7%            3.1%        63.3%            10.0%            4.0%          0.0%
Local government*                                                       33.3%           46.0%      38.6%                      82.1%            40.0%                    27.0%           28.1%        30.0%            40.0%           28.0%         48.1%
Private sector*                                                         37.5%           46.0%      57.1%                      30.8%            20.0%                    67.6%           42.2%        40.0%            40.0%           40.0%         37.0%
Parliament                                                               8.3%            1.1%       5.7%                       0.0%             0.0%                     2.7%            4.7%         3.3%             0.0%            4.0%          7.4%
NGOs/Community-based organizations (CBOs)*                              25.0%           27.6%      22.9%                      43.6%            20.0%                    29.7%           62.5%        20.0%            40.0%           28.0%         22.2%
Youth/university groups                                                  8.3%            9.2%       7.1%                       5.1%             0.0%                    10.8%            9.4%        10.0%            10.0%            0.0%          7.4%
Beneficiaries                                                           37.5%           31.0%      30.0%                      30.8%            20.0%                    13.5%           20.3%        20.0%            10.0%            8.0%         22.2%
Foundations                                                              0.0%            0.0%       1.4%                       0.0%             0.0%                     2.7%            1.6%         0.0%             0.0%            0.0%          3.7%
Other*                                                                   0.0%            2.3%       1.4%                       0.0%             0.0%                     2.7%            0.0%         0.0%             0.0%            0.0%         11.1%
Don’t know                                                               4.2%            2.3%       1.4%                       0.0%             0.0%                     2.7%            1.6%         0.0%             0.0%            0.0%          7.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Benin? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                                       Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                          Office of President/                                                                 Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                                Independent         Academia/
                                            Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/               Local               Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                               Government       Research Institute/
                                                Minister            Ministry         Consultant        government              Agency             Private Bank            CSO                Media               Institutions      Think Tanks              Other
                                           N    Mean     SD      N    Mean    SD    N    Mean SD   N     Mean   SD       N      Mean     SD     N    Mean    SD     N    Mean    SD     N    Mean    SD     N      Mean    SD     N    Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently
plays a relevant role in development in   22     7.59    1.71    82   7.73   2.06   67   8.27 1.70 36    7.61   2.23      9      7.11   1.76    33   6.36   2.88    53    7.06   2.67   27   7.89    2.52   9      6.33   2.12    23   7.74    2.42    26   8.31    1.32
Benin*
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned
with what I consider the development      22     6.73    1.83    74   7.14   2.42   62   7.84 2.01 35    6.97   2.33      8      7.13   1.13    32   5.16   2.74    51    6.45   2.83   25   7.08    2.45   9      4.89   2.03    21   6.14    2.92    21   7.10    2.12
priorities for Benin*
The World Bank Group supports
programs and strategies that are          22     7.09    2.04    81   7.14   2.34   60   8.05 1.68 30    7.50   2.33      8      6.88   1.13    31   5.58   2.66    52    6.21   3.04   26   7.08    2.62   10     5.80   2.25    19   6.74    3.05    22   6.82    2.11
realistic for Benin*
The World Bank Group treats clients and
                                          19     6.26    2.21    63   6.27   2.53   56   7.80 1.73 28    7.29   2.24      7      6.00   1.63    25   5.92   2.55    41    6.29   3.13   20   7.60    2.28   8      5.63   2.39    10   5.60    2.80    19   6.53    2.89
stakeholders in Benin with respect*

*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                                                76
                                                                                                                                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Benin, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                                                         Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                             Office of President/                                                            Bilateral/          Private Sector/                                            Independent          Academia/
                                               Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/            Local             Multilateral        Financial Sector/                                           Government        Research Institute/
                                                   Minister            Ministry         Consultant     government            Agency               Private Bank           CSO                 Media           Institutions       Think Tanks              Other
                                              N     Mean SD         N   Mean     SD    N Mean SD      N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD      N    Mean SD       N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N    Mean    SD
Responsiveness*                              17     6.41    2.03    52   6.60   2.34   43   7.19 1.82 19   6.47   2.25      7     6.29   1.38   24   5.29   2.01    37   5.76   2.72    14   5.57   1.65   8    5.50   1.51    13   5.23    2.35    13   6.08    1.89
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s
                                             17     6.29    2.20    59   6.29   2.59   48   6.44 1.91 17   5.35   2.50      6     5.33   1.63   25   5.24   1.92    40   5.53   2.55    15   6.07   2.52   7    4.86   .90     15   5.33    2.29    11   5.91    1.14
products and services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                             16     6.13    2.09    61   6.20   2.29   47   6.89 1.88 21   5.90   1.97      8     5.63   1.60   25   4.96   2.42    40   5.90   2.43    16   6.81   2.04   7    4.71   .76     17   5.41    2.37    11   6.00    1.84
circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                             14     6.50    1.95    51   6.04   2.47   37   7.24 1.88 15   6.67   2.19      8     5.38   .74    21   5.48   2.42    25   6.04   2.23    17   6.65   1.84   8    5.63   1.69    12   5.17    2.59    11   7.55    1.64
Openness (sharing data and other
                                             20     5.95    1.93    66   6.79   2.50   52   7.50 2.06 27   6.30   2.25      8     5.75   2.05   27   6.19   2.73    44   7.00   2.76    16   6.44   2.92   9    5.56   2.30    20   6.20    3.17    17   7.53    1.81
information)
Staff accessibility                          22     5.77    2.25    65   6.12   2.86   52   6.65 2.24 22   5.41   2.44      9     6.11   2.47   24   5.50   2.74    40   5.05   2.81    17   5.88   2.57   10   4.90   2.89    16   4.25    2.65    11   5.82    1.78
Straightforwardness and honesty              20     7.15    2.16    55   6.96   2.33   46   8.04 1.46 20   7.60   2.11      8     6.75   2.05   23   6.70   2.75    36   6.72   3.01    14   6.57   2.77   7    5.57   2.76    14   6.43    2.82    12   7.75    1.87
Ease of access to the people at the
World Bank Group who are making              20     6.55    2.54    56   6.09   2.63   48   6.96 2.30 20   4.90   2.51      7     5.86   2.67   25   4.76   2.49    37   4.68   2.81    17   5.41   2.69   9    4.56   3.05    16   3.94    2.46    11   6.36    2.77
decisions important to my work*
Collaboration with civil society             15     5.80    2.01    50   6.98   2.22   30   6.30 1.75 19   6.00   2.03      4     5.75   .96    28   5.71   2.81    49   5.82   2.88    21   6.24   2.43   9    5.44   2.40    15   5.87    2.48    11   6.64    2.11
Collaboration with the Government            19     8.05    .91     71   8.23   1.77   59   8.61 1.23 29   8.21   1.78      8     7.75   1.04   27   7.89   2.01    51   8.10   2.62    24   8.25   1.92   10   7.80   1.48    18   7.89    1.97    18   8.11    1.68
Collaboration with other donors and
                                             19     6.74    2.18    54   7.96   1.94   40   8.30 1.73 20   7.55   2.37      8     5.75   2.38   25   6.36   2.33    38   7.11   2.56    19   7.89   1.97   7    7.86   1.07    12   7.92    1.98    13   8.00    1.73
development partners*
Collaboration with the private sector*       15     5.47    2.00    47   5.72   2.65   39   6.69 1.88 22   5.68   1.86      6     7.67   1.37   29   4.66   2.68    37   5.70   2.26    13   6.38   2.50   9    5.56   2.51    13   4.15    3.13    11   5.45    2.51
The speed in which it gets things
                                             22     6.64    2.11    68   6.68   2.28   53   7.43 1.90 21   6.57   2.79      7     6.43   1.27   29   5.72   2.07    43   6.70   2.27    19   7.32   2.43   8    4.88   2.48    13   5.92    2.50    15   6.60    2.03
accomplished on the ground*
Being a long-term partner                    20     8.80    1.44    72   8.58   1.88   58   8.97 1.20 28   8.11   1.99      9     8.22   1.64   29   8.24   1.66    50   8.14   2.63    22   8.59   1.94   9    7.44   2.88    15   7.53    2.59    18   8.72    1.41
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To be a more effective development partner in Benin, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have… ? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                    Office of President/                                                    Bilateral/          Private Sector/                                 Independent      Academia/
                                                                     Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/                      Local      Multilateral        Financial Sector/                                     Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                                 Minister       a Ministry Consultant                   Gov.        Agency              Private Bank            CSO        Media        Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
More local presence                                                        73.9%           71.6%      63.8%                     83.8%         60.0%                  75.0%              64.5%       86.7%           66.7%           80.0%         81.5%
The current level of local presence is adequate                            13.0%           21.6%      31.9%                      8.1%         30.0%                  11.1%              16.1%        6.7%           22.2%           12.0%         14.8%
Less local presence                                                         8.7%            1.1%       1.4%                      5.4%         10.0%                   2.8%               9.7%        0.0%           11.1%            0.0%          0.0%
Don't know                                                                  4.3%            5.7%       2.9%                      2.7%          0.0%                  11.1%               9.7%        6.7%            0.0%            8.0%          3.7%




                                                                                                                                 77
                                                                                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                       Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                               Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
(Responses combined)                                         Minister       a Ministry Consultant   Gov.      Agency         Private Bank      CSO     Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
The World Bank Group does not do adequate
                                                             16.7%           16.1%       14.7%      5.3%      10.0%             33.3%          14.5%   10.0%      30.0%           30.4%         19.2%
follow through/follow-up
Poor donor coordination                                      4.2%            9.2%        14.7%      10.5%     10.0%             22.2%          14.5%   10.0%      20.0%           0.0%          0.0%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                             29.2%           23.0%       11.8%      36.8%     20.0%             25.0%          19.4%   13.3%      20.0%           26.1%         26.9%
political/social realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in
                                                             12.5%           16.1%       36.8%      13.2%     50.0%             22.2%          19.4%   20.0%      10.0%           13.0%         19.2%
Government*
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil
                                                             12.5%           28.7%       22.1%      18.4%     30.0%             19.4%          37.1%   53.3%      20.0%           26.1%         34.6%
society participation*
The World Bank Group works too slowly                        16.7%            6.9%        8.8%      18.4%     10.0%              2.8%           8.1%   10.0%      10.0%            4.3%         11.5%
The Government works inefficiently*                          12.5%           12.6%       14.7%      21.1%     60.0%             16.7%          29.0%   23.3%      30.0%           34.8%         23.1%
Political pressures and obstacles*                           50.0%           35.6%       44.1%      21.1%      0.0%             30.6%          24.2%   23.3%      40.0%            4.3%         34.6%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country
                                                             33.3%           33.3%       20.6%      47.4%      0.0%             19.4%          24.2%   26.7%      20.0%           39.1%         15.4%
challenges*
Other                                                        4.2%            4.6%        1.5%       0.0%       0.0%              2.8%          1.6%    0.0%       0.0%            4.3%          7.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                     78
                                                                                                                                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Benin? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                                                        Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                            Office of President/                                                            Bilateral/         Private Sector/                                             Independent          Academia/
                                              Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/            Local             Multilateral       Financial Sector/                                            Government        Research Institute/
                                                  Minister            Ministry         Consultant     government            Agency              Private Bank           CSO                  Media           Institutions       Think Tanks              Other
                                             N     Mean SD         N   Mean     SD    N Mean SD      N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD       N    Mean SD       N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N    Mean    SD
Agricultural development                    20     8.90    1.59    83   9.05   1.41   66   8.88 1.50 35   8.57   1.94     10    8.10   1.45   34   9.26   1.36    57   8.84   1.90     26   9.31   1.41   10   9.30   1.06    24   8.79    1.50    24   8.92    1.61
Education                                   21     8.76    1.61    81   9.31   1.06   62   8.90 1.43 33   8.73   1.61     10    7.90   1.97   31   8.45   1.93    54   8.70   2.07     29   9.14   1.57   9    9.11   1.36    22   8.91    1.31    22   9.00    1.31
Social protection (e.g., pensions,
                                            17     6.53    2.18    72   6.44   2.68   55   6.29 2.31 32   6.13   2.57     10    6.60   2.84   30   6.17   1.82    47   6.38   2.73     21   6.14   2.22   7    6.43   2.07    20   4.60    2.35    22   5.82    1.65
targeted social assistance)
Food security and nutrition                 19     8.37    1.86    80   8.30   1.82   59   8.34 1.60 34   8.18   1.85     10    7.80   1.62   32   8.50   1.70    52   7.98   2.33     21   8.19   2.14   9    9.11   .93     21   7.90    2.39    22   8.18    1.76
Health                                      18     8.78    1.31    78   9.13   1.18   63   8.75 1.43 31   8.61   1.69     10    7.20   1.99   28   8.57   1.83    50   8.76   1.81     27   8.85   1.75   9    8.78   1.30    23   8.30    2.10    24   9.04    1.33
Natural resource management and
                                            18     7.94    1.98    80   8.28   1.57   60   8.23 1.66 34   7.74   2.14     10    6.50   2.17   30   7.50   2.06    52   8.06   1.94     24   8.04   2.26   7    7.43   1.81    22   6.77    2.43    22   7.36    2.04
environmental sustainability*
Water and sanitation*                       20     8.20    1.61    77   8.60   1.59   62   8.73 1.40 35   8.29   1.81     10    6.80   1.93   29   8.21   1.86    50   8.10   2.20     27   8.89   1.69   9    8.78   1.20    21   7.43    2.18    22   8.32    1.64
Urban development                           17     7.41    1.84    75   7.00   2.04   58   7.53 1.57 29   6.90   1.68     10    7.60   1.84   29   7.62   1.80    48   6.81   2.48     21   7.00   2.14   9    7.44   1.94    21   6.24    2.53    22   6.27    2.37
Rural development                           18     8.39    1.72    75   8.29   1.70   60   8.47 1.46 30   8.23   1.52     10    7.90   1.20   31   8.74   1.46    48   8.52   2.35     23   8.70   1.66   8    9.00   .76     21   7.57    2.23    22   8.55    1.22
Private sector development (incl. foreign
direct investment, trade and                18     8.39    1.58    80   8.46   1.68   60   8.45 1.81 34   7.97   1.73      9    8.56   1.33   32   8.81   1.45    52   8.17   2.55     26   8.58   1.90   8    8.50   1.77    22   8.09    2.41    23   7.91    2.25
competitiveness)
Finance and markets                         19     8.05    1.75    74   7.36   2.15   57   7.47 1.81 30   6.87   2.24      9    8.00   1.12   30   7.57   1.91    45   7.62   2.57     22   7.41   2.20   8    7.38   1.06    19   6.05    2.57    20   6.90    2.34
Public sector governance (i.e.,
government effectiveness, public
                                            21     8.71    1.59    79   8.66   2.00   60   8.65 1.82 34   8.00   2.22      9    8.89   1.27   30   8.33   2.40    51   8.69   2.39     26   8.50   1.96   10   9.00   1.15    23   8.26    2.36    21   9.24    .89
financial management, public
expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Poverty reduction                           21     8.86    1.77    80   8.88   1.68   62   9.13 1.26 36   8.58   1.90      9    8.56   1.81   34   8.62   2.15    54   8.59   2.48     29   9.07   1.49   9    9.00   1.73    22   8.91    1.60    23   8.96    1.33
Energy and extractives                      18     8.72    1.87    76   8.33   2.06   61   8.41 1.85 35   8.34   1.64      9    6.78   2.54   32   8.09   2.49    50   8.00   2.70     21   8.76   1.48   8    8.25   1.75    21   7.67    3.02    21   7.33    2.08
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges,
                                            19     8.00    1.86    80   8.41   1.84   59   8.58 1.91 33   8.24   1.77     10    7.10   2.02   31   7.97   2.26    44   7.91   2.34     23   8.00   2.22   9    8.67   1.50    20   7.50    2.96    23   8.30    1.92
transportation)
Information and communications
                                            18     7.50    1.92    79   7.66   2.04   60   7.65 1.98 33   7.36   2.15      9    6.78   1.72   32   7.22   2.64    52   7.42   2.44     25   8.04   1.84   9    7.44   1.33    21   6.43    2.93    23   7.65    1.90
technology
Economic growth                             18     8.56    1.89    79   8.24   1.99   59   8.47 1.56 32   8.22   1.84     10    8.20   1.62   31   8.19   1.80    50   8.20   2.51     27   8.33   2.08   9    9.00   1.12    22   8.27    2.03    23   8.30    1.43
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)     19     8.11    1.85    79   7.52   2.33   58   7.62 2.18 31   7.77   1.86      9    7.00   1.73   29   7.97   1.88    49   7.71   2.18     24   8.04   2.39   9    7.67   1.87    22   6.64    2.70    22   7.23    2.11
Crime and violence                          18     6.72    1.81    73   6.67   2.61   60   6.65 2.53 31   6.52   2.36     10    5.70   2.58   29   7.38   2.31    44   6.05   3.02     25   7.04   2.61   9    7.22   1.48    20   5.75    3.13    22   6.59    2.65
Climate change (e.g., mitigation,
                                            18     7.83    1.69    77   8.16   1.73   62   7.89 1.99 32   8.03   2.10      8    5.75   1.67   28   7.93   2.09    47   7.49   2.51     27   8.19   2.32   8    8.13   1.64    21   7.33    2.44    21   8.24    1.70
adaptation)
Labor markets/job creation/employment       20     8.40    1.88    77   8.35   2.00   61   8.41 1.95 31   7.74   2.02      9    8.22   .97    32   8.34   1.88    51   8.10   2.31     24   8.58   2.00   9    8.33   1.32    19   7.47    2.93    23   8.61    1.85

Gender equity*                              20     7.45    2.06    76   7.29   2.21   58   7.00 2.44 32   7.63   2.06      9    7.56   1.59   30   5.77   2.56    48   7.06   2.71     25   7.48   2.40   9    6.56   2.55    21   5.62    2.69    22   7.36    1.87
Global/regional integration                 20     7.65    1.95    79   7.22   2.27   59   7.46 2.05 32   7.50   2.42      9    7.22   1.56   30   7.13   2.47    48   7.46   2.66     24   7.71   2.58   9    6.56   2.65    22   6.68    2.48    22   7.41    2.20
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                               79
                                                                                                                                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)
How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Benin? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                                       Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                           Office of President/                                                            Bilateral/          Private Sector/                                            Independent         Academia/
                                             Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/            Local             Multilateral        Financial Sector/                                           Government       Research Institute/
                                                 Minister            Ministry         Consultant     government            Agency               Private Bank           CSO                 Media           Institutions      Think Tanks              Other
                                            N     Mean SD         N   Mean     SD    N Mean SD      N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD      N    Mean SD       N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Agricultural development                   17     6.18    2.24    54   6.94   2.16   44   6.70 1.98 26   6.08   2.56      5     6.00   1.87   25   5.36   2.58    43   5.65   3.12    15   7.00   2.30   9   5.89   1.83    15   6.07    2.28    15   5.67    2.50
Education*                                 18     7.28    1.93    55   7.20   2.30   41   7.39 2.00 25   7.40   1.68      3     6.33   .58    22   4.91   2.18    36   6.36   2.64    18   7.17   2.09   8   5.75   2.25    11   6.73    2.28    18   6.94    2.34
Community development (i.e., social
                                           14     5.71    2.09    45   6.71   2.23   44   6.98 2.03 26   7.46   2.10      6     5.67   1.75   21   5.95   2.33    40   5.78   2.66    16   6.25   2.27   7   5.71   1.70    11   5.09    2.47    13   6.23    2.24
services, Safety Nets)*
Nutrition                                  19     6.58    2.14    39   6.82   2.35   39   6.49 2.26 26   7.12   1.75      2     5.00   0.00   23   5.65   1.97    36   6.39   2.65    15   6.60   2.06   8   5.63   2.07    13   5.46    2.18    14   6.36    1.91
Health (e.g., maternal and child health,
                                           18     7.00    1.94    60   7.67   1.84   46   7.48 2.01 25   7.36   1.80      4     6.50   1.00   23   6.09   1.81    44   7.16   2.47    21   7.81   1.75   7   6.29   2.06    13   7.46    2.15    16   7.56    2.22
health system performance)
Environmental protection (i.e., forests
                                           14     5.93    2.09    50   6.68   2.39   50   7.28 1.97 22   6.91   2.29      2     5.50   .71    22   5.91   1.97    38   6.92   2.48    14   7.21   2.36   6   6.17   1.94    12   6.67    2.57    12   6.17    1.99
and protected areas management)
Water and sanitation                       15     6.47    1.96    49   7.31   1.93   45   7.58 1.88 26   7.23   1.92      4     6.25   1.26   22   6.18   1.76    37   6.57   2.46    21   7.43   2.25   8   5.88   2.17    13   6.31    1.65    15   6.80    2.65
Urban development (e.g., roads,
sanitation, mitigation of the impacts of   15     5.60    2.29    51   6.63   2.37   46   7.24 2.09 24   7.17   2.06      7     6.71   1.11   21   6.05   1.94    41   6.93   2.41    19   6.37   2.77   8   5.88   1.81    12   6.25    2.77    12   6.00    2.66
floods, access to urban services)
Private sector development*                15     5.87    2.23    44   5.34   2.40   35   6.17 2.01 21   6.00   2.19      7     7.86   1.46   27   4.44   2.33    40   5.73   2.82    15   5.47   2.03   7   6.00   2.38    9    4.22    2.86    14   4.93    2.30
Business climate improvement               15     6.07    2.22    41   5.68   2.51   36   6.39 2.23 20   6.20   2.24      6     7.83   1.17   25   5.16   2.69    34   5.38   2.74    14   7.07   2.30   6   5.83   1.33    9    4.33    2.55    13   5.46    1.94
Public sector governance                   16     6.25    2.29    48   6.25   2.51   39   6.18 2.08 19   5.47   2.01      5     6.40   2.41   24   4.75   2.23    39   5.92   2.86    19   7.16   2.01   8   5.63   2.26    12   5.33    2.31    14   6.43    2.59
Poverty reduction*                         20     6.40    2.48    66   6.95   2.51   56   7.45 2.09 25   7.44   1.89      4     7.25   1.50   27   5.11   2.39    50   6.66   2.62    23   7.65   2.08   9   5.67   2.65    15   5.73    2.58    16   6.81    2.97
Energy                                     13     6.08    2.29    49   6.00   2.64   44   6.64 2.64 21   6.57   2.50      5     7.00   1.00   23   4.87   2.51    35   5.11   2.97    19   6.79   2.30   7   5.43   3.10    14   5.14    2.63    13   5.62    2.79
Telecommunications (ICT)                   12     5.50    2.15    37   5.54   2.23   26   5.88 1.97 20   6.50   2.65      3     6.00   1.73   21   5.62   2.29    29   5.31   2.71    14   6.57   2.34   6   5.00   2.76    11   4.55    2.42    10   5.40    2.27
Macroeconomics and fiscal
                                           15     5.73    2.22    37   6.35   2.14   26   6.35 2.30 19   7.32   1.83      5     7.60   1.67   16   5.81   2.46    25   5.24   2.54    11   6.45   1.86   7   6.00   2.83    9    5.11    2.52    11   6.36    2.34
management
Youth employment*                          16     5.88    2.31    45   5.96   2.63   42   6.43 2.51 20   6.10   2.25      5     6.80   .84    23   4.43   2.59    41   4.32   2.59    16   6.31   2.87   7   6.00   2.94    12   4.00    2.45    14   5.71    2.58
Institutional strengthening                14     6.21    2.33    48   6.73   2.48   42   7.07 1.76 22   7.27   1.80      5     7.00   1.41   24   5.54   1.98    36   6.36   2.44    16   6.50   2.34   8   5.25   2.19    12   5.67    2.93    11   6.45    1.69
Trade and transport facilitation (e.g.,
infrastructure development, customs        14     5.86    2.35    45   6.16   2.31   39   6.44 2.41 21   7.05   2.46      3     7.00   1.00   19   5.32   2.38    36   6.78   2.55    18   6.11   2.65   7   4.86   2.41    10   5.70    2.54    12   6.08    2.31
modernization)
Economic growth*                           16     6.69    2.18    51   6.49   2.30   46   7.15 1.84 25   7.48   1.96      6     7.00   1.67   25   5.12   2.39    38   6.66   2.75    20   7.60   2.14   8   5.88   2.10    15   5.80    2.34    14   6.43    2.17
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Benin?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                                  Office of President/                                                    Bilateral/          Private Sector/                                Independent      Academia/
                                                                   Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/                      Local      Multilateral        Financial Sector/                                    Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                               Minister       a Ministry Consultant                   Gov.        Agency              Private Bank            CSO        Media       Institutions    Think Tanks              Other
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                 70.8%           65.2%      78.3%                     61.5%         90.0%                  54.3%              68.9%       71.4%          80.0%           48.0%                 70.4%
In the country                                                           12.5%            9.0%      15.9%                      7.7%          0.0%                   8.6%              11.5%       10.7%           0.0%            4.0%                 11.1%
Don't know                                                               16.7%           25.8%       5.8%                     30.8%         10.0%                  37.1%              19.7%       17.9%          20.0%           48.0%                 18.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                               80
                                                                                                                                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

                                                                                                                       Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                          Office of President/                                                              Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                                 Independent         Academia/
                                            Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/               Local            Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                                Government       Research Institute/
                                                Minister            Ministry         Consultant        government            Agency            Private Bank           CSO                  Media               Institutions      Think Tanks              Other
                                           N    Mean     SD      N    Mean    SD    N    Mean SD   N     Mean   SD       N    Mean    SD     N    Mean    SD     N    Mean   SD       N    Mean    SD     N      Mean    SD     N    Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD
To what extent does the World Bank
Group’s work help to achieve              19     6.95    1.72    73   7.18   1.87   67   7.58 1.44 30    6.77   1.89      9    6.67   1.32   28   7.21   2.18    51   7.20   2.47     20   7.05    2.44   9      6.00   2.00    15    6.20   2.51    16   7.06    1.73
development results in Benin?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Benin? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                                       Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                          Office of President/                                                             Bilateral/         Private Sector/                                              Independent            Academia/
                                            Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/            Local              Multilateral       Financial Sector/                                             Government          Research Institute/
                                                Minister            Ministry         Consultant     government             Agency              Private Bank           CSO                  Media            Institutions         Think Tanks              Other
                                           N     Mean SD         N   Mean     SD    N Mean SD      N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD       N    Mean SD        N Mean SD             N Mean SD            N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group’s financial
instruments (i.e., investment lending,
Development Policy Loan, Trust Funds,     22     6.73    1.88    77   6.97   2.05   66   7.80 1.81 33    7.30   2.35     10    7.40   1.43   32   5.56   2.76    50   6.38   2.56     25   6.48    2.76   9      5.33   1.66    20   5.95    2.61    22   6.09    1.74
Program 4 Result, etc.) meet the needs
of Benin*
The World Bank Group meets Benin’s
needs for knowledge services (e.g.,
                                          20     5.65    2.06    68   6.54   2.44   54   6.87 1.82 26    6.58   2.28      8    6.38   2.00   31   5.55   2.54    47   6.06   2.73     20   6.45    2.82   8      4.88   1.46    17   5.00    2.55    14   6.21    1.19
research, analysis, data, technical
assistance)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                                       Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                          Office of President/                                                             Bilateral/         Private Sector/                                              Independent            Academia/
                                            Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/            Local              Multilateral       Financial Sector/                                             Government          Research Institute/
                                                Minister            Ministry         Consultant     government              Agency             Private Bank           CSO                  Media            Institutions         Think Tanks              Other
                                           N     Mean SD         N   Mean     SD    N Mean SD      N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD       N    Mean SD        N Mean SD             N Mean SD            N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the World
Bank Group measures and corrects its      21     6.90    2.00    64   6.88   2.32   63   7.78 1.64 27    7.19   1.75      7    7.43   1.90   26   6.38   2.17    38   6.92   2.70     22   7.73    2.49   6      4.50   1.22    9     5.89   2.71    11   7.27    1.56
work in real time in Benin?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                              81
                                                                                                                                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                                    Office of President/                                                         Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                  Independent      Academia/
                                                                     Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/                       Local          Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                      Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                                 Minister       a Ministry Consultant                    Gov.            Agency            Private Bank           CSO         Media         Institutions    Think Tanks               Other
Weekly                                                                     12.5%            4.7%      15.9%                       0.0%              0.0%                 2.9%              0.0%         0.0%            10.0%           16.0%                   4.0%
Monthly                                                                    20.8%            8.1%      21.7%                       5.1%             10.0%                11.4%              9.8%        17.9%            20.0%            0.0%                   0.0%
A few times a year                                                         50.0%           52.3%      46.4%                      20.5%             80.0%                34.3%             41.0%        32.1%            40.0%           28.0%                  44.0%
Rarely                                                                      8.3%           24.4%      14.5%                      53.8%             10.0%                28.6%             36.1%        39.3%            20.0%           36.0%                  28.0%
Never                                                                       8.3%           10.5%       1.4%                      20.5%              0.0%                22.9%             13.1%        10.7%            10.0%           20.0%                  24.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In Benin, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                                                          Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                             Office of President/                                                                 Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                               Independent         Academia/
                                               Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/               Local               Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                              Government       Research Institute/
                                                   Minister            Ministry         Consultant        government              Agency             Private Bank           CSO                Media               Institutions      Think Tanks              Other
                                              N    Mean     SD      N    Mean    SD    N    Mean SD   N     Mean   SD       N      Mean     SD     N    Mean    SD     N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD     N      Mean    SD     N    Mean    SD      N    Mean     SD
Are timely                                   20     7.60    1.54    76   7.86   1.74   59   8.00 1.62 28    7.54   1.84      8      6.88   1.13    24   7.63   1.97    49   7.14   2.60   20   7.60    2.48   8      6.38   1.60    17   6.71    2.26    19   7.63    1.54
Include appropriate level of stakeholder
                                             19     6.42    2.19    64   6.64   2.18   50   7.28 1.81 25    6.28   2.01     10      6.10   1.66    19   5.58   1.84    41   5.24   2.57   16   5.31    2.57   8      5.25   1.67    16   4.94    2.86    15   6.53    1.77
involvement during preparation*
Lead to practical solutions                  19     6.74    1.41    71   6.73   2.03   57   7.37 1.75 27    6.74   1.87      9      6.00   1.66    20   6.05   1.61    48   6.13   2.76   18   6.17    2.31   9      6.00   1.87    18   6.22    2.41    19   6.63    2.01
Are accessible (well written and easy to
                                             21     6.24    2.12    70   6.51   2.09   57   7.53 1.88 24    6.54   2.21      8      6.75   1.28    23   6.00   2.41    48   6.23   2.66   16   6.94    2.24   8      5.63   1.30    19   5.63    2.81    17   6.24    2.05
understand)*
Are source of relevant information on
                                             20     7.45    1.54    64   7.66   2.03   58   8.02 1.62 24    6.50   2.23      9      7.67   1.73    26   6.65   2.58    46   6.91   2.71   19   7.89    2.00   7      7.00   1.63    16   6.75    2.27    16   7.31    2.02
global good practices*
Are adequately disseminated                  19     5.37    1.77    62   5.58   2.39   58   6.24 2.11 27    5.78   2.83      8      5.38   1.19    24   4.67   2.76    46   5.37   2.82   20   4.85    2.48   8      5.38   1.92    19   4.58    2.99    17   4.82    2.01
Are translated enough into local
                                             20     3.75    2.40    52   3.60   2.53   50   4.40 2.52 25    3.48   2.80      7      5.00   2.24    22   3.05   2.08    46   3.91   3.00   18   2.17    1.42   7      3.71   2.75    15   2.27    1.67    17   4.47    3.41
language*
Are adaptable to Benin’s specific
development challenges and country           21     6.24    2.00    71   6.15   2.41   59   6.83 1.79 26    6.50   2.32      8      6.88    .64    27   5.59   2.26    46   5.93   2.67   19   6.00    2.65   7      4.57   1.99    19   5.05    3.14    16   6.31    2.12
circumstances
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                                  Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                             Office of President/                                                      Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                                       Independent            Academia/
                                               Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/            Local       Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                                      Government          Research Institute/
                                                   Minister            Ministry         Consultant     government       Agency            Private Bank           CSO                           Media            Institutions         Think Tanks              Other
                                              N     Mean SD         N   Mean     SD    N Mean SD      N Mean SD     N Mean SD           N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N               Mean SD        N Mean SD             N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do
you believe the World Bank Group’s
                                             22     6.73    2.03    75   7.31   2.06   57   7.96 1.39 29    7.62   2.31      7      7.00   1.00    31   7.00   1.97    53   7.09   2.42   21   7.86    2.17   9      6.33   1.32    21    6.86   2.15    15   7.80    1.47
knowledge work and activities make to
development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the World Bank Group's            22     7.18    1.47    75   7.41   1.77   59   8.34 1.23 29    7.55   1.92      7      7.29   1.98    29   6.93   1.81    53   7.42   2.36   17   7.88    1.93   9      6.67   1.58    20    6.40   2.33    17   7.47    1.55
knowledge work and activities?*

(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                   82
                                                                                                                                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                                         Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                            Office of President/                                                              Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                                 Independent         Academia/
                                              Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/               Local            Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                                Government       Research Institute/
                                                  Minister            Ministry         Consultant        government            Agency            Private Bank           CSO                  Media               Institutions      Think Tanks              Other
                                             N    Mean     SD      N    Mean     SD   N    Mean SD   N     Mean   SD       N     Mean    SD     N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD     N      Mean    SD     N    Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds
                                            24     5.75    2.82    63   5.17   2.49   66   6.85 2.44 27    5.07   2.51      7     5.57   1.90   28   4.39   2.56   44    4.39   3.00    14   3.71    3.02   8      4.25   2.87    17   4.06    3.11    18   3.89    2.52
promptly*
The World Bank Group effectively
monitors and evaluates the projects and     23     7.91    1.62    82   7.78   2.07   69   8.61 1.49 34    8.15   2.00      8     7.00   2.00   31   7.00   2.59   50    7.34   2.72    26   8.73    1.76   9      7.33   2.45    20   7.05    2.21    18   8.22    1.35
programs it supports*
The World Bank Group’s approvals and
                                            22     6.09    2.58    65   6.42   2.42   62   7.47 1.76 26    6.12   2.29      7     5.71   1.50   29   6.07   2.42   42    6.19   2.74    18   6.83    2.04   8      5.88   3.27    17   5.71    2.49    16   6.00    2.39
reviews are done in a timely fashion
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard
                                            18     6.11    2.05    51   6.90   2.15   55   7.67 1.67 22    7.59   1.99      5     7.20   1.64   25   6.04   1.74   39    6.87   2.66    16   6.81    2.26   5      5.20   2.68    16   6.00    2.83    10   6.50    2.59
Policy? requirements are reasonable*
The World Bank Group’s conditions on
                                            22     6.23    1.93    50   7.10   1.97   53   7.83 1.52 22    7.00   2.27      7     7.57   1.90   24   5.58   1.95   37    6.81   2.87    16   6.25    2.62   8      4.63   2.62    12   5.42    2.94    13   6.54    1.66
its lending are reasonable*
The World Bank Group takes decisions
                                            19     5.58    2.27    53   5.47   2.61   53   6.92 1.80 21    5.90   1.89      7     5.00   1.83   23   5.43   1.75   32    5.13   2.76    13   5.31    3.09   7      4.71   2.75    13   3.62    2.18    17   5.35    2.50
quickly in Benin*
Working with the World Bank Group
                                            20     6.95    1.82    73   7.41   2.10   66   7.97 1.47 27    7.30   2.33      9     6.33   1.32   29   7.31   1.97   52    6.83   2.70    22   7.95    1.76   8      5.75   2.49    19   6.68    2.63    15   6.20    2.21
increases Benin’s institutional capacity*

Where country systems (e.g.,
procurement, financial management,
                                            21     7.71    1.93    60   7.88   1.89   67   8.45 1.53 24    8.17   2.12      7     6.43   1.62   26   7.27   2.22   43    7.77   2.63    20   8.10    1.89   9      6.67   2.45    11   7.09    1.92    15   6.73    2.66
etc.) are adequate, the World Bank
Group makes appropriate use of them*
The World Bank Group provides effective
implementation support (i.e.,               23     7.74    1.81    76   7.70   2.14   69   8.68 1.44 30    7.57   2.24      9     7.00   1.73   26   7.38   2.02   51    7.53   2.77    22   8.05    1.76   9      6.44   2.07    19   6.74    2.33    17   7.76    1.56
supervision of projects)*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                                         Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                            Office of President/                                                              Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                                 Independent         Academia/
                                              Prime Minister/       Employee of a        PMU/               Local            Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                                Government       Research Institute/
                                                  Minister            Ministry         Consultant        government            Agency            Private Bank           CSO                  Media               Institutions      Think Tanks              Other
                                             N    Mean     SD      N    Mean     SD   N    Mean SD   N     Mean   SD       N     Mean    SD     N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD     N      Mean    SD     N    Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe that the
World Bank Group’s work helps to find
                                            19     6.63    1.89    63   6.68   1.92   56   7.64 1.54 23    6.48   2.17      7     7.14   1.86   32   6.16   2.38   47    6.43   2.85    20   8.50    1.76   8      6.25   1.16    16    5.56   2.19    14   6.14    1.23
solutions that promote private public
partnerships in Benin?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Benin? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                   Office of President/                                                     Bilateral/         Private Sector/                                    Independent      Academia/
                                                                    Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/                       Local      Multilateral       Financial Sector/                                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                                Minister       a Ministry Consultant                    Gov.        Agency             Private Bank             CSO         Media         Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Benin                          0.0%           1.1%       1.4%                       11.4%         10.0%                 5.4%                 6.3%        0.0%             10.0%           0.0%          0.0%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in
                                                                         41.7%               26.1%          27.1%               28.6%           40.0%                  24.3%            36.5%        33.3%            30.0%                37.5%            18.5%
Benin
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is
                                                                         41.7%               33.0%          47.1%               20.0%           30.0%                  35.1%            27.0%        40.0%            40.0%                29.2%            22.2%
appropriate
Don't know                                                               16.7%               39.8%          24.3%               40.0%           20.0%                  35.1%            30.2%        26.7%            20.0%                33.3%            59.3%


                                                                                                                                 83
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in Benin? (Select only ONE response)
                                                      Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
                                                       Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                   Minister       a Ministry Consultant   Gov.      Agency         Private Bank      CSO     Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and
focuses on the most important development                   75.0%           65.9%       71.4%      65.7%     60.0%             63.9%          57.1%   58.6%      50.0%           52.2%         48.1%
challenges in Benin
The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective
in Benin, and it is involved in too many areas of           4.2%            13.6%       12.9%      17.1%     20.0%             13.9%          15.9%   20.7%      10.0%           8.7%          3.7%
development
Don’t know                                                  20.8%           20.5%       15.7%      17.1%     20.0%             22.2%          27.0%   20.7%      40.0%           39.1%         48.1%

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Benin
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                      Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                              Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
(Responses combined)                                        Minister       a Ministry Consultant   Gov.      Agency         Private Bank      CSO     Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Provide more adequate
data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Benin’s                13.0%           20.5%       8.8%       17.9%     60.0%             18.9%          9.4%    30.0%      30.0%           28.0%         22.2%
economy*
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                       4.3%            3.4%        4.4%       5.1%     10.0%             18.9%          12.5%   10.0%      20.0%            0.0%          7.4%
Offer more innovative financial products                    13.0%           23.9%       19.1%      12.8%     10.0%             18.9%          17.2%   20.0%       0.0%           40.0%         18.5%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing
compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other          21.7%           5.7%        16.2%      2.6%      10.0%              5.4%          9.4%    10.0%      20.0%           20.0%         7.4%
terms)
Reach out more to groups outside of Government*             21.7%           37.5%       44.1%      51.3%     40.0%             64.9%          60.9%   76.7%      50.0%           32.0%         48.1%
Work faster                                                 17.4%           10.2%       10.3%       7.7%      0.0%              8.1%           4.7%    0.0%      10.0%           12.0%         22.2%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to
                                                            8.7%            8.0%        2.9%       10.3%      0.0%              2.7%          3.1%    0.0%       20.0%           8.0%          7.4%
Benin’s specific challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services                    4.3%            8.0%        4.4%       0.0%       0.0%              2.7%          10.9%   3.3%       0.0%            12.0%         3.7%
Collaborate more effectively with Government
                                                            13.0%           17.0%       5.9%       28.2%     20.0%              8.1%          12.5%   6.7%       40.0%           4.0%          14.8%
clients (e.g., national, state, local)*
Increase the level of capacity development in the
                                                            39.1%           25.0%       39.7%      17.9%     40.0%             21.6%          28.1%   16.7%      0.0%            20.0%         18.5%
country
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank
                                                            39.1%           34.1%       36.8%      46.2%     10.0%             27.0%          23.4%   23.3%      10.0%           24.0%         18.5%
Group financing
Other                                                       0.0%            2.3%        1.5%       0.0%       0.0%              0.0%          4.7%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%          3.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                    84
                                                                                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Benin (continued)

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Benin, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the
World Bank Group should offer more of in Benin? (Select only ONE response)
                                                      Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
                                                       Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                   Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.     Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Financial services                                           20.8%           15.5%      10.9%      28.9%       0.0%             27.0%         24.2%   28.6%       10.0%           12.5%          8.0%
Knowledge products                                            4.2%           14.3%      12.5%      15.8%      55.6%             10.8%         14.5%   17.9%       40.0%           20.8%         16.0%
Convening services                                            0.0%            2.4%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%              2.7%          1.6%    0.0%        0.0%            0.0%          4.0%
None of the above                                             0.0%            3.6%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%              0.0%          1.6%    0.0%        0.0%            0.0%          0.0%
The combination is appropriate for Benin                     70.8%           60.7%      73.4%      50.0%      44.4%             59.5%         53.2%   50.0%       50.0%           66.7%         68.0%
Don't know                                                    4.2%            3.6%       3.1%       5.3%       0.0%              0.0%          4.8%    3.6%        0.0%            0.0%          4.0%
G. Communication and Information Sharing

How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                      Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                              Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
(Responses combined)                                        Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.     Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks        Other
Periodicals*                                                 29.2%           16.9%      14.9%       5.3%      30.0%             10.8%          4.7%   10.3%       20.0%           12.0%            0.0%
International newspapers                                      4.2%           13.5%      14.9%      18.4%      20.0%             10.8%         21.9%   17.2%        0.0%           12.0%            3.8%
Local radio*                                                  8.3%           20.2%      14.9%      42.1%      10.0%             16.2%         26.6%   34.5%       10.0%           16.0%           46.2%
International radio                                           4.2%            4.5%       6.0%       5.3%       0.0%             10.8%          9.4%    3.4%       10.0%            8.0%            7.7%
Local television*                                            33.3%           51.7%      43.3%      55.3%      10.0%             48.6%         26.6%   44.8%       40.0%           52.0%           50.0%
International television*                                    29.2%           10.1%       6.0%      10.5%       0.0%             18.9%         21.9%    6.9%        0.0%           24.0%            7.7%
Local newspapers                                             20.8%           27.0%      25.4%      21.1%      40.0%             27.0%         28.1%   20.7%       30.0%           12.0%           34.6%
Internet                                                     37.5%           36.0%      49.3%      26.3%      70.0%             43.2%         42.2%   31.0%       60.0%           44.0%           42.3%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube,
                                                            12.5%           7.9%        9.0%       7.9%       0.0%              5.4%          7.8%    17.2%       0.0%             4.0%           3.8%
Flickr)
Other                                                       12.5%           4.5%        4.5%       0.0%      20.0%              8.1%          6.3%    3.4%       10.0%             4.0%           0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                      Office of President/                                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                              Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
(Responses combined)                                        Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.     Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Direct contact with World Bank Group                         40.9%           15.9%      15.7%      56.4%      50.0%             36.1%         33.9%   40.0%       10.0%           12.0%         40.7%
e-Newsletters                                                40.9%           46.6%      44.3%      20.5%      50.0%             33.3%         40.3%   43.3%       20.0%           40.0%         33.3%
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/
                                                            40.9%           40.9%       48.6%      35.9%     20.0%             33.3%          37.1%   36.7%      40.0%            44.0%           37.0%
conferences
World Bank Group’s publications and other written
                                                            50.0%           45.5%       37.1%      28.2%     50.0%             27.8%          27.4%   26.7%      60.0%            52.0%           29.6%
materials
World Bank Group’s website*                                 27.3%           45.5%       38.6%      41.0%     20.0%             52.8%          38.7%   10.0%      60.0%            36.0%           25.9%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube,
                                                            0.0%            6.8%        8.6%       15.4%      0.0%             13.9%          16.1%   16.7%       0.0%             8.0%           14.8%
Flickr)
Other*                                                      0.0%            0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%              0.0%          1.6%    10.0%       0.0%             4.0%           7.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                    85
                                                                                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the WBG will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                      Office of President/                                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
                                                       Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local    Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                   Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.      Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Yes                                                          13.6%           13.3%      16.9%       8.6%       30.0%              8.3%         10.2%   11.1%       30.0%            4.0%          7.4%
No                                                           86.4%           86.7%      83.1%      91.4%       70.0%             91.7%         89.8%   88.9%       70.0%           96.0%         92.6%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
                                                      Office of President/                                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
                                                       Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/        Local   Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                   Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.      Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Yes                                                          18.2%            7.0%      14.9%       0.0%       40.0%              2.8%          8.8%   14.8%       10.0%            4.0%          3.8%
No                                                           81.8%           93.0%      85.1%      100.0%      60.0%             97.2%         91.2%   85.2%       90.0%           96.0%         96.2%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                      Office of President/                                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
                                                       Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local    Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                   Minister       a Ministry Consultant   Gov.       Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks        Other
Yes                                                          100.0%          83.3%     100.0%        -        100.0%            100.0%         80.0%   75.0%      100.0%            -            100.0%
No                                                            0.0%           16.7%      0.0%         -          0.0%             0.0%          20.0%   25.0%       0.0%             -             0.0%

Do you have access to the Internet?*
                                                      Office of President/                                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
                                                       Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local    Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                   Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.      Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Yes                                                          95.7%           96.4%      96.9%      81.8%       90.0%             91.7%         78.3%   92.9%      100.0%           96.0%         79.2%
No                                                            4.3%            3.6%       3.1%      18.2%       10.0%              8.3%         21.7%    7.1%       0.0%             4.0%         20.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*
                                                      Office of President/                                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
                                                       Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local    Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                   Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.      Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Yes                                                          52.2%           45.1%      77.6%      29.4%       70.0%             27.8%         42.6%   42.9%       80.0%           48.0%         40.0%
No                                                           47.8%           54.9%      22.4%      70.6%       30.0%             72.2%         57.4%   57.1%       20.0%           52.0%         60.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites?
                                                      Office of President/                                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/                    Independent      Academia/
                                                       Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local    Multilateral   Financial Sector/                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                   Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.      Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media    Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Yes                                                          20.8%           14.5%      14.9%      20.6%       10.0%             27.0%         16.4%   32.1%       11.1%            8.0%         20.0%
No                                                           79.2%           85.5%      85.1%      79.4%       90.0%             73.0%         83.6%   67.9%       88.9%           92.0%         80.0%



                                                                                                     86
                                                                                                                                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                                         Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                           Office of President/                                                                  Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                                 Independent         Academia/
                                             Prime Minister/       Employee of a         PMU/               Local               Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                                Government       Research Institute/
                                                 Minister            Ministry          Consultant        government              Agency             Private Bank            CSO                Media                Institutions      Think Tanks              Other
                                            N    Mean     SD      N    Mean     SD    N    Mean SD   N     Mean   SD       N      Mean     SD     N    Mean    SD     N     Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD     N       Mean    SD     N    Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites
                                           12     6.33    2.19    40   7.20    2.07   50   7.08 2.11 16    5.25   2.57      6      7.33   1.37    17   5.12   2.89    29    6.97   2.53   10   6.00    3.30    7      6.71   1.38    12   7.00    2.52    12   6.00    2.73
easy to navigate.*
I find the information on the World Bank
                                           12     7.00    2.30    36   8.06    1.62   50   7.78 1.72 18    5.72   2.87      6      7.17   1.47    16   5.50   2.53    26    7.81   2.51   11   8.09    2.39    7      7.43   1.51    12   6.75    2.77    11   6.27    2.90
Group’s websites useful.*
The World Bank Group’s social media
channels are valuable sources of           10     5.20    3.12    24   6.67    3.02   18   6.83 2.26 18    7.17   2.96      3      5.33    .58    13   5.38   2.75    19    6.68   3.22   15   8.33    2.02    4      8.25   1.71    7    7.57    3.05    6    5.50    3.39
information about the institution
When I need information from the World
                                           18     6.61    3.07    50   6.52    2.92   56   6.84 2.74 19    5.16   3.02      8      7.13   1.73    19   4.74   3.30    43    5.81   3.14   19   5.00    3.33    8      4.88   2.70    19   4.89    3.13    12   5.33    2.46
Bank Group I know how to find it*
The World Bank Group is responsive to
                                           11     6.45    2.38    36   6.28    2.66   29   7.59 2.29 12    5.25   2.73      7      6.57   2.37    14   4.50   3.13    22    6.59   3.17   13   4.54    3.31    5      3.80   3.03    11   4.82    3.16    10   4.10    2.47
my information requests and inquiries*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

H. Background Information

Which of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group in your country?*
                                                                  Office of President/                                                          Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                    Independent      Academia/
                                                                   Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/                        Local          Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                               Minister       a Ministry Consultant                     Gov.            Agency            Private Bank            CSO         Media          Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group                        34.8%           28.4%      50.7%                       22.9%             30.0%                13.5%              25.8%        7.1%              30.0%           29.2%         26.9%
I have previously collaborated with the World Bank
                                                                        17.4%                9.1%           11.9%               5.7%              0.0%                    16.2%           21.0%        14.3%             10.0%                16.7%            15.4%
Group
Both of the above (I currently collaborate and
previously have collaborated with the World Bank                        34.8%               28.4%           29.9%               20.0%            50.0%                    21.6%           11.3%        32.1%             20.0%                8.3%             11.5%
Group)
I have never collaborated with the World Bank
                                                                        13.0%               34.1%            7.5%               51.4%            20.0%                    48.6%           41.9%        46.4%             40.0%                45.8%            46.2%
Group
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in Benin?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                                  Office of President/                                                          Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                    Independent      Academia/
                                                                   Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/                        Local          Multilateral      Financial Sector/                                        Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                               Minister       a Ministry Consultant                     Gov.            Agency            Private Bank            CSO         Media          Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
The World Bank (IDA)                                                     86.4%           82.4%      98.6%                       92.6%             88.9%                57.1%              75.0%        77.3%            100.0%           77.8%         68.2%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                               4.5%            4.1%       0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%                10.7%               1.9%         0.0%             0.0%             0.0%          9.1%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
                                                                        0.0%                 4.1%            0.0%               0.0%             11.1%                     0.0%            1.9%         0.0%              0.0%                0.0%              0.0%
(MIGA)
Other                                                                   9.1%                 9.5%            1.4%               7.4%              0.0%                    32.1%           21.2%        22.7%              0.0%                22.2%            22.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                  87
                                                                                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


H. Background Information (continued)

Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?
                                                      Office of President/                                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/                     Independent      Academia/
                                                       Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local    Multilateral   Financial Sector/                         Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                   Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.      Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media     Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Yes                                                          10.0%           18.6%      10.8%       4.0%       10.0%             20.0%          8.0%   10.0%        0.0%             9.5%         11.8%
No                                                           90.0%           81.4%      89.2%      96.0%       90.0%             80.0%         92.0%   90.0%       100.0%           90.5%         88.2%

If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in Benin?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                      Office of President/                                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/                     Independent      Academia/
                                                       Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local    Multilateral   Financial Sector/                         Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                   Minister       a Ministry Consultant   Gov.       Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media     Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
The two institutions work well together                      100.0%          70.0%      28.6%      0.0%         0.0%             16.7%         25.0%   0.0%            -           100.0%         50.0%
The way the two institutions work together needs
                                                            0.0%            10.0%       28.6%       0.0%      100.0%            33.3%          0.0%    100.0%        -             0.0%          0.0%
improvement
The two institutions do not work well together              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%             33.3%          75.0%    0.0%         -             0.0%           0.0%
Don't know                                                  0.0%            20.0%       42.9%      100.0%      0.0%             16.7%           0.0%    0.0%         -             0.0%          50.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                      Office of President/                                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/                     Independent      Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                              Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local    Multilateral   Financial Sector/                         Gov.     Research Institute/
(Responses combined)                                        Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.      Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media     Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Observer*                                                    17.4%           24.1%       7.5%      50.0%        0.0%             61.3%         40.7%   51.9%        20.0%           34.8%         19.0%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                             4.3%           16.1%      13.4%      21.9%       50.0%             22.6%         25.9%   18.5%        30.0%           30.4%         28.6%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                            52.2%           28.7%       32.8%      12.5%      20.0%             22.6%          27.8%   11.1%       20.0%           21.7%         28.6%
events/activities
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*              69.6%           56.3%       70.1%      37.5%      80.0%             25.8%          24.1%   33.3%       40.0%           21.7%         42.9%
Use World Bank Group website for information,
                                                            17.4%           13.8%       17.9%       6.3%       0.0%              0.0%          29.6%   22.2%       40.0%           30.4%         19.0%
data, research, etc.*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

What’s your gender?
                                                      Office of President/                                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/                     Independent      Academia/
                                                       Prime Minister/ Employee of      PMU/       Local    Multilateral   Financial Sector/                         Gov.     Research Institute/
Percentage of Respondents                                   Minister       a Ministry Consultant    Gov.      Agency         Private Bank       CSO    Media     Institutions    Think Tanks      Other
Female                                                       12.5%            7.9%      18.6%      10.5%       20.0%             13.9%         21.0%   20.0%        0.0%             4.0%         15.4%
Male                                                         87.5%           92.1%      81.4%      89.5%       80.0%             86.1%         79.0%   80.0%       100.0%           96.0%         84.6%




                                                                                                     88
                                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


Appendix C: Responses to Indicator Questions by Geographic Location14
Cotonou/Aborney Calavi N=246                      Autres villes N=151                Zones rurales N=36

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                       Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                                 Cotonou /
                                                                               Abomey Calavi              Autres villes         Zones rurales
                                                                               N  Mean SD             N      Mean SD           N   Mean SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank
                                                                           211         6.55   2.30    127     6.72    2.57     28   7.07   2.60
Group’s effectiveness in Benin.
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Benin?
                                                                                       Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                                 Cotonou /
                                                                               Abomey Calavi              Autres villes         Zones rurales
                                                                               N       Mean    SD     N      Mean         SD   N    Mean   SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                           229         7.56   2.17    132     7.49    2.35     33   8.36   1.92
development in Benin
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider
                                                                           217         6.73   2.50    121     6.87    2.39     30   7.43   2.69
the development priorities for Benin
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Benin, in terms of each of the following?
                                                                                       Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                                 Cotonou /
                                                                               Abomey Calavi              Autres villes         Zones rurales
                                                                               N  Mean SD             N      Mean SD           N   Mean SD
Responsiveness                                                             155         6.19   2.26    82      6.33    2.24     17   6.00   1.80
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)          161         5.96   2.18    84      5.98    2.34     22   4.95   2.40
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                   165         5.90   2.20    89      6.39    2.18     21   5.86   2.46
Being inclusive                                                            139         6.75   7.29    71      6.65    2.11     13   5.69   2.84
Openness (sharing data and other information)                              187         6.71   2.40    101     6.51    2.59     24   7.67   2.46
Staff accessibility                                                        177         5.84   2.55    98      5.73    2.76     20   5.50   2.67
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                           155         6.79   2.40    88      7.55    2.27     21   7.86   2.59
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who
                                                                           166         5.69   2.70    88      5.61    2.74     19   5.84   3.02
are making decisions important to my work
Collaboration with civil society                                           151         6.11   2.28    88      6.17    2.52     18   6.67   2.87
Collaboration with the Government*                                         200         8.00   1.89    115     8.30    1.73     25   9.20   1.04
Collaboration with other donors and development partners*                  161         7.35   2.16    84      7.76    2.08     15   8.73   2.37
Collaboration with the private sector                                      147         5.60   2.41    79      5.95    2.47     20   5.85   2.76
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground               179         6.64   2.14    100     6.72    2.37     26   6.65   2.88
Being a long-term partner                                                  193         8.46   1.87    120     8.36    2.11     24   8.83   1.52
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations



14
 Only 433 respondents provided the information about their geographic location (question H9 in the questionnaire). Thus only these respondents
were included in the analysis presented in this appendix.

                                                                          89
                                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results

                                                                                      Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                                   Cotonou /
                                                                                 Abomey Calavi               Autres villes         Zones rurales
                                                                                 N   Mean       SD       N      Mean         SD   N    Mean   SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to
                                                                              208     7.09     1.94     111      7.09    2.10     25   7.36   2.02
achieve development results in Benin?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Benin?
                                                                                      Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                                   Cotonou /
                                                                                 Abomey Calavi               Autres villes         Zones rurales
                                                                                 N  Mean SD              N      Mean SD           N   Mean SD
The WBG’s financial instruments meet the needs of Benin                       214     6.61     2.32     133      6.95    2.29     27   7.15   2.32

The WBG meets Benin’s needs for knowledge services                            186     6.23     2.23     111      6.06    2.52     22   6.45   2.63
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

In Benin, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                      Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                                   Cotonou /
                                                                                 Abomey Calavi               Autres villes         Zones rurales
                                                                                 N   Mean       SD       N      Mean         SD   N    Mean   SD
 Are adaptable to Benin’s specific development challenges and
                                                                              196     6.14     2.21     104      6.13    2.39     23   6.52   3.19
 country circumstances
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

                                                                                      Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                                   Cotonou /
                                                                                 Abomey Calavi               Autres villes         Zones rurales
                                                                                 N  Mean SD              N      Mean SD           N   Mean SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World
Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities make to                            205     7.22     1.90     115      7.36    2.28     26   8.15   1.85
development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World
                                                                              203     7.37     1.82     113      7.45    1.99     27   8.04   2.03
Bank Group's knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                            90
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                         Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                       Cotonou /
                                                                     Abomey Calavi           Autres villes         Zones rurales
                                                                     N   Mean    SD      N      Mean         SD   N    Mean       SD

The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Benin             161    5.71   2.43    81       5.22    2.44     21   6.38   2.20
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group
                                                                  187    7.58   2.10    91       7.96    2.04     31   8.55   1.95
makes appropriate use of them*
*Significantly different between locations.




H. Background Information

Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group in your country?
(Select only one response)*
                                                                    Cotonou/
Percentage of Respondents                                         Abomey Calavi        Autres villes       Zones rurales
I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group                    30.7%                23.9%                37.1%
I have previously collaborated with the World Bank Group             14.3%                12.7%                5.7%
Both of the above (I currently collaborate and previously
                                                                     28.2%                16.9%                20.0%
have collaborated with the World Bank Group)
I have never collaborated with the World Bank Group                  26.9%                46.5%                37.1%
*Significantly different between locations.

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in Benin?
(Select only one response)
                                                                 Cotonou/
Percentage of Respondents                                     Abomey Calavi         Autres villes                 Zones rurales
The World Bank (IDA)                                              81.9%                 82.5%                        89.3%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                        2.8%                  1.8%                        7.1%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                1.4%                  2.6%                           -
Other                                                             14.0%                 13.2%                        3.6%




                                                                91
                                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


Appendix D: Responses to Select Questions by Collaboration with the WBG15
Currently collaborating with the WBG N=218                         Not collaborating with the WBG N=197

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                          Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                              of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                         Currently collaborating          Not collaborating
                                                                                             with the WBG                  with the WBG
                                                                                         N       Mean        SD         N      Mean        SD

How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Benin?*                    213       6.15      2.19      192        4.68      2.56
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

                                                                                          Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                              of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                         Currently collaborating          Not collaborating
                                                                                             with the WBG                  with the WBG
                                                                                         N       Mean        SD         N      Mean        SD

Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in
                                                                                         198       7.23      2.04      156        5.85      2.65
Benin.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.


                                                                                          Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                              of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                         Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
                                                                                             with the WBG                    with the WBG
                                                                                          N       Mean       SD         N        Mean       SD

To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared to help
                                                                                         187       7.56      1.93      131        6.73      2.46
Benin solve its most complicated development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




15
  Only 415 respondents provided the information about their levels of collaboration with the World Bank Group (question H3 in the questionnaire).
Thus only these respondents were included in the analysis presented in this appendix.

                                                                        92
                                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Benin, in which sectoral
areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services)
in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                               Currently collaborating     Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                        with the WBG             with the WBG
Agricultural development                                                         50.2%                   54.6%
Education                                                                        41.9%                   38.8%
Public sector governance (i.e., government effectiveness, public
                                                                                 34.6%                   34.2%
financial management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Private sector development (incl. foreign direct investment, trade and
                                                                                 21.7%                   25.0%
competitiveness)
Health                                                                           19.8%                   24.5%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                 16.1%                   16.3%
Energy and extractives                                                           15.7%                   14.3%
Economic growth                                                                  14.3%                   12.2%
Poverty reduction                                                                14.3%                   16.3%
Natural resource management and environmental sustainability*                    11.5%                    5.1%
Food security and nutrition*                                                     11.1%                    5.1%
Water and sanitation                                                             10.1%                    7.7%
Labor markets/job creation/employment*                                           8.3%                    16.8%
Rural development                                                                6.9%                     8.2%
Gender equity                                                                    3.7%                     2.0%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                   3.7%                     4.6%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                          2.8%                     3.6%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                    2.8%                     3.6%
Information and communications technology                                        2.3%                     1.0%
Finance and markets                                                              2.3%                     0.5%
Crime and violence                                                               1.4%                     1.5%
Urban development                                                                1.4%                     0.0%
Global/regional integration                                                      0.5%                     1.5%
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the following
  areas in Benin? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                       Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                           of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                       Currently collaborating         Not collaborating
                                                                                           with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                       N       Mean        SD        N      Mean        SD

Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)*                        183      7.51      1.74      125       6.85      2.10

Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)*                  143      6.31      2.41      107       5.44      2.63

Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)         173      7.07      2.09      119       6.84      2.32
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                        93
                                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Benin to help ensure better development results, looking forward,
how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
                                                                                       Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                           of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                       Currently collaborating         Not collaborating
                                                                                           with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                       N       Mean        SD        N      Mean        SD

Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                        196       8.54      1.77      152        8.18      2.01

Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)                  175       8.59      1.65      152        8.34      1.95

Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)        185       8.63      1.73      153        8.33      1.96
(1-Not important all, 10-Very important)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Benin?
                                                                                        Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                            of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                        Currently collaborating             Not collaborating
                                                                                            with the WBG                     with the WBG
                                                                                         N       Mean        SD        N         Mean         SD
Overall the WBG currently plays a relevant role in development in Benin*                204       7.88      1.87      174         7.22      2.59
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the development
                                                                                        196       7.14      2.27      155         6.35      2.70
priorities for Benin*
The WBG supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Benin*                  197       7.38      2.12      155         6.37      2.77

The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Benin with respect              177       6.77      2.41      110         6.35      2.73
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Benin, in terms of each of the following?
                                                                                        Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                            of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                        Currently collaborating          Not collaborating
                                                                                            with the WBG                  with the WBG
                                                                                        N       Mean        SD         N      Mean        SD

Responsiveness                                                                          147       6.43      2.21       98         5.88      2.24
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)                       155       5.91      2.25      104         5.78      2.29

Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                156       6.18      2.16      110         5.82      2.26
Being inclusive                                                                         131       7.11      7.44       86         5.84      2.27
Openness (sharing data and other information)                                           168       6.92      2.32      130         6.40      2.69
Staff accessibility*                                                                    162       6.35      2.45      122         4.96      2.68
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                        148       7.43      2.10      104         6.59      2.73
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making decisions
                                                                                        154       6.44      2.57      109         4.47      2.47
important to my work*

Collaboration with civil society*                                                       132       6.45      2.21      115         5.68      2.55
Collaboration with the Government                                                       173       8.13      1.79      153         8.23      1.89
Collaboration with other donors and development partners                                139       7.67      2.02      110         7.37      2.38

Collaboration with the private sector*                                                  129       6.13      2.27      109         5.19      2.58
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground                            175       6.78      2.23      119         6.41      2.32

Being a long-term partner*                                                              177       8.65      1.69      147         8.16      2.23
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                         94
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Benin?
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                    of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                Currently collaborating         Not collaborating
                                                                                    with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                N       Mean        SD        N      Mean        SD
Agricultural development                                                        201      8.82      1.67      179       8.99      1.54
Education                                                                       196      8.81      1.57      169       8.96      1.60
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                  170      6.25      2.33      156       6.08      2.49
Food security and nutrition                                                     185      8.28      1.72      166       8.14      2.08
Health                                                                          190      8.75      1.49      164       8.75      1.73

Natural resource management and environmental sustainability                    191      8.01      1.81      161       7.71      2.09
Water and sanitation                                                            186      8.33      1.66      167       8.35      1.94
Urban development                                                               179      7.23      1.90      155       6.86      2.21
Rural development                                                               183      8.48      1.59      154       8.23      1.89
Private sector development                                                      188      8.29      1.95      170       8.42      1.93
Finance and markets                                                             174      7.22      2.14      151       7.41      2.22
Public sector governance                                                        190      8.59      1.87      169       8.51      2.20
Poverty reduction                                                               194      8.83      1.71      175       8.82      1.90
Energy and extractives                                                          181      8.22      2.07      164       8.15      2.32
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                185      8.12      2.05      159       8.18      2.11

Information and communications technology                                       188      7.45      2.12      166       7.46      2.26
Economic growth                                                                 189      8.28      1.87      164       8.32      1.98
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                         181      7.64      2.06      164       7.52      2.29
Crime and violence                                                              175      6.45      2.56      159       6.62      2.63
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                   183      7.86      1.95      160       7.86      2.19
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                           187      8.19      1.96      162       8.31      2.11
Gender equity                                                                   181      7.21      2.27      161       6.73      2.52
Global/regional integration                                                     181      7.41      2.15      165       7.18      2.48




                                                                 95
                                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Benin? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                        Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                            of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                        Currently collaborating         Not collaborating
                                                                                            with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                        N       Mean        SD        N      Mean        SD
Agricultural development                                                               151       6.42      2.27      112        5.88      2.55
Education                                                                              139       6.98      2.13      114        6.60      2.40
Community development (i.e., social services, Safety Nets)                             133       6.53      2.07      105        6.01      2.57

Nutrition                                                                              125       6.55      2.12      103        6.10      2.28
Health (e.g., maternal and child health, health system performance)                    149       7.30      1.89      122        7.23      2.19
Environmental protection (i.e., forests and protected areas management)                137       6.88      2.12      100        6.37      2.43

Water and sanitation*                                                                  138       7.22      1.84      112        6.54      2.29
Urban development*                                                                     143       6.95      2.08      109        6.17      2.49
Private sector development*                                                            126       5.96      2.29      105        4.96      2.50
Business climate improvement*                                                          120       6.20      2.41      95         5.21      2.41

Public sector governance*                                                              129       6.37      2.31      110        5.47      2.39
Poverty reduction                                                                      169       6.96      2.37      137        6.45      2.57
Energy*                                                                                131       6.35      2.54      107        5.24      2.65

Telecommunications (ICT)*                                                              100       6.03      2.21      83         5.02      2.25
Macroeconomics and fiscal management*                                                  100       6.43      2.16      76         5.70      2.34
Youth employment*                                                                      139       6.11      2.36      98         4.76      2.77

Institutional strengthening                                                            139       6.68      2.09      94         6.21      2.28
Trade and transport facilitation                                                       124       6.41      2.22      94         5.82      2.62
Economic growth*                                                                       151       6.89      2.01      107        6.04      2.60
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

                                                                                        Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                            of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                        Currently collaborating           Not collaborating
                                                                                            with the WBG                   with the WBG
                                                                                        N       Mean        SD        N        Mean       SD

To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development
                                                                                       186       7.24      1.82      141        6.87      2.22
results in Benin?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Benin?
                                                                                        Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                            of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                        Currently collaborating         Not collaborating
                                                                                            with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                        N       Mean        SD        N      Mean        SD
The World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of Benin*                  195       7.15      2.00      163        6.27      2.55

The World Bank Group meets Benin’s needs for knowledge services*                       165       6.49      2.12      139        5.78      2.55
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                      96
                                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


C. World Bank Group’s Sectoral Effectiveness and Results (continued)

                                                                                               Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                                   of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                              Currently collaborating          Not collaborating
                                                                                                  with the WBG                  with the WBG
                                                                                              N       Mean        SD         N      Mean        SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its
                                                                                              166       7.36      1.96      119        6.67      2.46
work in real time in Benin?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
   *Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

In Benin, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                               Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                                   of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                              Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
                                                                                                  with the WBG                    with the WBG
                                                                                               N        Mean      SD         N        Mean       SD
Are timely                                                                                    182       7.66      1.79      140        7.41      2.18

Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation*                      160       6.64      2.13      115        5.50      2.35

Lead to practical solutions*                                                                  173       6.84      1.92      134        6.28      2.28

Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)*                                         179       6.87      2.07      126        6.02      2.42
Are source of relevant information on global good practices*                                  170       7.61      1.96      130        7.01      2.36

Are adequately disseminated*                                                                  170       5.81      2.38      132        4.97      2.55
Are translated enough into local language*                                                    152       3.99      2.69      121        3.18      2.34
Are adaptable to Benin’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                              177       6.45      2.17      136        5.70      2.51
circumstances*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

                                                                                               Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                                   of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                              Currently collaborating          Not collaborating
                                                                                                  with the WBG                  with the WBG
                                                                                              N       Mean        SD         N      Mean        SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                              184       7.42      1.94      147        7.17      2.19
knowledge work and activities make to development results in your country?

Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                              189       7.62      1.70      141        7.18      2.10
knowledge work and activities?*
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                            97
                                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                       Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                           of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                       Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
                                                                                           with the WBG                    with the WBG
                                                                                       N       Mean        SD        N         Mean       SD

The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                                        192       5.72      2.73      118         4.20      2.62

The WBG effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it supports*     205       8.11      1.97      158         7.52      2.32

The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion*            185       6.86      2.15      120         5.77      2.57
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable*                160       7.19      2.07       97         6.26      2.40
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable*                      154       7.18      2.00      104         6.01      2.54

The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Benin*                                156       6.07      2.35       97         4.91      2.31

Working with the World Bank Group increases Benin’s institutional capacity*           188       7.46      1.96      145         6.91      2.39

Where country systems are adequate, the WBG makes appropriate use of them             177       7.92      2.01      119         7.59      2.24

The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support*                       196       8.07      1.94      147         7.21      2.31
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.

                                                                                       Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                           of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                       Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
                                                                                           with the WBG                    with the WBG
                                                                                       N       Mean        SD        N         Mean       SD

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find
                                                                                      169       7.06      1.98      129         6.37      2.38
solutions that promote private public partnerships in Benin?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.



G. Communication and Information Sharing

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                       Which one of the following best describes your level
                                                                                           of interaction with the WBG in your country?
                                                                                       Currently collaborating         Not collaborating
                                                                                           with the WBG                 with the WBG
                                                                                       N       Mean        SD        N      Mean        SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.*                             133       6.96      2.09      78          6.21      2.79
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.*                    129       7.64      1.91      75          6.71      2.72

The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                                       65       6.72      2.70      73          6.67      2.98
information about the institution

When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it*              150       6.56      2.81      122         5.20      3.09
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and inquiries*           98       6.78      2.58      74          4.86      3.01
*Significantly different between those who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not.




                                                                      98
                                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


Appendix E: Responses to Select Questions by Year16
Comparing responses across Country Surveys reflect changes in attitudes over time, but also changes in respondent
samples and changes to the survey instrument itself. To reduce the influence of the latter factor, only those
questions with similar response scales/options were analyzed. Although the FY12 and FY15 samples were fairly
similar, the samples from both years were weighted to have equivalent stakeholder groups.

                                                                                               Original Distribution
Percentage of Respondents                                                                 FY12                            FY15
Office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister                                           7.1%                            6.0%
Government institutions (includes Office of Parliamentarian,
employees of ministries, independent government institutions,
                                                                                         38.0%                           42.5%
PMU/Consultants on WBG supported projects, and the
judiciary branch)
Bilateral/multilateral agencies (includes international partners)                         2.9%                            2.5%
Private sector (includes financial sector/private banks)                                  5.7%                            9.3%
Academia                                                                                  8.2%                            6.3%
Media                                                                                     9.0%                            7.5%
Civil society (includes NGOs/CBOs, trade unions, and youth
                                                                                         18.4%                           16.1%
groups)
Local government                                                                         10.7%                            9.8%
Total Number of Respondents (Un-Weighted)                                                 523                             398
(Note, respondents who indicated “Other? were excluded.)

The weighted stakeholder breakdown is presented below:
                                                                                             Weighted Distribution
Percentage of Respondents                                                                FY12                            FY15
Office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister                                          6.6%                            6.6%
Government Institutions                                                                  37.2%                           37.4%
Bilateral/Multilateral Agency                                                            2.8%                            2.6%
Private Sector                                                                           9.6%                            9.6%
Academia                                                                                 8.0%                            8.1%
Media                                                                                    7.8%                            7.8%
Civil Society                                                                            17.6%                           17.7%
Local government                                                                         10.5%                           10.2%
Total Number of Respondents (Weighted)                                                    536                             384

All data presented in this appendix are weighted. As a result, means of the FY15 data and the total number of
respondents indicated will be slightly different from the aggregated responses in Appendix A. Similarly, responses
from FY12 respondents and the total number of respondents indicated may differ from those reported in the FY12
COS report.


A. General Issues facing Benin

In general, would you say that Benin is headed in...?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                         FY12                        FY15
The right direction*                                                                             41.1%                       57.4%
The wrong direction*                                                                             27.7%                       18.8%
Not sure*                                                                                        31.3%                       23.7%
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12 respondents.



16
     Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’12 and FY ’15 country opinion surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.

                                                                          99
                                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                                    FY12                     FY15
                                                                                            N       Mean       SD       N    Mean   SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Benin?*                      525       6.01     2.34     374   5.43   2.46
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between FY15 and FY12 respondents.


                                                                                                    FY12                     FY15
                                                                                            N       Mean       SD       N    Mean   SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                           466       6.93     2.02     325   6.58   2.47
effectiveness in Benin.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between FY15 and FY12 respondents.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Benin?
                                                                                                    FY12                     FY15
                                                                                            N       Mean       SD       N    Mean   SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                                           504       7.30     2.06     348   7.52   2.31
development in Benin
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                           478       6.50     2.26     327   6.76   2.53
development priorities for Benin
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic
                                                                                           475       6.89     2.12     326   6.93   2.53
for Benin
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Benin with
                                                                                           443       7.12     2.14     264   6.67   2.51
respect*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between FY15 and FY12 respondents.

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Benin in terms of each of the following?
                                                                                                    FY12                     FY15
                                                                                            N       Mean       SD       N    Mean   SD
Responsiveness                                                                             369       6.37     2.09     225   6.18   2.25
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)                          377       5.74     2.17     239   5.85   2.31
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                   380       5.84     2.10     248   6.02   2.23
Being inclusive                                                                            336       6.35     1.92     199   6.54   5.79
Openness (sharing data and other information)                                              442       6.90     2.19     279   6.63   2.54
Staff accessibility*                                                                       423       6.20     2.40     266   5.70   2.66
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                           367       7.45     2.09     234   7.04   2.44
Collaboration with civil society*                                                          396       6.56     2.26     234   6.11   2.42
Collaboration with the Government                                                          450       8.20     1.73     304   8.18   1.86
Collaboration with other donors and development partners                                   370       7.61     2.01     233   7.46   2.21
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between FY15 and FY12 respondents.




                                                                       100
                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Benin? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                    FY12                     FY15
                                                                              N     Mean      SD       N     Mean      SD
Agricultural development                                                     395     6.39    2.20    244      6.24    2.46
Education                                                                    440     6.96    1.97    227      6.81    2.28
Health                                                                       435     7.32    1.93    251      7.26    2.03
Environmental protection*                                                    324     6.14    2.11    220      6.75    2.26
Water and sanitation                                                         393     6.78    1.80    231      6.93    2.05
Urban development                                                            367     6.32    2.02    235      6.65    2.30
Private sector development                                                   336     5.55    2.15    213      5.58    2.44
Public sector governance                                                     350     6.07    2.17    221      5.95    2.40
Poverty reduction                                                            456     6.60    2.21    283      6.75    2.45
Energy                                                                       363     5.88    2.18    221      5.91    2.66
Economic growth*                                                             379     6.20    2.13    241      6.63    2.33
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12 respondents.


                                                                                    FY12                     FY15
                                                                              N     Mean      SD       N     Mean      SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                                                             486     7.02    2.03    307      7.09    2.02
development results in Benin?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Benin?
                                                                                    FY12                     FY15
                                                                              N     Mean      SD       N     Mean      SD
The World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of Benin         438     6.52    2.19    331      6.76    2.36
The World Bank Group meets Benin’s needs for knowledge services              429     6.45    2.21    288      6.18    2.42
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




                                                              101
                                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

In Benin, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                                         FY12                 FY15
                                                                                                 N       Mean    SD      N    Mean   SD
Are timely*                                                                                     324       6.74   1.93   296   7.53   2.01
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation*                        379       6.65   2.14   257   6.11   2.31
Lead to practical solutions*                                                                    402       6.89   1.98   284   6.57   2.12
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)*                                           424       6.95   2.03   283   6.51   2.29
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                     402       7.60   1.63   278   7.32   2.18
Are adequately disseminated*                                                                    372       6.29   2.11   280   5.44   2.51
Are translated enough into local language*                                                      379       6.75   2.05   253   3.59   2.55
Are adaptable to Benin’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                                408       6.59   2.04   291   6.11   2.39
circumstances*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


                                                                                                         FY12                 FY15
                                                                                                 N       Mean    SD      N    Mean   SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG’s knowledge
                                                                                               451        7.05   2.03   314   7.29   2.06
work and activities make to development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                               437        7.61   1.78   308   7.44   1.92
knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                                                                         FY12                 FY15
                                                                                                 N       Mean    SD      N    Mean   SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                                                  420       5.87   2.57   286   5.17   2.82
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                                480       7.69   1.93   337   7.82   2.17
programs it supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely
                                                                                                442       6.86   2.12   284   6.43   2.39
fashion*
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable                           413       6.93   1.97   243   6.85   2.23
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                                 385       6.37   2.31   241   6.73   2.33
Working with the World Bank Group increases Benin’s institutional capacity                      466       7.49   1.89   312   7.27   2.16
Where country systems (e.g., procurement, financial management, etc.) are
                                                                                                430       7.90   1.94   274   7.84   2.06
adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of them
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between FY15 and FY12 respondents.




                                                                           102
                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


G. Communication and Information Sharing

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the WBG will now disclose any information
in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
Percentage of Respondents                                                                      FY12                FY15
Yes                                                                                            10.7%              12.3%
No                                                                                             89.3%              87.7%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
Percentage of Respondents                                                                      FY12                FY15
Yes                                                                                            33.8%              9.6%
No                                                                                             66.2%              90.4%
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12 respondents.

Were you able to obtain this information?
Percentage of Respondents                                                                      FY12                FY15
Yes                                                                                            87.3%              90.9%
No                                                                                             12.7%              9.1%

Do you have access to the Internet?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                                      FY12                FY15
Yes                                                                                            95.2%              91.0%
No                                                                                             4.8%               9.0%
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12 respondents.

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                                      FY12                FY15
Yes                                                                                            56.1%              48.6%
No                                                                                             43.9%              51.4%
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12 respondents.

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                                                  FY12                    FY15
                                                                                           N      Mean    SD      N       Mean   SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.*                                253       7.42   2.02   190      6.64   2.43
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                        247       7.60   1.88   185      7.28   2.32
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it*                 347       6.94   2.53   250      5.93   3.05
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                         332       6.85   2.47   154      5.98   2.95
inquiries*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between FY15 and FY12 respondents.




                                                                      103
                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


H. Background Information

Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group (IBRD, IFC, or MIGA) in your country?^
Percentage of Respondents                                                          FY12                     FY15
Yes                                                                               56.3%                    51.9%
No                                                                                43.7%                    48.1%
^For comparison, those FY15 respondents who indicated that they currently collaborate or currently collaborate and had
previously collaborated were combined, and those who had previously collaborate (but not currently) and those who never
collaborated were combined, for comparison to the FY12 COS that asked this question as a Yes/No response.

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Benin?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                              FY12                    FY15
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                     46.4%                   45.5%
Observer                                                                          25.9%                   31.6%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities*                   43.1%                   26.5%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                 25.2%                   20.2%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                22.4%                   17.7%
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12 respondents.




                                                              104
                                                                                                                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


Appendix F: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the World Bank Group
                                                                                        Which of the following
                                                                                                                      Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                         describes your level of
                                                                                      interaction with the WBG?          Observer          Use WBG reports/data   Engage in WBG activities       Collaborate        Use WBG website
                                                                                           Not        Currently
                                                                                                                    No Mean    Yes Mean    No Mean    Yes Mean     No Mean     Yes Mean      No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean   Yes Mean
Indicator Question                                                                    Collaborating Collaborating
Overa l l , pl ea s e ra te your i mpres s i on of the Worl d Ba nk Group’s
                                                                                          5.85          7.23         6.98           5.95     6.61       7.03         6.56         7.07        6.36        7.04      6.71       6.63
effecti venes s i n Beni n.
Overa l l the Worl d Ba nk Group currentl y pl a ys a rel eva nt rol e i n
                                                                                          7.22          7.88         7.81           7.24     7.71       7.42         7.52         8.02        7.56        7.75      7.65       7.69
devel opment i n Beni n
The Worl d Ba nk Group’s work i s a l i gned wi th wha t I cons i der
                                                                                          6.35          7.14         7.09           6.10     6.83       6.82         6.72         7.10        6.52        7.13      6.81       6.88
the devel opment pri ori ti es for Beni n
Res pons i venes s                                                                        5.88          6.43         6.60           5.04     6.22       6.31         6.21         6.30        5.92        6.53      6.15       6.60
Fl exi bi l i ty (i n terms of the i ns ti tuti on’s products a nd s ervi ces )           5.78          5.91         6.05           5.40     5.87       5.98         5.82         6.09        5.68        6.09      5.87       6.00
Fl exi bi l i ty (i n terms of cha ngi ng country ci rcums ta nces )                      5.82          6.18         6.24           5.42     6.01       6.12         5.98         6.17        5.77        6.30      5.97       6.31
Bei ng i ncl us i ve                                                                      5.84          7.11         7.09           5.28     6.28       7.94         6.79         6.20        6.72        6.57      6.71       6.35
Opennes s (s ha ri ng da ta a nd other i nforma ti on)                                    6.40          6.92         7.08           5.65     6.57       7.14         6.77         6.53        6.37        7.07      6.57       7.30
Sta ff a cces s i bi l i ty                                                               4.96          6.35         6.18           4.76     5.85       5.73         5.79         5.89        5.34        6.30      5.84       5.75
Stra i ghtforwa rdnes s a nd hones ty                                                     6.59          7.43         7.36           6.29     7.03       7.38         6.98         7.46        6.74        7.47      7.04       7.42
Ea s e of a cces s to the peopl e a t the Worl d Ba nk Group who a re
                                                                                          4.47          6.44         6.26           3.89     5.75       5.46         5.50         6.19        4.77        6.55      5.73       5.48
ma ki ng deci s i ons i mporta nt to my work
Col l a bora ti on wi th ci vi l s oci ety                                                5.68          6.45         6.41           5.37     6.08       6.11         5.99         6.37        5.75        6.49      6.07       6.16
Col l a bora ti on wi th the Government                                                   8.23          8.13         8.19           8.15     8.13       8.34         8.15         8.26        8.22        8.13      8.15       8.31
Col l a bora ti on wi th other donors a nd devel opment pa rtners                         7.37          7.67         7.75           6.93     7.47       7.61         7.37         7.95        7.37        7.64      7.42       7.93
Col l a bora ti on wi th the pri va te s ector                                            5.19          6.13         6.10           4.86     5.66       5.88         5.63         6.00        5.29        6.21      5.66       5.93
The s peed i n whi ch i t gets thi ngs a ccompl i s hed on the ground                     6.41          6.78         6.71           6.25     6.49       7.00         6.70         6.32        6.38        6.80      6.63       6.45
Bei ng a l ong-term pa rtner                                                              8.16          8.65         8.50           8.38     8.52       8.30         8.45         8.53        8.29        8.65      8.43       8.65
To wha t extent does the Worl d Ba nk Group’s work hel p to
                                                                                          6.87          7.24         7.09           7.12     7.19       6.75         6.97         7.44        7.14        7.05      7.08       7.18
a chi eve devel opment res ul ts i n Beni n?
The Worl d Ba nk Group’s fi na nci a l i ns truments meet the needs
                                                                                          6.27          7.15         6.97           6.32     6.75       6.96         6.66         7.15        6.51        7.10      6.88       6.42
of Beni n
The Worl d Ba nk Group meets Beni n’s needs for knowl edge
                                                                                          5.78          6.49         6.37           5.67     6.09       6.44         6.07         6.44        5.92        6.43      6.17       6.16
s ervi ces (e.g., res ea rch, a na l ys i s , da ta , techni ca l a s s i s ta nce)
Are a da pta bl e to Beni n’s s peci fi c devel opment cha l l enges a nd
                                                                                          5.70          6.45         6.32           5.81     6.11       6.43         6.08         6.47        6.01        6.36      6.32       5.60
country ci rcums ta nces
Overa l l , how s i gni fi ca nt a contri buti on do you bel i eve the
Worl d Ba nk Group’s knowl edge work a nd a cti vi ti es ma ke to                         7.17          7.42         7.37           7.18     7.30       7.38         7.21         7.61        7.26        7.37      7.34       7.21
devel opment res ul ts i n your country?
Overa l l , how woul d you ra te the techni ca l qua l i ty of the Worl d
                                                                                          7.18          7.62         7.61           7.08     7.41       7.66         7.42         7.60        7.37        7.58      7.46       7.48
Ba nk Group's knowl edge work a nd a cti vi ti es ?
The Worl d Ba nk Group ta kes deci s i ons qui ckl y i n Beni n                           4.91          6.07         5.94           4.64     5.52       5.98         5.56         5.81        5.30        5.93      5.69       5.37
 Where country s ys tems a re a dequa te, the Worl d Ba nk Group
                                                                                          7.59          7.92         7.90           7.52     7.86       7.58         7.57         8.36        7.70        7.91      7.84       7.67
 ma kes a ppropri a te us e of them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No means.



                                                                                                                              105
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


Appendix G: Benin FY 2015 Questionnaire




                           World Bank Group Country Survey FY15 – Benin


The World Bank Group is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Benin or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey will give the World Bank Group’s team that works in Benin, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is
perceived. This is one tool the World Bank Group uses to assess the views of its stakeholders, and to develop
more effective strategies that support development in Benin.

A local independent firm has been hired to oversee the logistics of this survey. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid.

Finally, the survey relates to the World Bank Group’s work. The World Bank Group consists of IBRD, IDA, IFC,
MIGA, and ICSID. When responding to the survey, please consider the area of the World Bank Group with which
you are most familiar.

To complete the survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion.
If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank. If you feel that you do not have an
adequate amount of information on a subject, please check “Don’t know?.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING BENIN

 A1. In general would you say that Benin is headed in ... ?
 1   The right direction
 2   The wrong direction
 3   Not sure




                                                      106
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Benin.
Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in
Benin? (Choose no more than THREE) — Kindly read to the end before making
your choices
 1    Agricultural development                             13    Poverty reduction
 2    Education                                            14    Energy and extractives
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 3                                                         15    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
      assistance)
 4    Food security and nutrition                          16    Information and communications technology
      Public sector governance (i.e., government
                                                                 Private sector development (incl. foreign direct
 5    effectiveness, public financial management, public   17
                                                                 investment, trade and competitiveness)
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 6    Water and sanitation                                 18    Economic growth
 7    Urban development                                    19    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 8    Rural development                                    20    Crime and violence
 9    Finance and markets                                  21    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
10    Labor markets/job creation/employment                22    Global/regional integration
11    Health                                                     Natural resource management and environmental
                                                           23
12    Gender equity                                              sustainability


A3. The World Bank Group has committed itself to twin goals: ending extreme poverty by 2030 and
boosting shared prosperity. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many
different areas.
Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE) — Kindly read to the end before
making your choices
 1    Water and sanitation                                 12    Information and communications technology
                                                                 Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 2    Economic growth                                      13
                                                                 assistance)
 3    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)        14    Urban development
 4    Global/regional integration                          15    Education
 5    Gender equity                                        16    Energy and extractives
                                                                 Public sector governance (i.e., government
      Private sector development (incl. foreign direct
 6                                                         17    effectiveness, public financial management, public
      investment, trade and competitiveness)
                                                                 expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 7    Rural development                                    18    Health
 8    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)              19    Agricultural development
 9    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)     20    Labor markets/job creation/employment
 10   Crime and violence                                   21    Finance and markets
      Natural resource management and environmental
 11                                                        22    Food security and nutrition
      sustainability




                                                           107
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
A4. The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity? goal captures two key elements, economic growth
and equity. It will seek to foster income growth among the bottom 40 percent of a country’s
population. Improvement in the Shared Prosperity Indicator requires growth and well-being of the
less well-off. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the
following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Benin? (Choose no more than
TWO) — Kindly read to the end before making your choices
 1     Better employment opportunities for young people
 2     Better employment opportunities for women
 3     Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
 4     Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
 5     Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens
 6     Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
 7     A growing middle class
 8     Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
 9     Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
 10    Consistent economic growth
 11    More reliable social safety net
 12    Greater equity of fiscal policy
 13    Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
 14    Better quality public services
 15    Other (please specify):_____________________________________


A5. Do you think the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem, a moderately big
problem, a small problem or not a problem at all in Benin?             (Select only ONE response)
 1    A very big problem
 2    A moderately big problem
 3    A small problem
 4    Not a problem at all
 5    Don’t know


A6. In your view, is global climate change a very serious problem, somewhat serious, not too
serious, or not a problem?        (Select only ONE response)
 1    A very serious problem
 2    A somewhat serious problem
 3    Not too serious problem
 4    Not a problem
 5    Don’t know




                                                             108
                                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Benin?
         1            2           3       4       5           6            7          8            9                  10
Not familiar at all                                                                                            Extremely familiar



B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Benin.
        1             2       3       4    5      6       7                8          9           10                  
Not effective at
                                                                                             Very effective       Don't know
all


B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
knowledge) to help Benin solve its most complicated development challenges?
        1             2       3       4    5      6       7            8          9               10                  
To no degree at                                                                                    To a very
                                                                                                                  Don't know
all                                                                                       significant degree


B4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development
results in Benin, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its
resources (financial and knowledge services) in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE) —
Kindly read to the end before making your choices
     Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social                 Private sector development (incl. foreign direct
 1                                                                13
     assistance)                                                        investment, trade and competitiveness)
 2   Crime and violence                                           14    Water and sanitation
 3   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             15    Food security and nutrition
 4   Agricultural development                                     16    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 5   Global/regional integration                                  17    Poverty reduction
 6   Gender equity                                                18    Rural development
     Public sector governance (i.e., government
 7   effectiveness, public financial management, public           19    Economic growth
     expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 8   Health                                                       20    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 9   Education                                                    21    Finance and markets
10   Energy and extractives                                       22    Information and communications technology
11   Labor markets/job creation/employment                              Natural resource management and environmental
                                                                  23
12   Urban development                                                  sustainability




                                                                  109
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
B5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Benin?
                                                                        Greatest Value           Second Greatest Value
                                                                (Choose only ONE)                (Choose only ONE)
 1     Convening/facilitating                                                                              
 2     Data                                                                                                
 3     Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                                    
 4     Financial resources                                                                                 
 5     Capacity development                                                                                
 6     Technical assistance                                                                                
 7     Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                          
 8     Donor coordination                                                                                  
       Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 9                                                                                                         
       knowledge sharing)
10     Other (please specify): ________________________                                                    


How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in
each of the following areas in Benin? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed
below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                at all                                       effective   know
        Project implementation (or other organizational
 B6                                                                 1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        strengthening)
        Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B7                                                                 1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        into development)
        Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B8                                                                 1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        achieve development goals)


When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Benin to help ensure better development
results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
aspects of capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed below,
please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                Not important                                Very        Don't
                                                                at all                                   important       know
        Project implementation (or other organizational
 B9                                                                 1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        strengthening)
        Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B10                                                                1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        into development)
        Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B11                                                                1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        achieve development goals)




                                                              110
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
B12. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
work in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO) — Kindly read to the end before
making your choices
 1   Staff too inaccessible
 2   Not exploring alternative policy options
 3   Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the Government
 4   Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving
 5   Not enough public disclosure of its work
 6   Arrogant in its approach
 7   Not client focused
 8   The credibility of its knowledge/data
 9   World Bank Group’s processes too slow and complex
10   Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
11   Too influenced by developed countries
12   Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
13   Not aligned with other donors’ work
14   Not aligned with country priorities
15   Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Benin
16   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
17   Don’t know


B13. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing
poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1   Trust Fund management
 2   Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
 3   Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 4   Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
 5   Capacity development
 6   Policy based lending / budget support to the Government
 7   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 8   Don’t know


B14. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support help the poorest
in Benin? (Select only ONE response)
 1   To a fully sufficient degree
 2   To a somewhat sufficient degree
 3   To a somewhat insufficient degree
 4   To a very insufficient degree
 5   Don’t know




                                                              111
                                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
B15. In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following
groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country?
(Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Academia/think tanks/research institutes                   7         NGOs/Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 2    Donor community                                            8         Youth/university groups
 3    Media                                                      9         Beneficiaries
 4    Local Government                                           10        Foundations
 5    Private sector                                             11        Other (please specify): _____________________
 6    Parliament                                                 12        Don’t know


To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in
Benin?
                                                                      Strongly                                  Strongly   Don't
                                                                      disagree                                     agree   know
       Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
B16                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       relevant role in development in Benin
       The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
B17                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       consider the development priorities for Benin
       The World Bank Group supports programs and
B18                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       strategies that are realistic for Benin
       The World Bank Group treats clients and
B19                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       stakeholders in Benin with respect

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Benin, in terms of each of
the following?
                                                                      To no                                  To a very
                                                                                                                           Don't
                                                                      degree at                             significant
                                                                                                                           know
                                                                      all                                      degree
B20    Responsiveness                                                  1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
B21                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       services)
       Flexibility (in terms of changing country
B22                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       circumstances)
B23    Being inclusive                                                 1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
B24    Openness (sharing data and other information)                   1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
B25    Staff accessibility                                             1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
B26    Straightforwardness and honesty                                 1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       Ease of access to the people at the World Bank
B27    Group who are making decisions important to my                  1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       work
B28    Collaboration with civil society                                1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      

B29    Collaboration with the Government                               1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       Collaboration with other donors and development
B30                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       partners
B31    Collaboration with the private sector                           1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
B32                                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       the ground
B33    Being a long-term partner                                       1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      


                                                                 112
                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
B34. To be a more effective development partner in Benin, do you believe that the World Bank Group
should have… ? (Select only ONE response)
                                       The current level of local
     More local presence                                                     Less local presence   Don't know
                                           presence is adequate


B35. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 2     Poor donor coordination
 3     The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 4     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 5     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 6     The World Bank Group works too slowly
 7     The Government works inefficiently
 8     Political pressures and obstacles
 9     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
10     Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                113
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
C1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
areas of development in Benin?
                                                             Not important                             Very    Don't
                                                             at all                                important   know
 1    Agricultural development                                   1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 2    Education                                                  1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 3                                                               1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
      assistance)
 4    Food security and nutrition                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 5    Health                                                     1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
      Natural resource management and environmental
 6                                                               1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
      sustainability
 7    Water and sanitation                                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 8    Urban development                                          1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 9    Rural development                                          1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
      Private sector development (incl. foreign direct
 10                                                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
      investment, trade and competitiveness)
 11   Finance and markets                                        1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
      Public sector governance (i.e., government
 12   effectiveness, public financial management, public         1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 13   Poverty reduction                                          1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 14   Energy and extractives                                     1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 15   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)           1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 16   Information and communications technology                  1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 17   Economic growth                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 18   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 19   Crime and violence                                         1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 20   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)              1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 21   Labor markets/job creation/employment                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 22   Gender equity                                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      
 23   Global/regional integration                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7    8   9    10      




                                                           114
                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
C2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following
areas of development in Benin? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in working in any of the sectors
listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                 Not effective                                   Very    Don't
                                                                 at all                                      effective   know
 1    Agricultural development                                       1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 2    Education                                                      1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      Community development (i.e., social services, Safety
 3                                                                   1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      Nets)
 4    Nutrition                                                      1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      Health (e.g., maternal and child health, health system
 5                                                                   1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      performance)
      Environmental protection (i.e., forests and protected
 6                                                                   1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      areas management)
 7    Water and sanitation                                           1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      Urban development (e.g., roads, sanitation,
 8    mitigation of the impacts of floods, access to urban           1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      services)
 9    Private sector development                                     1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 10   Business climate improvement                                   1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 11   Public sector governance                                       1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 12   Poverty reduction                                              1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 13   Energy                                                         1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 14   Telecommunications (ICT)                                       1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 15   Macroeconomics and fiscal management                           1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 16   Youth employment                                               1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 17   Institutional strengthening                                    1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      Trade and transport facilitation (e.g., infrastructure
 18                                                                  1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      development, customs modernization)
 19   Economic growth                                                1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      




                                                               115
                                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
C3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Benin?
(Select only ONE response)
 1   At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)
 2   In the country
 3   Don’t know


C4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
Benin?
       1          2      3      4       5       6        7         8           9                10                   
To no degree at                                                                                  To a very
                                                                                                                 Don't know
all                                                                                     significant degree



To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Benin?
                                                     Strongly                                                Strongly     Don't
                                                     disagree                                                   agree     know
     The World Bank Group’s financial instruments
     (i.e., investment lending, Development Policy
C5                                                   1        2        3       4    5       6    7     8     9     10      
     Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.)
     meet the needs of Benin
     The World Bank Group meets Benin’s needs
C6   for knowledge services (e.g., research,         1        2        3       4    5       6    7     8     9     10      
     analysis, data, technical assistance)


C7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its work in real time
in Benin?
       1          2      3      4       5       6        7         8           9                10                   
To no degree at                                                                                  To a very
                                                                                                                 Don't know
all                                                                                     significant degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                             116
                                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work
you do?
1     Weekly
2     Monthly
3     A few times a year
4     Rarely
5     Never


In Benin, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                        To no                                                      To a very
                                                                                                                                Don't
                                                        degree at                                                 significant
                                                                                                                                know
                                                        all                                                          degree
 D2     Are timely                                       1        2        3       4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
        Include appropriate level of stakeholder
 D3                                                      1        2        3       4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
        involvement during preparation
 D4     Lead to practical solutions                      1        2        3       4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
        Are accessible (well written and easy to
 D5                                                      1        2        3       4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
        understand)
        Are source of relevant information on global
 D6                                                      1        2        3       4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
        good practices
 D7     Are adequately disseminated                      1        2        3       4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
 D8     Are translated enough into local language        1        2        3       4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
        Are adaptable to Benin’s specific
 D9     development challenges and country               1        2        3       4    5     6     7     8       9     10        
        circumstances


D10. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group's knowledge work
and activities make to development results in your country?
          1              2    3      4      5       6        7         8           9               10                        
Not significant at all                                                                         Very significant       Don't know


D11. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work
and activities?
          1              2    3      4      5       6        7         8           9               10                        
Very low technical                                                                          Very high technical
                                                                                                                      Don't know
quality                                                                                                 quality




                                                                 117
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                          Strongly                                                 Strongly   Don't
                                                          disagree                                                    agree   know
      The World Bank Group disburses funds
E1                                                        1       2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      promptly
      The World Bank Group effectively monitors
E2    and evaluates the projects and programs it          1       2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      supports
      The World Bank Group’s approvals and
E3                                                        1       2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      reviews are done in a timely fashion
      The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy?
E4                                                        1       2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      requirements are reasonable
      The World Bank Group’s conditions on its
E5                                                        1       2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      lending are reasonable
      The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly
E6                                                        1       2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      in Benin
      Working with the World Bank Group increases
E7                                                        1       2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      Benin’s institutional capacity
      Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
      financial management, etc.) are adequate, the
E8                                                        1       2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      World Bank Group makes appropriate use of
      them
      The World Bank Group provides effective
E9    implementation support (i.e., supervision of        1       2   3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      projects)


E10. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find solutions that
promote private public partnerships in Benin?
         1             2       3      4      5        6       7       8        9               10                        
                                                                                       To a very significant
To no degree at all                                                                                                 Don't know
                                                                                                    degree


E11. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Benin?
(Select only one response)
1    The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Benin
2    The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Benin
3    The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate
4    Don’t know


E12. Which of the following best describes the WBG’s support in Benin?
(Select only one response)
     The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the most important development challenges in
1
     Benin
2    The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Benin, and it is involved in too many areas of development
3    Don’t know




                                                              118
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN BENIN
F1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in
Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1   Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Benin’s economy
 2   Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 3   Offer more innovative financial products
 4   Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)
 5   Reach out more to groups outside of Government
 6   Work faster
 7   Improve the quality of its experts as related to Benin’s specific challenges
 8   Offer more innovative knowledge services
 9   Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)
10   Increase the level of capacity development in the country
11   Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing
12   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


F2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Benin, and
taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the
World Bank Group should offer more of in Benin? (Select only ONE response)
 1   Financial services
 2   Knowledge products
 3   Convening services
 4   None of the above
 5   The combination is appropriate for Benin
 6   Don’t know




                                                            119
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Benin?
(Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Periodicals                                         6    International television
 2    International newspapers                            7    Local newspapers
 3    Local radio                                         8    Internet
 4    International radio                                 9    Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)
 5    Local television                                   10    Other (please specify): ___________________


G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?
(Choose no more than TWO)
      Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e.,
 1                                                        5    World Bank Group’s website
      face to face meetings/discussions)
 2    e-Newsletters                                       6    Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)
      World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/
 3
      conferences
                                                          7    Other (please specify): ___________________
      World Bank Group’s publications and other
 4
      written materials

      Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under which the
G3                                                                                                        Yes        No
      Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
      Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past
G4                                                                                                        Yes        No
      year? (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                           Yes        No

G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                                 Yes        No

G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                              Yes        No
      Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites (e.g., blogs, Facebook,
G8                                                                                                        Yes        No
      Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)?

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                    Strongly                              Strongly   Don't
                                                                    disagree                                 agree   know
       I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to
 G9    navigate. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank         1      2   3   4   5    6    7    8   9     10    
       Group website)
       I find the information on the World Bank Group’s
G10    websites useful. (Only answer if you have used a World       1      2   3   4   5    6    7    8   9     10    
       Bank Group website)
       The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g.,
G11    blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr) are valuable      1      2   3   4   5    6    7    8   9     10    
       sources of information about the institution
       When I need information from the World Bank Group I
G12    know how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach      1      2   3   4   5    6    7    8   9     10    
       them, etc.)
       The World Bank Group is responsive to my information
G13                                                                 1      2   3   4   5    6    7    8   9     10    
       requests and inquiries




                                                              120
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?             (Select only ONE response)
 1   Office of the President, Prime Minister             10   NGO/Community Based Organization
 2   Office of Minister                                  11   Media (press, radio, TV, web, etc.)
                                                              Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory
 3   National Assembly                                   12
                                                              Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
     Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial
 4                                                       13   Trade Union
     Department or Implementation Agency
     Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing
     implementation of project/
 5                                                       14   Faith-Based Group
     Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank
     Group supported project/program
 6   Local Government Office or Staff                    15   Youth Group
 7   Bilateral/Multilateral Agency                       16   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 8   Private Sector Organization                         17   Judiciary Branch
 9   Financial Sector/Private Bank                       18   Other (please specify): ________________________


H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Select only ONE response)
 1   Water                                               12   Gender
 2   Social protection and labor                         13   Transport and ICT
 3   Fragility, conflict and violence                    14   Urban, rural, and social development
 4   Environment and natural resources                   15   Governance
 5   Public-private partnerships                         16   Poverty
 6   Education                                           17   Jobs
 7   Health, nutrition, and population                   18   Agriculture
 8   Energy and extractives                              19   Climate change
 9   Macroeconomics and fiscal management                20   Generalist (specialized in multiple sectors)
10   Trade and competitiveness
                                                         21   Other (please specify): ____________________
11   Finance and markets


H3. Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group
(IDA, IFC, or MIGA) in your country? (Select only ONE response)
1    I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group
2    I have previously collaborated with the World Bank Group
3    Both of the above (I currently collaborate and previously have collaborated with the World Bank Group)
4    I have never collaborated with the World Bank Group




                                                              121
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Benin


SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION
H4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in
Benin? (Select only ONE response)
 1   The World Bank (IDA)
 2   The International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
 3   The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
 4   Other (please specify):___________________________


H5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?
(If YES please go to Question H6; If NO please go to H7)
1    Yes
2    No


H6. If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in Benin?
(Select only ONE response)
1    The two institutions work well together
2    The way the two institutions work together needs improvement
3    The two institutions do not work well together
4    Don’t know


H7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Benin?
(Choose no more than TWO)
1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
2    Use World Bank Group reports/data
3    Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities
4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
5    Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.


H8. What’s your gender?
1    Female
2    Male


H9. Which best represents your geographic location?
1    Cotonou / Abomey Calavi
2    Come / Ouidah
3    Porto Novo
4    Parakou
5    Autres villes ____________________________________________________
6    Zones rurales (Precisez la commune) ________________________________


                               Thank you for completing the survey!


                                                              122
