A GREENER PATH
TO COMPETITIVENESS
POLICIES FOR
CLIMATE ACTION IN
INDUSTRIES AND PRODUCTS
JULY 2016




ETIENNE KECHICHIAN
ALEXIOS PANTELIAS
ARI REEVES
GUY HENLEY
JIEMEI LIU




            PARTNERS   IN COLLABORATION WITH
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




©2016 The World Bank Group
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
Telephone : 202-473-1000
Internet : www.worldbank.org

All rights reserved.

This volume is a product of the staff of the World Bank Group. The World Bank Group refers to the member
institutions of the World Bank Group: The World Bank (International Bank for Reconstruction and Development);
International Finance Corporation (IFC); and Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), which are separate and
distinct legal entities each organized under its respective Articles of Agreement. We encourage use for educational and
non-commercial purposes.

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Directors or Executive Directors of the respective institutions of the World Bank Group or the governments they
represent. The World Bank Group does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
permission may be a violation of applicable law. The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will
normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA; telephone: 978-750-8400; fax: 978-
750-4470; Internet: www.copyright.com.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher,
The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422;
E-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




TABLE OF CONTENTS


04     Acknowledgments
05     Abbreviations
06     Executive Summary
12     Introduction
12     Competitiveness and Climate Change
14     Emissions and Growth
15     Defining Competitiveness

18     Part 1 Competitiveness and Climate Action for Industrial Operations
18     Introduction
18     Emissions
21     Breakdown of Industrial Emissions
22     Overview of Industry Energy Consumption by Fuel Type
25     Competition
29     Competiveness of the Iron and Steel, Cement, Chemical, and Aluminum Sectors
39     The Challenges in Industrial Competitiveness and Environmental Action
52     Interventions
54     Energy Efficiency Improvements
55     Low-Carbon Substitutes for Feedstock and Fuels
55     Alternative and Innovative Processes
56     Sectorwide Interventions
58     Examples of GHG Improvements across Industrial Sectors
62     Barriers and Drivers
63     Pathway for Technology Deployment
64     Low-Carbon Technologies’ Role in Company Competitiveness
67     Recommendations
67     Actions to Decrease GHG Emissions and Maintain Competitiveness through Technology Adoption
69     Dialogue and Collaboration to Achieve Successful Outcomes at Marrakesh and Beyond
70     Case Study 1 RUSAL Aluminum Production: Tackling Climate Change through Technology Interventions
72     Case Study 2 Energy Efficiency at LG Chem: Reducing GHG Emissions across the Republic of Korea’s
       Chemical Industry

74     Part 2 Scaling Climate Action and Competitiveness through Energy Efficient Products
74     Introduction
74     A Brief History of Energy Efficiency Standards and Labeling Policy
78     GHG Emissions Reductions and Energy Impacts of S&L Policies
80     The Impact of S&L on Manufacturing Competitiveness
85     Lighting
85     Global Overview of Current Lighting S&L Policy
87     Historical Energy Efficiency and Consumer Price Trends
88     China - S&L Policies for Compact Fluorescent Lamps
91     Space Cooling
92     Global Overview of Current S&L Space Cooling Policy
93     Historical Energy Efficiency and Consumer Price Trends
95     India - S&L Policies for Air Conditioners
100    Major Home Appliances
105    Global Overview of Current S&L Home Appliance Policy
106    Historical Energy Efficiency and Consumer Price Trends
108    The United States - Manufacturers’ Tax Credits
113    Switzerland - Heat Pump Clothes Dryer
115    Mexico - Regional Harmonization of Refrigerator Standards
118    Industrial Equipment
119    Global Overview of Current S&L Industrial Equipment Policy
120    Historical Energy Efficiency and Consumer Price Trends
121    The U.S. Department of Energy and Negotiated Rulemaking
124    Siemens and New Electric Motors
125    Recommendations for Promoting Competitiveness with S&L
126    References
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products



       Boxes
14     I.1 Key GHG-Emitting Sectors
33     1.1 Competitive Dynamics of the Steel Market
39     1.2 Key Structural Changes to the Aluminum Sector
40     1.3 Production and GHG Decoupling across the EU Chemical Sector
55     1.4 Best Available Technologies
56     1.5 Gaining Acceptance for Low-Carbon Cements
58     1.6 Iron and Steel GHG Reduction
59     1.7 Cement GHG Reduction
60     1.8 Chemicals GHG Reduction
61     1.9 Aluminum GHG Reduction
63     1.10 Short-Term Volatility in Energy and Commodity Prices Deters Low-Carbon Technology Investment
67     1.11 Finding the Right Balance between Regulation and Technology Support
69     1.12 Examples of Driving Change Industrial though Collaboration

       Figures
08     ES.1 The Impact of Interventions on Competitiveness
10     ES.2. Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions in 2030 from Product Efficiency Policies
14     I.1 Global GHG Emissions by Sector, 1970–2010
19     1.1 Final Energy Consumption by Sector, 2012
19     1.2 Industrial Emissions, 1970–2010
22     1.3 Main Fuel Sources for the Iron and Steel, Cement, Aluminum, and Chemical Industries (2012)
24     1.4 Realized and Unrealized Energy Efficiency Potential
26     1.5 UNIDO’s Ranking of Countries’ Industrial Competitiveness
28     1.6 Tangible and Intangible Factors of Competitiveness
31     1.7 Steel-Making Processes and the Associated Low-Carbon Interventions
32     1.8 Global Crude Steel Production
32     1.9 Crude Steel Regional Production, 2015
33     B1.1.1 World Crude Steel Capacity (nominal) and Demand
33     B1.1.2 Indexed Global Energy Consumption per Ton of Crude Steel Production
34     1.10 Cement-making Process and Associated Low-carbon Interventions
35     1.11 Global Cement Production
35     1.12 World Cement Production 2014, by Region and Main Countries
36     1.13 Regional Chemical Sales
36     1.14 Regional Growth in Chemical Production
37     1.15 Process of Aluminum Production
38     1.16 Regional Primary Aluminum Production
38     1.17 Global Annual Primary Aluminum Production
39     B1.2.1 Focus of Primary Energy across the Aluminum Sector
40     B1.3.1 Decoupling of GHG and Production
40     B1.3.2 Energy Intensity of EU Chemical Production
42     1.18 Countries That Have or Are looking to Implement a Carbon Tax or ETS and Linkage
       Occurring between Different Schemes
46     1.19 Sectors Covered Emission Trading Schemes
48     1.20 California Assessment of Carbon Leakage Risk
48     1.21 Risk of Carbon Leakage across EU Industry in 2010
51     1.22 Steps to Improve Emission Trading Schemes
54     1.23 Energy Maturity Model
57     1.24 An Example of Industrial Symbiosis in Denmark
63     B1.10.1 Commodity Price Indices
63     B1.10.2 Brent Price Prospects	
64     1.25 Potential Carbon Abatement Potential across the Cement Sector by 2050
65     1.26 The Impact of Interventions on Competitiveness
66     1.27 Impact of Interventions on Abatement Potential, Timeframe, and Cost
71     CS1.1.1 The Khakas Aluminum Smelter is the most up-to-date and Technologically Advanced Smelter in
       Russia
71     CS1.1.2 “Boges,” RUSAL’s new Boguchansky Aluminum Smelter, will be the main consumer of Electricity
       Generated by Boguchanskaya Hydropower Plant
72     CS1.2.1 Energy Efficiency in Cracked Furnace
73     CS1.2.2 New insolation technology, Aerogel adoption
74     2.1 Examples of Energy Labels



2
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products



75     2.2 The Uptake of S&L Programs and Policies
75     2.3 Total Number of S&L Policies in Effect by Type, 2015
76     2.4 Number of Standards and Labeling Policies around the Globe, by Country
79     2.5 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions in 2030 from Product Efficiency Policies
85     2.6 LED Sales as a Percentage of All Sales of Domestic Lamps
86     2.7 The Uptake of Lighting S&L Policies Worldwide
87     2.8 Historical and Predicted Efficiency of Light Sources
90     2.9 Number of Lamps Sold in China by Type, 2005–12
90     2.10 Annual Energy Saving Lamp Production and Export in China, 1996–2012
91     2.11 Annual Sales of Air Conditioners and Cooling Fans in India
92     2.12 Global Production of Nonducted Air Conditioners
93     2.13 The Uptake of Space Cooling S&L Policies
94     2.14 The Relationship between Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio (SEER) and the Adjustable
       Consumer Price Index for ACs in the United States between 1990 and 2010
94     2.15 The Relationship between Cooling Coefficient of Performance (COP) and the Consumer Price Index for
       Room ACs in Japan between 1990 and 2010
95     2.16 Room Air Conditioner Sales in India, 2006–14
97     2.17 Indian Market Share of AC Products Rated One to Five Stars, 2008–14
98     2.18 Voltas Used Its Energy Efficient ACs as a Key Differentiator to Gain Market Share in India
99     2.19 Annual AC Sales of Leading Brands (Voltas, LG, and Samsung) between 2005 and 2015 in India
100    2.20 Godrej’s AC Models Registered with BEE in Its S&L Database
100    2.21 Annual Sales of Major Appliances Worldwide, 2001–14
102    2.22 Expected Appliance Market Growth, 2014–19
104    2.23 Global Production of Home Appliances
105    2.24 The Uptake of Home Appliance S&L Policies
106    2.25 Household Ownership of Refrigerator-Freezers in Three Countries
107    2.26 Increase in Household Appliance Energy Efficiency, 1980–2008
107    2.27 Refrigerator Energy Use, Volume, and Retail Price, 1987–2010
108    2.28 Annual Rate of Decline of Median, Feature-Adjusted Refrigerator Energy Use
110    2.29 Units Eligible for Appliance Manufacturers’ Tax Credit, 2008–9
111    2.30 Market Transformation of Refrigerators and Clothes Washers, 2000–2015
112    2.31.1 Whirlpool Yearly Tax Credits
114    2.32 Clothes Dryer Sales in Switzerland by Energy Label Category
117    2.33 The Import of Refrigerators from Mexico to the United States, 2002–14
119    2.34 S&L Policies for Motors and Transformers
120    2.35 Market Share of Efficiency Classes in the United States, 2001–6
121    2.36 Market Share of Efficiency Classes in Europe under the CEMEP Voluntary Agreement
124    2.37 Marketing Materials from Siemens Presenting New, Efficient Motors

       Tables
13     ES.1 Industry Climate Action Matrix: Operations and Outputs
17     I.2 Definitions of Competitiveness
21     1.1 The World’s Highest-Emitting Industries
30     1.2 Drivers of Competitiveness across Four Industrial Sectors
53     1.3 Examples of Technological Solutions, by Category and Industry
73     CS1.2.1 Comparison of LG Chem to Competitors
78     2.1 Examples of Diverse Savings within Different Jurisdictions
82     2.2 Profile of Competitiveness Indicators
84     2.3 List of Cases Examined
87     2.4 Cumulative Energy and CO2 Savings through 2030 from Recent Lighting
       Standards in the United States
89     2.5 Energy and CO2 Targets for PILESLAMP Project
96     2.6 Energy Performance Standard for Room ACs (Minisplit) in India
109    2.7 Summary of U.S. Manufacturer’s Tax Credits
116    2.8 Mexican MEPS (NOMs) Schedule for Refrigerators and Freezers




                                                                                                                 3
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This report was written by a team led by Etienne Kechichian and Alexios Pantelias and comprising Ari
Reeves, Guy Henley, and Jiemei Liu. Contributions were made by Amit Khare, Jennifer Corry Smith, Yang
Yu, and Naz Beykan.

This report benefited from extensive discussions and inputs from the expert group comprising Eric
Bush, Thom Catania, Jennifer Cleary, Lloyd Harrington, Soren Heitmann, Shane Holt, Stuart Jeffcott, Jim
McMahon, Kevin Messner, Alison lp, Michael Scholand, Melanie Slade, Kavita Surana, Tanmay Tathagat,
Margaret Taylor, Marcus Wagner, Paul Waide, and Andrew Johnson. Case studies were drafted with
essential support from Inchul Hwang and Koojung Mo from the Korea Energy Agency (KEA). Zhuo Zhang
at China Association of Lighting Industry (CALI), Niko Kavakiotis at Siemens, Vera Kurochkina at UC
RUSAL, and the Energy-Climate Team at LG Chem.

Guidance was provided by the book’s peer reviewers. Internal peer reviewers include Pepukaye Bardouille,
Michael Ehst, Emmanuel Pouliquen, Jonathan Coony, Massimiliano Santini, Han-koo Yeo, Thomas Michael
Kerr, Ivan Rossignol, Paulo Guilherme Correa, Nidal Nouhad Mahmoud, Armando Heilbron, and Stephane
Hallegatte. External advisors included Han-koo Yeo, Russell Bishop, and Jigar Shah. The report was
carried out under the guidance and direction of Cecilia Sager.

S.D. Williams provided substantive copy editing and the team benefited from the World Bank’s GSDTI
English Editing Team. The design and typesetting of the report was carried out by Finar with guidance
from Beril Benli.




4
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




ABBREVIATIONS

ACs	           air conditioners
BAT	           best available technologies
BEE	           Bureau of Energy Efficiency (India)
BF	            blast furnace
BOF	           basic oxygen furnace
CAGR	          compound annual growth rate
CCS	           carbon capture and storage
CCU	           carbon capture and utilization
CEMEP	         European Committee of Manufacturers of Electrical Machines and Power Electronics
CFL	           compact fluorescent lamps
CGLP	          China Green Lights Program
CHP	           Combined Heat and Power
CO2	           carbon dioxide
CONAE	         National Commission on Energy Savings of Mexico
DOE	           Department of Energy (United States)
DRI	           direct reduced iron
EAF	           electric arc furnace
EE	            energy efficiency
EER	           energy efficiency ratio
EES&L	         energy efficiency standards and labeling
EnMS	          energy management system
ESL	           energy-saving lamp
EU ETS	        EU Emission Trading Scheme
GHG	           greenhouse gas
GRIM	          Government Regulatory Impact Model
GWh	           gigawatt hour
HID	           high-intensity discharge lamps
IEC	           International Electro-technical Commission
INPV	          industry net present value
kWh	           kilowatt hour
LBNL	          Lawrence Berkeley National Lab
LED	           light-emitting diode
MEF	           modified energy factor
MEPS 	         minimum energy performance standards
MIA	           manufacturer impact analysis
Mt	            million tons
MMtCO2e	       million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalents
MtCO2e	        metric ton carbon dioxide equivalent
NEMA	          National Electrical Manufacturers Association (North America)
OECD	          Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
PH	            Porter Hypothesis
R&D	           research and development
SDG	           Sustainable Development Goal
S&L	           standards and labeling
SEAD	          super-efficient equipment and appliance deployment
SEER	          seasonal energy efficiency metric
tCO2e	         tons of carbon dioxide equivalent
TWh	           terawatt hour
UNIDO	         United Nations Industrial Development Organization




                                                                                                  5
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The ninth Sustainable Development Goal advises countries to “build resilient infrastructure, promote
inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation.”1 Industry has historically been one
of the most important pillars of economic and social development, but traditional resource-intensive
and heavily polluting production is no longer sustainable in the face of climate change. If the path of
industrial growth is not redirected immediately and effectively, reaching the target set in the 2015 Paris
Agreement to “avoid dangerous climate change by limiting global warming to well below 2°C” will become
unrealizable.

The good news is that recent practices demonstrate how industry could be a big part of the solution for
climate mitigation and inclusive, sustainable development. The unprecedented task presented in Paris to
“decarbonize” globally introduces challenges but also enormous opportunities for industries as they seek
a greener path to production while remaining globally competitive.

This report helps chart that path to industrial competitiveness through policy and technology
interventions that improve industrial operations. At the same time it explores ways that industrial
products can become greener through public standards while companies and countries maintain, and
even increase, competitiveness. The information is directed toward government leaders, policy makers,
and multilateral institutions in the fields of energy, climate mitigation, and sustainable development. The
report’s recommendations to policy makers are based on comprehensive case studies and quantitative
and qualitative analyses.

COMPETITIVENESS AND CLIMATE ACTION FOR INDUSTRIAL OPERATIONS

While new technologies can be important parts of industry’s efforts to address climate change, not all
options are currently conducive to price competitiveness.

Technology solutions need to be complemented by institutional frameworks and policy options
that counter competitive disadvantages.

Some technological interventions face numerous barriers to adoption, both in jurisdictions under
environmental regulation and in those that are not. A sound institutional and policy framework that
targets long-term prosperity needs to be in place to facilitate and cushion industry upgrades to new
technologies.

Given their potential to limit energy costs, implementing energy-efficient technologies and undertaking
cost-effective process improvements across industrial manufacturing operations are in industries’
own interests. Various technological decarbonization interventions are already available to industrial
managers. Complementary policies will encourage the scaling up of such initiatives and enhancing the
outcomes.

Basic energy efficiency interventions can reduce greenhouse gas emissions without damaging a
company’s competitiveness.

Best practice solutions already exist. For the most part they involve relatively easy retrofits and have
quick paybacks. Newer innovative approaches are also available. While many show promise and appear
to be effective, they are generally not yet mature and typically require larger investments with longer
paybacks and longer operational shutdown periods. Some may become mainstream solutions while
others may not.

Retrofitting existing equipment is essential to decarbonizing the industrial sector, as is integrating best
available technologies when building new industrial facilities. It must be noted, however, that installing
new technologies alone does not automatically guarantee the largest emission reduction potential-the
manner in which they are operated and maintained is crucial to realizing energy efficiencies.


1
    	 UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development Organization). 2015. “SDG Goal 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure.” New York: UNIDO. https://isid.
      unido.org/goal9.html.


6
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                                                                                           7
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Technology solutions for decarbonization and modernization across the industrial sector can be
categorized broadly in three areas:

1. Energy efficiency improvements
2. Low-carbon substitutes, both fuels and material
3. Innovative and alternative processes

As summarized in Figure ES.1, these interventions have different impacts on competiveness and would
require differing enabling environments for successful uptake.

        Figure ES.1 The Impact of Interventions on Competitiveness



                                                                Current impact of interventions on competitiveness


                                                                                                                         Innovative abatement
                                               Energy efficiency                 Low-carbon substitutes
                                                                                                                             technologies




                                                                                      - Early movers                    - Global carbon policy
              Context for
                                             - Business as usual                - Dependent on price and                      agreements
              successful
                                          - Low margins/high costs               availability of substitutes         - Period of economic growth
            implementation
                                                                                - Extent of Policy Support           - Strong innovation support



                                           Low                                    Extent of policy support                                   High

                                      = positive impact for                        = both positive and negative          = negative impact for
                                      companies who implement                      impacts for companies who             companies who implement
                                      these versus those who                       implement these versus                these versus those who
                                      do not.                                      those who do not (dependent           do not.
                                                                                   on market and company
                                                                                   circumstances).




Many of the interventions that are easiest to implement, and have low capital costs, short payback
periods, and low transaction costs relate to energy efficiency. Overall, such interventions are conducive to
price competitiveness and can be implemented without the need for stringent policy mechanisms such
as a carbon tax or emission trading scheme.

Complex interventions need additional policy actions if they are going to provide a net benefit to
business.

The implementation rates of low-carbon technology vary across sectors and regions. There has been
good uptake in many Western production facilities, where companies seek to counteract high energy
prices and adapt to carbon policies. There is also good implementation across new builds in emerging
economies, where companies seek to minimize operational costs from the outset.

High energy and feedstock prices provide an incentive for at least partial adoption of low-carbon
technologies, substitutes, and process improvements. Companies that implement such measures reduce
the quantity of energy and commodities consumed and enhance their competitive position vis-à-vis
companies that do not implement these measures. However, with the low costs of traditional fossil
fuels and commodities in the middle of the century’s second decade, the business case for low-carbon
technology investment is sometimes difficult to make. In the absence of robust low carbon policy
frameworks, such investment is unlikely to be prioritized as a means to improve competiveness unless
these costs start to rise.1 Unfortunately; this means that the rate of future carbon reduction is uncertain
and unlikely to be at the scale and pace required to meet ambitious carbon reduction targets set in Paris.
1
    	   Since 2000, the main trend in commodity and energy prices has been upward. Current low levels are a relatively recent fluctuation.




8
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




There is no single solution to the decarbonization versus competitiveness dichotomy. Diverse entities
must develop climate-friendly and competitive approaches that suit their requirements. There is a need
to develop a suite of policies that protect against carbon leakage in the short term and simultaneously
assist in creating a conducive environment for further implementation. These policies should provide
clear signals of support for research and development (R&D) investment that leads toward a greener
path.

The business case for low-carbon interventions is based largely on the following:

•	 The ability to provide quick paybacks
•	 Minimal operational disruption
•	 Cost of the intervention
•	 	Access to finance
•	  The cost of current inputs used within operations (for example, energy or aggregates) versus the low
    	
    carbon substitutes
•	 	A strong and globally implemented carbon policy and limited subsidies for conventional energy
•	 	The extent to which competitors around the world are implementing these measures

Complex interventions-for example, carbon abatement interventions-should not be discounted. Although
they can be expensive in the short run, innovative abatement technologies will be required to further
decarbonize industry in order to meet long-term targets. Efforts to both create the right policy-enabling
environment and support innovative R&D are needed in order to reduce costs and facilitate uptake in the
short to medium terms.

From a technology and operations perspective, the path to decreasing GHG emissions while
maintaining competitiveness is straightforward:

1. Industry should focus on cost-effective energy efficiency options that can be deployed today with
short payback periods, low transaction costs, and easy-to-access finance. While many of these options
have been implemented by leading companies already, there is still substantial variation in global practice,
indicating opportunities for securing some quick wins. Key enablers include the following:

•	 Management/board buy-in on the need to decarbonize is critical. Improved valuation of non-economic
   benefits can assist in building the business case.
•	 Implementation support and awareness programs, for example, energy surveys, management system
   and communication campaigns can be crucial.

2. Industry, governments, and consumers should focus on enabling those technologies and
interventions that are on the cusp of cost-effectiveness. Regulation or procurement policies can signal
the direction of demand for a low-carbon products. Making consumer demand visible can encourage
solutions currently at the margin of viability. Examples of enabling solutions are standards and labeling,
explored in more detail in the next section of the executive summary. Key enablers include the following:

•	 Specific economic incentives to see through the more complex energy efficiency interventions, for
   example, concessional energy efficiency finance to reduce payback periods
•	 Research into methods to reduce the administrative burden to comply with energy and carbon
   regulations
•	 Strong labeling schemes and building and construction codes, practices, and standards that support
   the implementation of novel solutions
•	 Additional light touch R&D demonstration support may be required to prove survivability and reliability
   to the market
•	 Strengthening collaboration and interaction between producers and consumers-there is the need to
   share visions and pathways for technology development and deployment
•	 An improved framework for fuel switching and increased recycling
•	 Improved finance solutions, based on greater awareness and certainty of energy payback




                                                                                                             9
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




3. Governments should pursue framework policies such as removing distorting production subsidies
or trade tariffs and putting a comprehensive price on carbon. They should also develop technology-
incentive programs for solutions that currently have a weak business case-for example, in the adoption
of large-scale and capital-intensive carbon abatement technologies. In addition, government should
adopt industry decarbonization policies within strategic development plans and harmonize these across
jurisdictions. Key enablers include the following:

•	 Policies need to be designed to be conducive with private sector growth. Business has highlighted
   the need for strong and clear signals from government, to allow time to respond to policies that may
   impact the manner in which they traditionally operate. Therefore, political consensus on credible,
   consistent, longer term policy signals is critically required. This would include strong, consistent,
   flexible, and globally implemented carbon taxes or cap-and-trade schemes.
•	 Phase out country level energy subsidies as these impact competiveness and are especially
   detrimental to the implementation of low carbon interventions.
•	 Develop Sector specific carbon reduction strategies. Without this, achieving carbon reduction targets
   will be expensive and potentially unattainable.
•	 Financial support for R&D investment in early stage products and process innovation can help
   companies overcome market barriers and increase manufacturers’ and consumers’ confidence in the
   technologies or resulting products. This will support the business case for breakthrough interventions.

Scaling Competitiveness and Climate Action through Efficient Industrial Products

Energy efficiency standards and labeling (S&L) policies are cost-effective tools for reducing energy usage
and GHGs. They also have co-benefits such as reducing peak power demand, saving energy costs for
consumers, and, importantly, improving industry competitiveness.

S&L approaches could be preferable tools for policy makers to meet their national climate agenda

Adopting and harmonizing (worldwide) the most stringent MEPS could reduce 9% of the global total
energy consumption1 --- The 8,950 TWh saving per annum is equivalent to shutting down 165 coal-fired
power plants or getting 132 million cars off the road.

Improving product efficiency to the level of the best technologies available in 2010-across a group of
18 major economies- could achieve emission reduction in the amount of 1.5 Gt CO2e, almost half of all
countries’ Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). (Figure ES.2.)

       Figure ES.2. Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction in 2030 from Product Efficiency Policies (Gt CO2e)


                                                                                                        0,52
         Business as usual:       NDCs                             Remaining potential


         59.5 Gt                                                                                   Impact of recent
                                                                                                       policies

                                                      45%                 -1,48




                                  -3,3



                                                                       Unit: Gt C02e

     Sources: UNFCCC and CLASP2 2016.




1
    	 European Union. 2015. “Savings and Benefits of Global Regulations for Energy Efficient Products: A ‘Cost of non-World’ Study
2
    	 NDCs data were sourced from “Aggregate effect of the intended nationally determined contributions: an update” published by UNFCCC, May 2016. Other
      data from unpublished analysis conducted by CLASP and LBNL on behalf of the SEAD Initiative.



10
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




S&L policies spur innovation and unlock new markets.

When countries develop or revise energy efficiency standards, manufacturers must invest in
technological innovation to ensure their products meet the standards. Innovation drives the development
and commercialization of more efficient products, and this expands existing markets or creates new
markets for manufacturers. A concrete example is the case of clothes dryers in Switzerland. S&L policies
drove the technology innovation behind heat pump dryers, which are highly efficient in comparison to
conventional clothes dryers. An entirely new market for high-efficiency heat pumps was created as
a result of aggressive S&L policies, which were complemented by an incentive package that included
government procurement, a rebate program, and awareness campaigns. Similarly, the introduction of an
energy efficiency label for air conditioners in India unlocked innovation and boosted domestic production
of high-efficiency products.

Complementary incentive policies support the implementation of S&L policies.

Procurement programs, rebates, tax credits, and subsidies can help manufacturers offset their R&D
costs for new products, and they can create demand for high-efficiency products. Such policies have
enabled manufacturers to better compete in domestic markets, as in the case of white goods (large
appliance) manufacturers in the United States. Policies encouraged domestic manufacturers to produce
highly efficient appliances by awarding tax credits for every unit of efficient product they produced. The
market penetration of efficient products increased significantly, and because of the tax credit program,
domestic manufacturers were not disadvantaged by the additional cost of making more efficient
products.

Harmonizing standards among trading partners can lower transaction costs and promote export
growth.

By aligning domestic standards with foreign trade partners, trade barriers can effectively be lowered.
Policies directed at manufacturing energy-saving lights in China and standards for refrigerators in Mexico
provide examples. In both cases, S&L policies were strengthened to align with those in major foreign
markets. Incentives for domestic manufacturers pointed toward higher efficiency, and exports were
facilitated.

Dialogue among stakeholders is a key to successful S&L policy development.

Policy makers, manufacturers, and other stakeholders must work together to ensure that S&L policies
realize the dual benefits of energy savings and industrial competitiveness. The highly participatory
rulemaking processes used in the United States can serve as models. Through dialogue, policy makers
can learn what manufacturers need to succeed: access to technical assistance, test laboratories, or loan
facilities, for example. Similarly, manufacturers can better understand what policy makers are trying to
achieve and how quickly, and use this knowledge to plan and market accordingly.

It has become clear that competitiveness cannot be achieved if the climate agenda is left behind.
Fortunately, new industrial leaders in some emerging economies have already become role models and
surpassed their counterparts in the developed world by adopting resource-efficient and environmentally
friendly technologies and practices. The world has a very small window in which to stabilize GHG
emissions and redirect the development path by 2050. The risk of inaction is real.




                                                                                                         11
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




INTRODUCTION


COMPETITIVENESS AND CLIMATE CHANGE

Manufacturing includes the highest carbon-emitting sectors in the global economy. This study examines
policies that can push these industries toward climate-friendly operations and the technologies that
simultaneously can preserve-or enhance-their competitiveness. The study focuses on both industrial
operations and the products that the industries produce.

The first global pact to fight climate change was signed by almost 200 countries in Paris in 2015. It aims
to prevent global temperatures from rising another degree Celsius in the century to come. The Paris
Agreement was significant not only in charting a path for progress on the Sustainable Development Goal
agenda but also in creating momentum for human society to work toward eliminating greenhouse gas
(GHG) pollution.1 Among numerous GHG emission sources, manufacturing industry has been identified as
a main contributor to the complex issue of climate change, but it is also seen as a significant part of the
solution. The manufacturing industry is responsible for almost a third of total GHG emissions, and there
are significant untapped opportunities to reduce those emissions. Countries are already taking actions in
reducing GHG in the industrial sector, but much more could be done.

The main challenge for industries and governments is how to integrate the carbon reduction scheme into
the economic growth and competitiveness agenda and how to provide industries with a greener path to
competitiveness. Factors of competitiveness are complex and differ according to sector and products.
Market access, labor and labor costs, technologies, and other bottom-line factors often supersede the
importance of reducing environmental impact. Even when accounting for the eventual global framework
for carbon pricing and other cost externalities, businesses in developing countries will not be greatly
affected by policy intervention because of their low baseline emissions, and it can be argued they may
benefit in the short term by increasing energy availability under cap-and-trade schemes. Therefore, many
governments are justifiably reluctant to impose requirements on industries or specific products that
would have GHG reduction benefits. They worry that these interventions might harm domestic industry.
Governments and businesses are skeptical of any additional cost burden on their operations.

This study acknowledges those concerns while it provides concrete policy recommendations that
can help to chart a greener development path in the industrial sector. It helps policy makers better
understand the changing landscape of climate mitigation strategies. It also helps them understand the
impacts of environmental policies on economies and how to create strategies that work for both industry
and the environment.

The report explores aspects of competitiveness and draws on insights from numerous industry and
research experts. Cases from various economic groups and countries were examined to showcase (1) the
technologies that are applicable and economically feasible for optimizing industrial operations and (2)
policy solutions, especially minimum energy performance standards and labeling (S&L), that influence the
design of energy-consuming products (see Table I.1).

The insights are directed at government leaders, policy makers interested in climate change and related
policies, and multilateral institutions that work along the spectrum of climate mitigation and sustainable
development. The document provides an overview on how to drive industries toward a green path of
competitiveness. It focuses on basic and cost-effective technologies for high-emitting industries and
leveraging the manufacturing sector in order to spur development of energy efficient appliances and
products through S&L.




1
    	 The overarching purpose of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals are to end poverty, combat climate change, and fight injustice and inequality by 2030.
      United Nations (UN). (UNIDO, 2015. “Sustainable Development Goals.” http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/.
      The role of the industry sector is illustrated in goal nine: Build Resilient Infrastructure, Promote Inclusive and Sustainable Industrialization and Foster
      Innovation. United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). 2015. “SDG Goal 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure.” https://isid.unido.
      org/goal9.html.


12
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




   Table ES.1 Industry Climate Action Matrix: Operations and Outputs


                                        Industrial operations                       Industry outputs
                                                                                    • Energy efficiency standards
                                        • Overall climate change policy
                                                                                    • Energy efficiency or eco-labeling
                                        (GHG emission limits)
                                                                                    • Regulations (e.g., customs
    Public policy leverage              • Energy management programs
                                                                                    exemptions)
                                        • Environmental licensing
                                                                                    • Incentives
                                        • Fiscal and non-fiscal incentives
                                                                                    • Waste regulations
                                                                                    • Industry standards for testing
                                        • Voluntary performance standards
                                                                                    products
    Private sector leverage             (ISO 14000, ISO 50000)
                                                                                    • Private labels (e.g., FSC)
                                        • Corporate social responsibility
                                                                                    • CSR requirements


 Note: CSR = Corporate social responsibility; FSC = Forest Stewardship Council


The report begins with a discussion on the role of industries in climate change, the dynamics of climate
change, and the public policy measures that can help guide industrial operations toward climate friendly
operations. Part 1 ranks 12 subsectors according to their emissions associated with direct energy
use, offsite electricity generation, and industrial processes. (See Table 1.1.) Four of the highest ranking
subsectors-iron and steel, chemicals, aluminum, and cement-are then examined in greater detail.
For each of these sectors, the report examines the upstream interventions available to reduce GHG
emissions and how these may impact a firm’s competiveness. These interventions can be divided into
three broad categories: (1) energy efficiency improvements, (2) substitution of low-carbon feedstocks
and fuels, and (3) use of alternative or innovative processes. Additional routes to the decarbonization
of the industrial sector include storing or using (recycling) carbon that would otherwise be emitted and
increasing the use of renewable energy sources within the sector. Options provided on carbon capture
and storage (CCS) and carbon recycling might not be economically feasible in the short term-more
aggressive carbon reduction agendas at the country level and international collaboration are required
to unleash the capacity of breakthrough CCS technologies. They may, however, become more common
facets of future strategies.

Part 2 of the report focuses on the products of the manufacturing process. Public policy has leverage
in the energy or resource consumption of these products and the firms that manufacture them. Energy
efficiency standards are the main tools policy makers use in order to lower emissions from products
and the way they are made. Falling commodity prices and massive production volumes allow trillions of
end-use products to be utilized by households and businesses, and these products continually consume
energy in the form of electricity and emit GHGs until the end of their life cycle. How these products are
manufactured determines either the rise or fall of GHG emission in years and decades to come.

Minimum energy performance S&L programs for these products are proven pathways to energy savings
and GHG emission reductions. As of 2015, there were more than 1,400 minimum energy performance
standards, comparative labeling, and endorsement labeling policies in place in about 75 countries. Where
studies have been done, they have found that S&L policies have delivered substantial energy and GHG
emissions savings, yielding real benefits for individual consumers and the countries that have put those
policies in place.

Part 2 also explores in some depth the impacts of energy efficiency standards and labeling (EES&L)
policies on industry competitiveness in four product categories: (1) lighting products, (2) air conditioners,
(3) major home appliances, and (4) industrial equipment. Products in these categories are together
responsible for much of the energy used in homes and businesses and are typically the first products
addressed by new S&L programs. Part 2 gives an overview of EES&L policies and their achievements in
each of these product areas and identifies trends in policy making.

This report is based on thorough desk research and case study analysis obtained through interviews and
qualitative research. The publication is a first in exploring the direct link between competitiveness and
climate-friendly practices in industry, or more specifically, manufacturing. The results chart the way for
more quantitatively based analysis of this link in order to provide further support to policy makers as
they develop business and climate friendly regulations for a greener path to competitiveness.


                                                                                                                          13
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




EMISSIONS AND GROWTH

Global energy consumption increased 16-fold during the 20th century, and it surpasses the growth rate
of the global population, which increased 4-fold over the same period.1 Since the beginning of the current
century, GHG emission growth has been particularly strong in Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East.2
Most of these economies are in their early stages of industrial development, and with increasing market
activities, the trajectory of strong emission growth will last in these regions if no immediate actions are
taken. In terms of sector-wide emission, the key GHG emitting sectors globally are agriculture,3 industry,
transport, buildings, and energy. (Box I.1 and Figure I.1)

                  BOX I.1 KEY GHG-EMITTING SECTORS



                                                   Transport emissions grew substantially                         Buildings emissions experienced mild
                                                   from 2.8 GtCO2eq in 1970 to 7 GtCO2eq                          growth from 2.5 GtCO2eq in 1970 to 3.2
                                                   in 2010.                                                       GtCO2eq in 2010.




                                                   Industrial emissions experienced high                          Agriculture emissions experienced mild
                                                   growth from 5.4 GtCO2eq in 1970 to 8.8                         growth from 9.9 GtCO2eq in 1970 to 12
                                                   GtCO2eq in 2010.                                               GtCO2eq in 2010.




                                  FIGURE I.1 Global GHG Emissions by Sector, 1970 - 2010

              World by Sector

                                          Energy     Transport         Buildings   Industry      AFOLU   Waste

                                                                                                                                             ALL +10%
                                          50




                                                                                                                  ALL +5%

                                          40

                                                                                                                                               +36%
                                                                                       ALL +14%
     Annual GHG Emissions (GtCO2 eq/yr)




                                                         ALL +21%                                                   +18%



                                          30
                                                                                         +27%                                                  +18%

                                                          +41%                                                      +25%

                                                                                         +25%                                                   +9%

                                                          +35%
                                          20                                                                         +1%
                                                                                         +5%
                                                          +9%
                                                                                                                                               +45%
                                                                                                                     +2%
                                                                                         +4%
                                                          +15%
                                          10

                                                          +11%                           +11%                       +11%                        +8%

                                                          +27%                           +26%                        +9%                       +13%

                                                         1970 - 1980                   1980 - 1990               1990 - 2000                 2000 - 2010

    Source: IPCC 2014.


1
    	 Wilson, C. 2012. “Up-scaling, formative phases, and learning in the historical diffusion of energy technologies.” Energy Policy, 50, pp.81-94.
2
    	 IEA. 2014. Energy Technology Perspectives 2014. http://www.iea.org/etp/etp2014/
3
    	 Agriculture, forestry, other land use.




14
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Key drivers of emission growth have been the following:

•	 Rapid population growth and sustained economic development, especially across developing and
   emerging economies
•	 Increased and globalized trade facilitated through the expansion of infrastructure, technology diffusion,
   and increased resource availability
•	 Industrialization and growth of middle-class consumers in middle and lower income countries
•	 Improvements in standards of living leading to increased consumption
•	 Increases in energy intensity
•	 Growth-driven public policies and long-term industry commitment to less than efficient technology,
   which by and large have not been successfully offset by carbon reduction policies

In spite of worrying trends, there are projected pathways to decarbonization, which would limit global
temperature rise to less than two degrees Celsius by the end of the twenty-first century. These scenarios
require significant emissions reduction across the power and industrial sectors before 2050 to reach
target. With only 34 years remaining until 2050, achieving the needed decarbonization is increasingly
challenging and requires robust and firm climate commitments complemented by immediate and
sustained action.

That carbon emissions can be uncoupled from economic growth has been confirmed by the International
Energy Agency, whose data show that since 2014 “global energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions-
the largest source of man-made greenhouse gas emissions-stayed flat for the second year in a row.”1
Such uncoupling can be attributed to the successful implementation of low-carbon technologies, such
as solar and wind energy, and other energy efficiency measures. However, as traditionally there is a direct
correlation between economic growth and emissions, uncoupling can also be attributed to the stagnation
in growth and consumption due to the recent economic downturn in major economies. Sustained action
is therefore required to maximize the potential for uncoupling. This report explores the pathways toward
this goal.

There is widespread understanding of the significant societal risks from climate change. At the same
time, consensus has formed gradually that climate change mitigation and adaptation measures could
be aligned with poverty alleviation, job creation, and competitive growth. Deep collaborations among the
private sector, public institutions, and civil society need to be scaled up to realize the potential.

DEFINING COMPETITIVENESS

The next 15 years are critical. The extent of low-carbon investment and action will likely shape
the future of the planet. Technological advancements in the past several decades have redefined
industrial boundaries and how consumers’ needs are met. An increasingly integrated global value chain,
accompanied by knowledge dissemination, has induced new supply-demand channels. This creates new
business models, opportunities, and challenges. Whether economies recede or thrive will depend on their
flexibility and their capacity to adapt to a rapidly changing social and economic environment, bound by
the climate threshold and their means to compete. It is worth revisiting the essence and meaning of
competitiveness within this context.

Understanding the different drivers of competitiveness will help clarify how climate action in industries
can be assisted by certain types of technologies and policies. The challenge is that the definition of
competitiveness itself, especially for industries, is loosely or inconsistently defined. Research across
various institutional and private sector approaches shows that there is no core definition for the term
(see Table I.2). Stakeholders nonetheless know when they are gaining or losing competitive advantage
and recognize paths that lead to gains.




	 IEA (International Energy Agency). 2016. “Decoupling of Global Emissions and Economic Growth Confirmed,” IEA, Paris.
1

	https://www.iea.org/newsroomandevents/pressreleases/2016/march/decoupling-of-global-emissions-and-economic-growth-confirmed.html.




                                                                                                                                     15
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Concerns about competitiveness have grown in response to globalization, shrinking economic distance,
rapid technological change, and the liberalization of markets.1 In general, competitiveness refers to an
entity’s ability to compete in national or international markets. Broader definitions of competitiveness
focus on structural factors such as productivity, skills, and innovation that affect economic performance.
However, most commonly competitiveness is measured as a relative price or cost indices.2 According to
the Global Green Growth Institute, the effects of competitiveness can be felt at multiple levels.

•	 At the firm level, a business is considered competitive if it can produce better or cheaper products or
   services than its domestic and international competitors.3
•	 At the sector level, competitiveness refers to how attractive different countries are for a particular
   industry. This is often measured in terms of performance in international trade: net exports,
   investment flows, and so forth. Industrial policy, supply chain linkages, standards, and the availability of
   raw materials are key drivers for sector-level competitiveness.4
•	 At the country level, competitiveness is often represented by national welfare or productivity and
   driven by many factors, including a nation’s educational and scientific strengths.5

From a different perspective, competitiveness is always a relative measure that consists not only of
tangible components, such as labor, technology, and physical assets, but also of intangible factors, such
as brand, site integration or clustering, and access and channels to investment. The discussion in Part 1
further explores competitiveness from the angle of industrial operation. Technical and policy options are
provided for decision makers to help them expand both tangible and intangible competitiveness capacity.

Part 2 examines the competitiveness argument deriving from the Porter hypothesis,6 which argues,
“Well-designed environmental regulations enhance competitiveness through innovation.” Ample evidence
shows that environmental regulations induce innovation in clean and efficient technologies. Regulated
firms face a higher price on emissions relative to other costs of production. This induces them to invest
in R&D and innovate and make operational changes to reduce emissions. Also, the Global Green Growth
Institute found in its research that the “low-carbon innovations induce larger economic benefits than the
‘dirty’ technologies they replace, because they generate more knowledge in the economy, which can be
used by other innovators to further develop new technologies across various sectors of the economy.”7
For example, the EU Emissions Trading Scheme has increased innovation activity in low-carbon
technologies among regulated companies by 10 percent compared to a counterfactual scenario.8




1
 	 Lall, Sanjaya. 2001. “Competitiveness Indices and Developing Countries: An Economic Evaluation of the Global Competitiveness Report.” World
    Development 29 (9): 1501–1525. http://biblioteca.fundacionicbc.edu.ar/images/3/34/Politicas_2.pdf.
2
  	 Fagerberg, J., 1996. Technology and competitiveness. Oxford review of economic policy, 12(3), pp.39-51.
3
  	 Dechezleprêtre, Antoine, and Misato Sato. 2014. “The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Competitiveness.” Policy brief, Grantham Research
    Institute on Climate Change, London, and Global Green Growth Institute, Seoul. http://personal.lse.ac.uk/dechezle/Impacts_of_Environmental_Regulations.
    pdf.
4
  	 Dechezleprêtr and Sato. 2014. “The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Competitiveness.”
5
  	 Shenkar, Obed, Yadong Luo, and Tailan Chi. 2014. “Country Competitiveness.” In International Business, 3rd ed., chap. 5. Abingdon-on-Thames, UK: Taylor
    and Francis. http://www.sagepub.com/sites/default/files/upm-binaries/18595_Chapter_5.pdf.
6
  	 Proposed by Harvard Business School economist and strategy professor Michael Porter twenty years ago.
7
 	 Dechezleprêtr and Sato. 2014. “The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on Competitiveness.”
8
  	 Calel, R., and A. Dechezleprêtre. 2016. “Environmental Policy and Directed Technological Change: Evidence from the European Carbon Market.” Review of
    Economics and Statistics 98 (1): 173–191.



16
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




   Table I.2 Definitions of Competitiveness


                         Competitiveness is the set of institutions, policies, and factors that determine the level of
                         productivity of a country.
    World Economic
    Forum, 2014    Sustainable competitiveness is the set of institutions, policies, and factors that make
                   a nation productive over the longer term while ensuring social and environmental
                   sustainability.
                         Although not explicitly defined, manufacturing competitiveness draws from trade theory
                         and focuses largely on cross-country or cross-sector competitive advantage-the ability to
                         produce goods and services at globally competitive levels. Competitiveness measurements
                         focus on the manner in which the target sector is competitive. Markets of the Organization
    Deloitte, 2012
                         for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) are deemed competitive by
                         innovation and other factors that further promote their capital-intensive competitiveness,
                         whereas Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa (BRICS), for example, have a
                         competitive advantage in labor.
    Organization for     Competitiveness is the degree to which a country generates relatively high factor income
    Economic Co-         and factor employment levels while being exposed to international competition.
    operation and
    Development,         Industry competitiveness is a multifaceted concept, best described with multiple measures
    2014                 of the effectiveness of production processes.

    United Nations       Industrial competitiveness is defined as the capacity of countries to increase their
    Industrial           presence in international and domestic markets while developing industrial sectors and
    Development          activities with higher value added and technological content.
                         Source: UNIDO. 2013. The Industrial Competitiveness of Nations: Looking back, Forging ahead-Competitive
    Organization,        Industrial Performance Report 2012/2013. New York: UNIDO. https://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/
    2013                 Services/PSD/Competitive_Industrial_Performance_Report_UNIDO_2012_2013.PDF.

                   For each sector, the McKinsey Global Institute defines competitiveness as a capacity
                   to sustain growth through either increasing productivity or expanding employment. A
    McKinsey, 2010 competitive sector is one in which companies improve their performance by increasing
                   productivity through managerial and technological innovations and offer better quality or
                   lower-prices goods and services, thereby expanding demand for their products.
                         Firm-level competitiveness is defined by whether a firm can produce better or cheaper
                         products or services than its domestic and international competitors. It is a firm’s long-
                         run profit performance and refers to its ability to compensate its employees and provide
                         adequate returns to its owners.
    Grantham
    Research             Sector-level competitiveness refers to how attractive different countries are for a
    Institute            particular industry and is often measured in terms of performance in international trade
    on Climate           (net exports, investment flows, and so forth).
    Change and the
    Environment,         Country-level competitiveness is often used as a synonym for national welfare or
    2014                 productivity. Unlike firm or sector competitiveness, which are achieved at the expense of
                         rivals when competing for global market share, the competitiveness of a country should
                         not come at the expense of other countries but rather will benefit them by providing a
                         bigger market for exports, greater opportunities for specialization, and cheaper and more
                         innovative inputs.




                                                                                                                                   17
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




PART 1
COMPETITIVENESS AND CLIMATE ACTION
FOR INDUSTRIAL OPERATIONS


INTRODUCTION

The industrial sector is a major contributor to global emissions. Developed countries and the leading
emerging economies are the world’s dominant industrial powers and have the opportunity to lead on
sector decarbonization in order to meet the climate targets being set by the international community. As
other economies grow and industrialize, they too have an important role in ensuring a greener path for
industrial production. In particular they will need to establish safeguards to avoid the historical carbon-
heavy pathway of Western societies.

Part 1 introduces the challenges and opportunities for industries in finding greener paths to
competitiveness. It places particular emphasis on the role of technology in reducing greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions and the potential implications for competitiveness. Part 1 groups favorable technology
solutions, and analyzes the economic feasibility of each under discussed policy scenarios. Leveraging
polices for the successful adoption of these options were illustrated.

EMISSIONS

Roughly a third of both global carbon dioxide emissions and the world’s energy consumption are
attributable to manufacturing industries.1 Figure 1.1 displays industrial energy use, while Figure 1.2
highlights the growth of industrial emissions between 1970 and 2010 by country income. Industrial
sector emissions grew 63 percent from 1970 to 2010.

High-income countries were the key emitters in 1970 but have now been overtaken by middle-income
countries such as China. This growth can be attributed to rapid economic development among low-
and middle-income countries since the 1980s. There has been a fundamental shift in production and
consumption of goods and services from countries of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) to others, particularly in Southeast Asia.2




	 IEA-4E. 2007. Tracking Industrial Energy Efficiency and CO2 Emissions. Paris: IEA. https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/tracking_
1

  emissions.pdf.
	 De Backer, Koren, and Norihiko Yamano. 2012. “International Comparative Evidence on Global Value Chains.” OECD Science, Technology and
2

  Industry Working Papers, OECD, Paris. http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/international-comparative-evidence-on-global-value-
  chains_5k9bb2vcwv5j-en?crawler=true.



18
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                          Figure 1.1 Final Energy Consumption by Sector, 2012




                                                    Other
                                                        3%
                                                                                                    Industry
                                                    Non energy                                      29%
                                                        9%


                                                                                                   Transport
                                                    Buildings
                                                                                                     27%
                                                       32%



     Source: IEA 2014, Key World Energy Statistics.




                          Figure 1.2 Industrial Emissions, 1970-2010


                          Industry

                                     Low-Income Countries

                                     Lower-Middle-Income Countries

                                     Upper-Middle-Income Countries

                                     High-Income Countries from Non-OECD-1990

                                     High-Income Countries from OECD-1990



                                     8




                                                                                                                 +58%
                                     6
                                                                                        -1%
 Annual GHG Emissions (GtCO2 e/yr)




                                                 +10%                    +43%

                                                 +66%                    +18%                                    +100%
                                     4                                                 +18%
                                                 +24%
                                                                         +24%
                                                                                        +2%                      +23%
                                     2

                                                 -4%                     +17%           +6%                       -7%


                                              1970 - 1980              1980 - 1990   1990 - 2000               2000 - 2010
     Source: IPCC 2014.




                                                                                                                             19
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Industrial emissions growth has been particularly strong since the start of the 21st century. Emission
spikes equate to a 100 percent increase across upper-middle-income countries and 58 percent across
lower-middle-income countries between 2000 and 2010. Growth in emissions across non-OECD high-
income countries has been milder, with a 23 percent increase, while OECD high-income countries have
experienced a 7 percent decrease within the same period.1

China now firmly dominates world production, and there is also high growth across Asia, the Middle
East, and Latin America. Improved global transport routes and technological development have enabled
China to become a global powerhouse within the industrial sector. One should note that regions and
countries do not operate in vacuums. Industrial production draws heavily on global resources and
produces downstream emissions that are embedded in the end product. The production of energy-
intensive products has grown between 200 and 500 percent across cement, aluminum, steel, ammonia,
and paper.2 Emissions have been falling in OECD countries, however, which can be attributed to both a
decrease in OECD production and the deployment of energy efficiency levers.




	 IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2014. Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Geneva: IPPC. http://www.ipcc.ch/report/
1

  ar5/wg3/.
	 Kelly, T. D., and G. R. Matos. 2013. “Historical Statistics for Mineral and Material Commodities in the United States.” US Geological Survey (USGS) Data
2

  Series 140, USGS, Washington, DC. http://minerals.usgs.gov/ds/2005/140/.



20
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




BREAKDOWN OF INDUSTRIAL EMISSIONS
A ranking of the top emitting industries is provided in Table 1.1. In order to discuss the potential
technological and energy management interventions and their impact on competitiveness four sectors
were selected for closer examination based on their high emissions from direct energy use, indirect use,
and processes. These are iron and steel, chemicals, aluminum (nonferrous metal), and cement were
chosen.1

     Table 1.1 The World’s Highest-Emitting Industries (in Mt CO2e)




                                  Emissions          Offsite                                                                       Global GHG
                                                                                      Process
      Sector                  through direct electricity and                                                         Total          emissions
                                                                                     emissions
                                 energy use     heat supply                                                                           ranking
      Iron and steel                          190                     720                   1,500                    2,410                          1
      Nonmetallic
                                             1,011                    350                     550                    1,910                         2
      minerals
      Chemical and
                                             390                      960                     530                   1,880                          3
      petrochemical
      Paper, pulp,
                                              430                     320                        15                    760                         4
      and print
      Food and
                                              420                     270                      N/A                    690                          5
      tobacco
      Nonferrous
                                              130                     460                      100                    690                          6
      metals
      Machinery                               150                     440                      N/A                    590                          7
      Mining and
                                              130                     150                         2                   280                          8
      quarrying
      Textile and
                                               90                     180                     N/A                      270                         9
      leather
      Transport
                                               60                     130                     N/A                      190                       10
      equipment
      Construction                            130                       60                    N/A                      180                        11
      Wood and
                                               90                       80                    N/A                      170                        12
      wood products
        Sector being examined in this report.


    Note: Mt CO2e = Million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent. Estimate emissions, 2010.



Ranking method: Three areas of emissions were examined. First, emissions through direct energy use,
i.e., direct emissions from consumption of different forms of energy (e.g. coal, natural gas, biofuel) within
the manufacturing facility were calculated, using energy use data from International Energy Agency
(IEA) energy statistics and emission factors.2 Second, indirect emissions through consumption of grid
electricity and heat from offsite supply was examined, using IEA energy use data for global industrial
sectors and emission factors weighted by production by country.3 Last, process emissions from the
manufacturing process (by-products of various non-energy-related industrial activities) were calculated,
using data from industry reports and IPCC emission factors.4 Carbon Trust analysis identifies the
top industrial sectors by GHG emissions as iron and steel; nonmetallic minerals; chemicals and petro
chemicals; paper, print and pulp; food and tobacco; and nonferrous metals.

1
  	 Significant analysis has been conducted on these four sectors and readers should refer to wider literature for an in-depth sector review.
2
 	 IEA (International Energy Agency). 2012a. “CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion Highlights: Beyond 2020 Documentation,” IEA, Paris; IEA. 2012b. “Energy
    Statistics of Non-OECD Countries,” IEA, Paris.
3
  	 IEA. 2012. “Energy Statistics of Non-OECD Countries”; Country specific emissions factor for offsite energy production are provided by IEA; individual
    sector offsite energy use emission factors were weight-adjusted based on production figures in different countries.
4
  	 IPCC. 2006. “Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories,” IPCC, Geneva.



                                                                                                                                                        21
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




OVERVIEW OF INDUSTRY ENERGY CONSUMPTION BY FUEL TYPE
Coal, oil, natural gas, and electricity are the main fuel sources across industry. Fuel mixes differ across
the four sectors chosen for close examination, but what the sectors have in common is the weak
contribution of low-carbon fuels. Coal features heavily across the iron and steel and cement sectors,
while electricity is the dominant source for the aluminum sector, and oil and natural gas for the chemical
sector. This diversity in fuel mix demonstrates the need for tailored solutions in order to reduce the
carbon intensity of each sector.

     Figure 1.3 Main Fuel Sources for the Iron and Steel, Cement, Aluminum, and Chemical Industries (2012)


     a. Total industry final energy consumption (PJ)
        (including BF, CO and chemical feedsstocks)

                                                                                                Heat
                          Biomass, waste and other                                            5%
                          renewables
                             4%
                                                                                                Coal

                          Electricity
                                                                                             30%
                            20%

                          Natural gas
                                                                                                   Oil
                            20%
                                                                                             21%


     b. Chemicals final energy consumption (PJ)

                          Biomass, waste and other            Heat
                          renewables                           0%
                             5%                                                                 Coal
                                                                                              8%
                          Electricity
                             10%


                                                                                                   Oil
                          Natural gas
                                                                                             47%
                            30%


 Note: PJ = Petajoule; BF = Blast Furnace; CO = Coke Oven.
 Source: IEA 2015, Energy Technology Perspectives dataset.




22
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




   Figure 1.3 Main Fuel Sources for the Iron and Steel, Cement, Aluminum, and Chemical Industries (2012) (Continued)


   c. Iron and steel final energy consumption (PJ)

                          Biomass, waste and other
                          renewables                                                             Heat
                                4%                                                             3%

                          Electricity
                             19%
                                                                                                 Coal
                          Natural gas
                                                                                              61%
                                11%
                          Oil
                                2%




   d. Aliminum final energy consumption (PJ)
                                                     Biomass, waste and
                                                      other renewables
                                                               0%
                                                                                                 Coal
                                                                                              18%

                          Electricity                                                               Oil
                            55%                                                               12%

                                                                                           Natural gas
                                                                                              15%


   e. Cement final energy consumption (PJ)

                                                      Biomass, waste and
                                                       other renewables
                          Heat                                 0%
                                3%
                                                                                                 Coal
                          Electricity
                                                                                              66%
                                12%
                          Natural gas
                                8%
                          Oil
                                11%


 Note: PJ = Petajoule; BF = Blast Furnace; CO = Coke Oven.
 Source: IEA 2015, Energy Technology Perspectives dataset.




                                                                                                                       23
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Recent studies have identified strong realization of energy efficiency across the industrial sector, with an
estimated 40 percent of realized energy efficiency having been already achieved.1 However, as Figure 1.4
highlights, significant economic potential, in the region of 60 percent, for future energy efficiency savings
still remains. Beyond energy efficiency, decarbonization strategies such as carbon capture and storage
can also be deployed to reduce the industrial sector’s carbon footprint.

     Figure 1.4 Realized and Unrealized Energy Efficiency Potential

         Realized energy efficiency potential                    Unrealized energy efficiency potential


     100%



     80%



     60%



     40%



     20%


                    Industry                         Transport                      Power generation                        Buildings
    Source: IEA 2014.


While the sector has started to adopt low-carbon technologies, in order to avoid exceeding a two
degree Celsius rise in global temperatures, significant improvement in emissions reduction is required
across the world’s industrial sector.1 Key challenges facing the sector globally are securing gains from
increased production and trade while also reducing emissions, which has become particularly challenging
in the current global economic climate. Furthermore, industrialized processes are largely mature with
established and long-life technologies in place that are not necessarily compatible with or aligned to
a fully developed low-carbon pathway. Increasingly, the sector will have to deploy currently available
carbon-reducing technologies while investing in R&D to bring down the cost of more progressive and
effective solutions. Other solutions exist, for example, product standards and labeling and energy
management systems, which have yet to be fully developed and could stimulate further decarbonization
across the industrial sector.




	 IEA. 2014. Capturing the Multiple Benefits of Energy Efficiency. Paris: IEA. http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/Captur_the_
1

  MultiplBenef_ofEnergyEficiency.pdf



24
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




COMPETITION

Recent declines in output from individual countries, decreasing prices, the desire to maintain economic
benefits, and the need for strategic access to core industrial products have made the subject of
industrial competitiveness topical. Competiveness is generally examined at the country level, and a
number of indexes that classify countries’ industrial competitiveness exist, including the following:

•	 Competitive Industrial Performance Index (CIP) from the United Nations Industrial Development
   Organization (UNIDO)
•	 Global Manufacturing Competitiveness Index (GMCI) from Deloitte Global
•	 Global Competitiveness Index from the World Economic Forum

Figure 1.5 displays UNIDO’s relative ranking of state industrial competiveness.2

The GMCI 2016 identifies talent, cost competiveness, productivity, and supplier networks as the key
drivers of manufacturing competitiveness. It further highlights the role of advanced manufacturing
technologies and the cultivation of strategic public partnerships as important to unlocking
competitiveness. Policy environments that enable technology transfer, science, and innovation is also an
important component.3

UNIDO notes that the context in which sustainable industrial development occurs is rapidly changing due
to the globalization of production systems, the shrinking economic distance between trading partners,
the emergence of new competitors and transnational companies, and rapid technological change induced
through innovation and learning. Navigating industrial competitiveness is challenging, in particular for
countries that have yet to realize their industrial potential.4

The integration of environmental impact of industrial activity is an aspect that is better considered
within developing countries, than in emerging economies. There is now the fundamental requirement
to ensure that industrial policies integrate ‘green’ considerations across all economies to ensure GHG
reduction can progress while minimizing competitive distortions across national industry.




1
 	 IEA. 2015b. Energy Technology Perspectives 2015. Paris: IEA. http://www.iea.org/etp/etp2015/; World Energy Council (WEC). 2015. 2015 World Energy
    Issues Monitor. London: WEC. http://www.worldenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/2015-World-Energy-Issues-Monitor.pdf.
2
 	 UNIDO. 2014. “Competitive Industrial Performance Report 2014,” Working Paper 12/2014, UNIDO, New York. http://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/
    Services/PSD/WP2014_12_CIPReport2014.pdf.
3
  	 Deloitte Global. 2016. “Highlights from the 2016 Global Manufacturing Competitiveness Index.” http://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/
    Documents/manufacturing/us-gmci-highlights.pdf.
4
  	 UNIDO. 2012. Tanzania Industrial Competitiveness Report 2012. New York: UNIDO. https://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/Services/PSD/TanzaniaIn
    dustrialCompetitivenessReport2012-ebook.pdf.



                                                                                                                                                  25
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     Figure 1.5 UNIDO’s Ranking of Countries’ Industrial Competitivenss




     Competitive Industrial Performance

          Less competitive




          Highly competitive




 Source: UNIDO 2014.



26
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                                                                                           27
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Companies seek comparative advantage by successfully competing for markets and resources and
apply industrial strategy to improve performance. Companies commonly measure competitiveness by
examining relative profitability and market shares.1

The classification of sector competitiveness is less common than that of country or business
competitiveness. As highlighted within the introduction, competitiveness is always a relative measure,
not an absolute concept. Examining competitiveness is always a comparative exercise: companies versus
companies, industries versus industries, and countries versus countries. If energy costs fall by the same
amount for all companies in a particular market, there will be no impact on any individual company’s
relative competiveness.

Sector- and company-level competiveness is composed of both tangible and intangible factors (Figure
1.6). Tangible factors include labor, energy, other inputs, intellectual property and technology, and
physical assets. Intangible factors include branding, price setting, innovative capacity, site integration
and clustering, trade and access to foreign investment, and the strength of local markets. The extent to
which these factors are dominant forces varies from sector to sector. The primary focus of this report
is the impact of reducing GHG emissions on competiveness. At the core to this discussion is the cost of
energy or carbon intensity and the current structural market conditions and exposure to trade, or trade
intensity.

     Figure 1.6 Tangible and Intangible Factors of Competitiveness

         Intangible
                                                                           Labor (cost
         Tangible                                      Strength             and skill)
                                                      of the local
                                                        market
                                                                                                 Energy
                                                                                               (cost and
                                          Trade/                                              availability)
                                         foreign
                                       investment
                                          acces

                                                                                                      Commodities
                                                                         Sector                         (cost and
                                                                     competitiveness                   availability)
                                     Integration/
                                      clustering


                                                                                                   IP/technology

                                               Innovative
                                                capacity                             Physical
                                                                                      assest
                                                                                   (maturity and
                                                                 Brand/price
                                                                                       scale)
                                                                   setting




    Source: Carbon Trust and Vivid Economics analysis 20152.




	 Law, S. 2001. “Competitiveness Indices and Developing Countries: An Economic Evaluation of the Global Competitiveness Report.” World Development 29
1

  (3): 1501-1525. http://biblioteca.fundacionicbc.edu.ar/images/3/34/Politicas_2.pdf.
	 Some categories were adapted from McKinsey Global Institute, 2012. Manufacturing the future: The next era of global growth and innovation. http://www.
2

  nist.gov/mep/data/upload/Manufacturing-the-Future.pdf.



28
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




COMPETITIVENESS OF THE IRON AND STEEL, CEMENT, CHEMICAL, AND ALUMINUM
SECTORS

Cement, aluminum, iron and steel, and chemicals are largely mature, consolidated industries-they are
dominated by a relatively small number of large global players. The products are often globally traded,
have similar upstream activities, and feed into common processes and end sectors.

All of these sectors have been faced with the challenge of weathering the global economic downturn.
Traditional centers of production have had to take new strategic paths to compete with new players and
to address shifts in traditional centers of consumption, sluggish demand, surplus in capacity, and a spiral
of downward prices.

The key components of competiveness for individual companies or countries across these sectors when
faced with decarbonizing can be summarized as follows:

•	 Availability of low cost energy
•	 The maturity and scale of the physical plants, which influence the ability to retrofit
•	 The availability, to a varying degree, of key inputs, innovative capacity, integration or clustering of sites,
   cost of labor, and strength of the local and regional markets




                                                                                                              29
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Table 1.2 provides a summary of the drivers of competiveness and their relative importance across the
chosen industrial sectors.1

      Table 1.2 Drivers of Competitiveness across Four Industrial Sectors


      Competitiveness drivers

          Not important             Moderately important                         Highly important

                                                               Tangible                                                                                              Intangible




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Strength of local mkt.
                                                                                                                                                                      Intergarion/clustering
                                                                                                                         Brand/price setting



                                                                                                                                               Innovative capacity




                                                                                                                                                                                               Trade/FI Access
                                                                                                       Physical assets
                                                                                       IP/technology
                                                                  Other inputs
                                          Labour



                                                      Energy




        Subsectors analysed

               Chemicals


             Steel and iron


                Cement


               Aluminum




     Source: Carbon Trust, based on a Carbon Trust and Vivid Economics Analysis Framework, adapted from Mckinsey 2012.



While many factors that influence competitiveness are at play, these differ case by case. Part 1 focuses
on the role of low-carbon interventions to reduce the impact of GHG emissions and the impacts such
interventions have on competiveness.

Due to the energy-intensive nature of these four industrial sectors, fluctuations in fuel price and resource
price are particularly material to sector profitability.2 They can bring about a change in relative regional
comparative advantage, resulting in new winners and losers.3 Therefore positioning centers of production,
where there are low energy costs and close proximity to resources, will provide competitive advantage.

It is worth noting that while all four sectors are strongly exposed to the cost of energy, not all industrial
sectors are subject to strong exposure to global market forces. For instance, cement products are not
traded globally to the same degree as the other industrial products due to logistical constraints inherent
to the sector.

Close proximity to consumers and trade hubs helps to serve markets in a cost-competitive manner
and, generally speaking, with a lower carbon footprint than distance would entail. The extent to which
this is a key determinant of competitiveness differs across sectors. Chemical and aluminum production
across the Middle East is a prime example in which these factors are decisive. These sectors have access
to competitive energy prices and are geographically well placed to serve multiple markets, allowing
companies within the region to remain globally competitive.

The fluid characteristics of various industrial subsectors provide challenges to policy makers who try
to develop comprehensive multisector national and regional industrial development policies. A strong
understanding of the sectors at the national, regional, and where applicable global levels are required in
order to design policies that support global competitiveness.

1	
     It should be noted that this is not the definitive picture, but serves to show the importance of certain factors of competitiveness over others. Factors of
     competitiveness vary by sector and region, and in some jurisdictions the relative importance will vary.
2	
     Eventually, mid-term input price variations will pass through to consumers. Any actions that threaten to impact those at risk of fuel poverty is of
     particular concern to policy makers.
3	
     IEA. 2015a. Energy Efficiency Market Report 2015. Paris: IEA. https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/
     MediumTermEnergyefficiencyMarketReport2015.pdf.



30
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Iron and Steel
Steel is manufactured via three main processing routes: (1) blast furnace (BF)/basic oxygen furnace
(BOF); scrap/electric arc furnace (EAF); and direct reduced iron (DRI/EAF). About 70 percent of steel is
produced via BF-BOF processes.1 The products-sheets, rails, pipe products, bars, plates, wire rods, wires,
coated steel products, and so forth-are regionally and globally traded and very price sensitive.2 These
products can be found within a wide range of sectors such as construction, transportation equipment,
automotive materials, heavy machinery, domestic appliances, and electrical equipment.
          Figure 1.7 Steel-Making Processes and the Associated Low-Carbon Interventions


                                                                                                     Scrap                                  Iron fines
                                                                                                                                   DRI
                 Coal                                                   -Waste heat recovery                                                       Coal     -Midrex process
                                                                        -Waste gas recycling                                                                -Fastmet, Fastmelt
                                                                        -EOS                                                                                -ITmk3
                                                       Sintering        -Multı- slit burning                                                                -HYL III
           Coke Making
                                                                        -Waste fuel use                                      Gas                            -Coal Based HYL
            -Coke dry quenching                                         -All measures                                                                       -SL/ RN process
            -Further use of cog                                                                                                                             -All processes
            -Coal moisture Control
            -Non – recovery ovens                                        BOF
            -Better process control                  Blast Furnace
            -Coke stamp charging                                                                                                                             General measures
            -All measures                                                                                            -Process control
                                                                                                                     -Hot DRI/HBI charging                 -Preventative
                                                                                               EAF                   -Flue gas combustion                  maintenance
                                                                                                                     -Bottom stirring                      -Energy management
           -Use of high – quality are                                                                                -Charge pre – heating                 system
           -Top pressure recovery turbine                                                                            -Foamy slag practices                 -VFD for pumps & fans
           -Pulverized coal injection                                                                                -Oxy – fuel burners/lancing           -Motor systems
           -Recuperative hot stove           -Heat & gas recovery                                                    -Direct current (DC) AF               optimization
           -Improved process control         -Process control                                                        -Engineered materials                 -Steam system
           -Improved BFG Recovery            -Bottom stirring/lancing                                                -All measures                         optimization-
           -Bell-less top charging           -Improved ladle
           -Natural gas / oil injection      preheating
           -Direct reduced iron (DRI)        -All measures
           -Smelting reduction
           -All measures
                                                                                                     Steel Rolling                        -Advanced process control
                                            -Continuous casting                                                                           -Hot charging
                                            -Efficient ladle pre-                                                                         -Recuperative/regenerative burners
                                            heating                                                                                       -Improved insulation
                                            -Thin- slab casting                                                                           -Flamelless burners
                                            -Castrip process                                                                              -Walking beam furnace
                                            -Endless strip production          Casting                                                    -Heat recovery from water
                                            -Integrated                                                                                   -Lubrication systems
                                            casting&rolling                                                                               -All measures
                                            -All measures




    Source: IETD 2015, “Iron and Steel.”


The industry is very energy intensive. It is the world’s largest CO2 emitter and the second largest
industrial user of energy.3 Energy intensity is estimated at 14–23 Gigajoule (GJ) per ton4 of crude steel,5
and the sector accounted for 13.6 percent of primary energy use in China and 1.4 percent in the USA.6

The production of steel and iron relies heavily on combustion fuels. It entails significant process
emissions arising from the utilization of carbon as a chemical reductant and additional emissions
through indirect electricity consumption. The majority of consumed energy is used to provide heat, at
temperatures over 1000 degrees Celsius.7 While emissions can be reduced through EAF processes by
leveraging recycled scrap iron, the more energy-intense BOF is still needed to produce high-grade steel,
which is required in many end-use applications.

Estimates vary, but the literature suggests that energy constitutes up to 40 percent (but can be as low
as 5–15 percent) of the cost of steel production, while raw materials make up about 70 percent of costs.
Cost of labor varies by region and can also be a competitive factor.8




	
1
          WSA (World Steel Association). 2014. “Energy Use in the Steel Industry,” fact sheet, WSA, Brussels, https://www.worldsteel.org/publications/fact-sheets/
         content/02/text_files/file0/document/fact_energy_2014.pdf.
2
    	    IETD (Industrial Efficiency Technology Database). 2015. “Iron and Steel.” http://ietd.iipnetwork.org/content/iron-and-steel.
3
     	   WSA. 2015c. “World Steel in Figures,” WSA, Brussels. https://www.worldsteel.org/dms/internetDocumentList/bookshop/2015/World-Steel-in-
         Figures-2015/document/World%20Steel%20in%20Figures%202015.pdf; IETD. 2015. “Iron and Steel.”
4
    	    Metric tone
5
    	    For Chinese and U.S. iron and steel producers.
6
    	    Hasanbeigi, Ali, Lynn Price, and Nathaniel Aden. 2011. A Comparison of Iron and Steel Production Energy Use and Energy Intensity in China at the US.
         Berkeley, CA: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. https://china.lbl.gov/sites/all/files/lbl-4836e-us-china-steeljune-2011.pdf.
7
    	    DECC (Department of Energy and Climate Change) and BIS (Department for Business, Innovation and Skills). 2015. Industrial Decarbonisation and Energy
         Efficiency Roadmaps to 2050: Iron and Steel. London: DECC and BIS. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
         file/416667/Iron_and_Steel_Report.pdf.
8
    	    Various, e.g., WSA. 2015b. “Energy Use in the Steel Industry Report Available Now,” press release, https://www.worldsteel.org/media-centre/press-
         releases/2015/Energy-use-in-the-steel-industry-report-available-now.html; Steel Consult. 2006. “New Competitive Realities in Steel.” http://www.
         steelconsult.com/ArticleSteelConsultinMillenniumSteel_English.pdf.



                                                                                                                                                                                   31
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products



     Figure 1.8 Global Crude Steel Production                                      Figure 1.9 Crude Steel Regional Production, 2015
     (thousand tonnes)

     1,800,000
                                                                                             Oceania                           European Union (28)
     1,600,000                                                                                0.4%                                       10.5%
                                                                                                                                                     Other Europe
     1,400,000                                                                                                                                            2.1%
     1,200,000
                                                                                                                                              6.3%      C.I.S. (6)

                                                                                                                                              7.0%      North America
     1,000,000
                                                                                                                                              2.8%      South America
      800,000                                                                                Asia
                                                                                              68.3%                                                  Africa
      600,000
                                                                                                                                                 0.9%

                 1990     1995         2000       2005   2010       2015e

    Source: World Steel Association, 2015 Data.                                  Source: World Steel Association, 2015 Data.



The iron and steel sector is a highly mature and consolidated sector dominated by large international
companies. Figure 1.8 displays the growth in crude steel production, and Figure 1.9 displays the regional
production levels. Between 2000 and 2011 steel production grew by about 75 percent, with crude steel
production estimated at 1.6 billion tons in 2015, hitting an average of about 130 million tons per month in
2014.1

The development of steel production entails fundamental differences by region. Steel production is
moving from the Atlantic to Asia, which in 2012 produced 66 percent of global output, compared to
only 11 percent in 1960.2 China’s share of global demand for finished flat steel more than doubled to 42
percent in the past decade, while the share of consumption by EU and North American nations fell by 23
percentage points. China now represents 48 percent of the total global market.3

Despite a recent decrease in nominal demand and production growth rates, demand for steel is expected
to increase with global growth and urbanization, with more than 1 billion people expected to relocate to
towns and cities by 2030, requiring essential steel-dependent transport and energy, water, and housing
infrastructure.

Due to the global and regional nature of the steel trade, remaining competitive will hinge on access to
low energy and iron ore prices, the state of capacity, the global price of steel, the strength of regional
markets, and state of physical assets. Growth in the steel market is forecast to remain weak, with excess
in capacity and volatility in energy and raw material costs expected to challenge the viability of high-cost
producers and limit future investments. The extent of political interference will also impact the ability to
undertake commercially rational investments.4 For more on the dynamics of the steel market, see Box 1.1.




1
 	 WSA. 2015a. “Crude Steel Production.” Brussels: WSA. https://www.worldsteel.org/statistics/crude-steel-production0.html.
2
 	 Steel Consult. 2013. “Realities of Survival for European Steel: Is There a Future for Steel in Europe?” http://www.steelconsult.com/images/Presentation%20
    SteelConsult%20Platts%20Steel%20EUR.pdf.
3
  	 WSA. 2015c. “World Steel in Figures.”
4
  	 Ernst & Young. 2013. Global Steel 2013: A New World, a New Strategy. London: Ernst & Young. http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/Global-Steel-
    Report-2013/$FILE/Global-Steel-Report-2013_ER0046.pdf.



32
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




   BOX 1.1 COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS OF THE STEEL MARKET

   The global steel sector faces a number of key trends: shifting production and consumption, a
   shift in value chains, technology innovation in operating methods, geoeconomics preferences,
   vertical integration, protectionism, and overcapacity and asset dumping. The global steel market
   is currently facing overcapacity with demand falling below production. Despite the decline of the
   global steel price, global nominal capacity is projected to increase to 2.36 billion tons by 2017, up
   from 2.16 billion tons in 2013. Non-OECD countries are expected to lead the expansion in capacity.

   Key factors to maintaining the excess in capacity include the following: government interventions
   (including subsidies), regardless of profitability, have been put in place in order to avoid social
   upheavals due to layoffs; the high cost of plant closure discourages downward adjustments or
   reallocation of capacity; and some large net steel-importing regions are interested in moving
   toward greater self-sufficiency in steel production in order to reduce their dependence on imports.
   Therefore despite current market conditions, a large number of new projects are taking place,
   which will increase global crude steel-making capacity significantly in the coming years. Many
   countries view steel production as a strategic priority and try to keep production local.

   Many governments actively intervene to strengthen domestic steel markets to ensure supply
   (via protectionism, state aid, and subsidies). In the past 50 years, the steel industry has reduced
   its energy consumption per tonne of steel produced by 60 percent. However, due to this
   dramatic improvement in energy efficiency, it is estimated that there is limited room for further
   improvement on the basis of existing proven technologies. A recent study by the World Steel
   Association shows that the average energy intensity for steel production is 20 Gigajoule per tonne
   (GJ/t) crude steel with a potential for improvement of 15–20%. The steel sector is progressively
   implementing energy efficiency projects, largely done at the individual companies’ initiative
   because of the potential cost savings. Cost control and better productivity are the main drivers for
   companies to implement energy efficiency measures, while corporate reputation and government
   regulations remain low on the list of influencing factors. Companies also quote restrictive internal
   investment criteria and long payback periods as issues facing them when choosing to invest
   in energy efficiency projects. Financial mechanisms that support shared investment schemes
   could help in implementation of energy efficiency projects with long payback periods. Policies
   that support innovation and implementation of new tools will be important to advancing energy
   efficiency more progressively.

     Figure B1.1.1 World Crude Steel Capacity (nominal) and                                                                               Figure B1.1.2 Indexed Global Energy Consumption/
     Demand                                                                                                                               Tonne of Crude Steel Production
        Capacity/Demand gap (RHS)                                Capacity (LHS)                     Demand (LHS)

                                                                                                                                          %

             Million Tonnes                                                                                       Million Tonnes
     2,500                                                                                                                         700    100
     2,300
                                                                                                                                   600
     2,100                                                                                                                                80
     1,900                                                                                                                         500
     1,700
                                                                                                                                   400    60
     1,500
     1,300                                                                                                                         300
                                                                                                                                          40
     1,100
                                                                                                                                   200
      900
                                                                                                                                          20
      700                                                                                                                          100

             2000    2001     2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015                   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2014
    Sources: OECD 2014.                                                                                                                  Sources: World Steel Association 2015c.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    33
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products



Cement
Cement is a binding agent made up primarily of clinker1 mixed with other minerals. The vast majority of
global cement production is used to create concrete-a key component of infrastructure development
and maintenance. It can also be found in products such as mortar.

Cement is manufactured in a process that involves two basic steps. Clinker is made in a kiln at
temperatures of 950–1,450 degrees Celsius. It is then cooled before it is ground with other minerals
to produce cement. The kilns have heavy fuel requirements, making the process energy intensive, and
further CO2 is emitted during chemical exchanges within the kiln.2 Cement has been identified as the
most energy-intensive of all U.S manufacturing industries, with a heavy reliance coal and petroleum
coke3.

Cement can be classified as a predominantly local commodity, with production serving local markets
to a greater extent than other industrial products. This is because the extraction of inputs (for example,
limestone) and the nature of the production processes largely occurs on a regional or local basis. Cement
markets are mature with relatively high capital-intensity requirements. The sector is highly regulated in
developed countries and is undergoing a process of consolidation.4

The cost of energy can be significant in cement production. It is estimated that energy represents 20 to
40 percent of the total cost of production.5 One large cement manufacturer broke down costs as follows:
about 30 percent energy; 30 percent raw materials and consumables; and 30 percent production, labor,
and maintenance costs.6

Global production in 2014 was 4.3 billion tons. China now dominates global production with an estimated
56 percent of the total (figures 1.11 and 1.12).7 Coal and petroleum coke remain the predominant industry
fuels today, and hence the sector remains carbon intensive.

       Figure 1.10 Cement-making Process and Associated Low-carbon Interventions


                                                                                                      -Alternative fuels
                                                                                                      -Fuel management
                                                                                                      -High efficiency mills
                                                                                                      -High-efficiency classifiers
                 -Alternative raw materials                                        Fuel preparation
                 -Process control systems
                 -Efficient transport systems                                                                                                                     -Blended cements
                 -Efficient meal blending                                                                                                                         -Process control and management
                 -High-efficiency mills                                                                                                                           -High efficiency mills
                 -High-efficiency classifiers                                                                                                                     -High efficiency classifiers
                                                                                                                                                                  -Grinding aids in ball mils
                                                                                                                                                                  -Improved grinding media in
                                                                                                                                               Finish             ball mills
                                                                                                                                              grinding


                   Raw material
                    preparation


                                                                              Clinker making




                General measures
                                                  -Energy management and process control
                                                  -Improved insulation                                                                                                Emerging carbon reducing
                                                  -Combustion improvements                                                                                            products & measures
               -Preventative maintenance                                                                                  Clinker cooling   -High efficiency
                                                  -Heat recovery for power generation                                                       coolers                     -Low- & negative
               -High-efficiency motors& drives
                                                  -Addition of mineralizers                                                                 -Optimized heat             –carbon cement
               -Variable Speed Drives (VSD)
                                                  -Low pressure drop cyclones for preheaters                                                recovery                    alternatives
               -Compressed air & fan system
                                                  -Additional pre-heater stages                                                             -VSD in cooler fans         -Carbon capture &
               optimization
                                                  -Converting to multistage preheater systems                                                                           storage
               -Lighting control & optimization
                                                  -Addition of precalciner to preheater kilns
                                                  -Dry systems with preheaters & precalciner
                                                  -Fluidized bed advanced kiln systems




    Source: IETD 2015.




1
  	 Clinker consists of various calcium silicates including alite and belite, and generated by heating various clays and limestone.
2
  	 MPA Cement. 2015. “Modern Cements (Bulk),” MPA Cement Fact Sheet 14b, MPA Cement, London, http://cement.mineralproducts.org/documents/
     FS_14b_Modern_cements_BULK.pdf.
3
  	 U.S. Energy Information Agency. 2013. “Today in Energy: The cement industry is the most energy intensive of all manufacturing industries”. http://www.eia.
     gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=11911.
4
  	 It is estimated that there are currently thousands of plants globally, but the sector is being increasingly dominated by a few key players.
5
   	 ClimateTechWiki. 2015. “Energy Efficiency and Saving in the Cement Industry,” http://www.climatetechwiki.org/technology/energy-saving-cement.
6
  	 Lafarge. 2008. “Information on Lafarge,” chap. 3, 2007 annual report, Paris. http://www.lafarge.com/04022008-Activities-Details_cement_business-en.pdf.
7
 	 Cembureau. 2014. Activity Report 2014. Brussels: Cembureau. http://www.cembureau.eu/sites/default/files/Activity%20Report%202014_website_1.pdf;
     USGS. 2015. Minerals Information data. http://minerals.er.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/cement/



34
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products


     Figure 1.11 Global Cement Production (thousand tons)                          Figure 1.12 World Cement Production 2014, by Region
                                                                                   and Main Countries (percentage)
                                                                                          Europe                                                         CIS
                 Thousand tons
                                                                                            5.7%                                                    2.4%
     4,500,000
                                                                                                                               0.3% Oceania                 America
     4,000,000                                                                                                                                    4.6% (exl. USA)
     3,500,000
                                                                                          China
                                                                                                                                     1.9% USA
     3,000,000
     2,500,000                                                                             56.4%                                              4.8% Africa
     2,000,000
     1,500,000                                                                                                                     15.5% Rest of Asia
     1,000,000
      500,000                                                                             Japan                                                     India
                                                                                            1.4%                                                  7.0%
                 1965            1972   1979   1986   1993   2000   2007   2014
    Source: U.S. Geological Survey, 2015 Data.                                    Source: U.S. Geological Survey, 2015 Data.



European countries have been successful in using alternative fuels (for example, biomass waste) in
cement production and are claiming successful decarbonization strategies through the replacement of
long dry and wet kilns.

Due to the high energy intensity of the cement sector, remaining competitive heavily relies on the ability
to have access to low energy costs and access to competitively priced raw materials. The state of local
demand will heavily impact profit margins and hence influence the ability of the sector to invest in new
technologies.

Chemicals
The chemical industry supplies and supports innovative solutions across virtually all sectors. It serves
a large number of end markets, including aerospace, automobiles, energy construction, fast-moving
consumer goods, textiles, health, packaging, electronics, and agriculture.

The industry is energy intense and competes globally.1 It utilizes a diverse range of complex processes
spanning from small batch processes to large volume, continuous operations. The sector is highly energy
intensive, accounting for approximately 10 percent of global final energy demand.2 It uses 30 percent of
global industrial energy.3 According to some estimates it is the largest energy user within the industrial
sector.4 The manufacturing process requires high energy inputs and high temperatures, including
extensive use of natural gas, petroleum, coal, heat purchase, and electricity. It also entails process
emissions for activities such as chilling, compression, pumping, and lighting.

Approximately half of the energy used within the sector is contained within hydrocarbon raw materials
(primarily from oil and natural gas), and the other half is used in the transformation of raw materials
into chemical products (through reaction and purification steps). Further, unlike other sectors, much of
the original energy is preserved within the final chemical products.5 Energy use within the sector can be
broken down into two key categories: energy within feedstock and energy within fuel.6

With the growth in production there has been a growth in energy consumption. The U.S. Energy
Information Administration (US EIA) estimates that chemicals industries are the second largest user of
energy in the U.S. manufacturing industry, representing 29 percent of total manufacturing energy, and
that a 28 percent growth in energy consumption occurred from 1991 to 2002.7

The global market has shifted substantially since the 1990s and is now highly competitive, with
increasing market share captured by developing countries and economies in transition (e.g. China, India,
and countries in the Middle East)8. Global sales have roughly doubled over the past decade, and there
is increased competition for investment. These countries have been able to lean upon increasingly
sophisticated production facilities and feedstock as well as energy advantages to attract investment9.


1
 	 Cefic. 2015b. “Energy and Climate Change.” http://www.cefic.org/Policy-Centre/Energy--Climate-Change/.
2
  	 ICCA (International Council of Chemical Associations). 2013. “Chemical Industry Contributions to Energy Efficiency and Mitigating Climate Change.”
    Brussels: ICCA. http://www.icca-chem.org/ICCADocs/ICCA%20Roadmap%20Summary.pdf.
3
  	 OECD and IEA. 2009. “Chemical and Petrochemical Sector: Potential of Best Practice Technology and Other Measures for Improving Energy Efficiency,” IEA
    Information Paper, Brussels, https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/chemical_petrochemical_sector.pdf.
4
  	 OECD and IEA. 2009. “Chemical and Petrochemical Sector.”
5
  	 Neelis et al., 2007, sourced in Patt, J., and Banholzer, W., Improving Energy Efficiency in the Chemical Industry. Washington, DC: National Academy of
    Engineering. https://www.nae.edu/Publications/Bridge/EnergyEfficiency14874/ImprovingEnergyEfficiencyintheChemicalIndustry.aspx.
6
  	 US EIA (U.S. Energy Information Administration). 2015. “Chemical Industry Analysis Brief,” US EIA, Washington, DC. https://www.eia.gov/consumption/
    manufacturing/briefs/chemical/.
7
 	 US EIA. 2015. “Chemical Industry Analysis Brief.”
8
  	 UNEP. 2013. “Global Chemicals Outlook: Towards Sound Management of Chemicals”. http://www.unep.org/hazardoussubstances/Portals/9/
    Mainstreaming/GCO/The%20Global%20Chemical%20Outlook_Full%20report_15Feb2013.pdf
9
  	 Cefic. 2015a. “Competitiveness of the European Chemical Industry.” http://www.cefic.org/Documents/PolicyCentre/Reports-and-Brochure/
    Competitiveness-of-the-European-chemical-industry-2014.pdf.



                                                                                                                                                                  35
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products



     Figure 1.13 Regional Chemical Sales                                                                                        Figure 1.14 Regional Growth in Chemical Production
                                                  Rest of World
                                                                                                                                 China          Russia        Brazil    USA
                                                           1%                                                                    India          South Korea   EU        Japan
                                                                     Rest of Europe
                                             2%   India                                                                          400
                                                                                3%




                                                                                       Production index (2003=100) by country
           China                                                                                                                 350
                                                          4%    Rep. Of Korea
             33%                                                                                                                 300
                                                          5%    Latin America
                                                                                                                                 250
                                                          5%    Japan                                                            200
                                                                                                                                 150
                                                      13%       Rest of Asia
                                                                                                                                 100
           NAFTA                                                                                                                  50
             17%                                                               EU 28
                                                                               17%
                                                                                                                                         2003      2004       2005     2006     2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013
    Source: Cefic. Facts and Figures 2014.                                                  Source: U.S. Geological Survey, 2015 Data.




In 2013 China dominated production with EUR 1,047 billion in sales, representing roughly one third of
global sales estimated at EUR 3,136 billion.

The European market is currently at a competitive disadvantage, with lower energy prices within the
Middle East and the United States. However, it is able to retain some competitiveness by staying at the
forefront of product innovation. Due to the highly traded nature of the product, staying ahead from a
cost price point is important. A key challenge facing the sector is how to provide the high energy intensity
required within the manufacturing process while minimizing emissions.

Aluminum
Aluminum is a key enabling metal. Its use facilitates important developments in industries such as
automotive, infrastructure, construction, electric engineering, food and drink, and aircraft.1 Aluminum is
one of the highest consumed metals globally, surpassed only by steel and copper.2




	 Aluminium Leader. 2015. All about Aluminium. http://www.aluminiumleader.com/.
1

	 IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2015. “Commodity Special Feature,” from World Economic Outlook, IMF, Washington, DC. http://www.imf.org/external/
2

  np/res/commod/pdf/WEOSpecialOCT15.pdf.



36
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




      Figure 1.15 Process of Aluminum Production


    Extraction              Production                                                                            Co-products      Use                End of Life

                                                              primary Al                                                                 use energy       Waste
                                                                         Ignot                                                                           Mgmt. &
      Mining      bauxite   Refining    alumina    Smelting
                                                                        Casting                                                                          Recycling
                                                                                              Semis
                                                                                             manu-        semis    Manufac-          final
                                                                                    lgnots                                                                 Collection
                                                                   recycled Al               factur-                turing         product    Use
                                                                                               ing
                                                Anode
                                              Production                                                                                                   Sorting &
                                                           dross       Remelting
                                                                       & Refining                                                                          Treatment



                                                                                                 new scrap             new scrap                      old scrap
                                                                           scrap                                                                                  Landfill




    Co-products
                            Other raw materials                                                        Other Materials/Product Systems




    Source: World Aluminum 2015.1


Key stages of aluminum production are bauxite mining, smelting, and processing. Aluminum production
requires significant energy. The Hall-Héroult process, the electrolytic refining process during aluminum
smelting, is very energy intensive, accounting for about 80 percent of energy required within primary
aluminum production. Approximately 3 percent of the world’s entire electricity supply goes to the
extraction of aluminum,2 and in 2014 the sector consumed about 700 terawatt-hour (TWh)3 of energy.
Globally, 57,890 thousand metric tons of aluminum were produced in 2015.4

Energy costs account for approximately 35 percent of aluminum production costs.5 Tariffs charged by
energy producers are therefore crucial to remain regionally and globally cost competitive. Large producers
of aluminum are able to gain competitive advantage when located where electricity is cheap and readily
available.


1
 	 World Aluminium. 2015. Aluminium and Life Cycle Thinking: Towards Sustainable Cities. World Aluminium. 2015. Aluminium and Life Cycle Thinking:
    Towards Sustainable Cities.
2
 	 Mr. Reid. 2011. “Electricity Consumption in the Production of Aluminium.” Blog entry, Mr. Reid.org, July 14, 2011. http://wordpress.mrreid.org/2011/07/15/
    electricity-consumption-in-the-production-of-aluminium/.
3
  	 Terawatt-hour is a unit of energy. It represents a billion units of the more common kilowatt-hour.
4
  	 Data retrieved from World Aluminum, “Statistics,” March 2016. http://www.world-aluminium.org/statistics/primary-aluminium-smelting-power-
    consumption/.
5
  	 Rusal. 2015.”Aluminium Production Costs.” http://rusal.ru/en/aluminium/energetics.aspx.



                                                                                                                                                                             37
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Aluminum profit margins are affected by rising energy costs and falling prices, and about 70 percent of
the variability in aluminum’s total cost is linked to energy cost.1 However, given the reliance on electricity
within its production, which is heavily regulated in most countries, aluminum prices are more stable than
those of iron.

Recycling has become an increasingly important part of meeting demand for aluminum. According
to World Aluminum, about 70 percent of production is derived from primary production and about
30 percent is supplied through recycling. Recycling is driven by market mechanisms. It currently is an
attractive proposition as it provides high value at a relatively low cost and it is less energy intensive than
primary production. It also simultaneously helps meet city and national recycling objectives. Recycling of
aluminum requires as little as 5 percent of the energy and emits 5 percent of the GHG emissions when
compared to primary aluminum production.2 Since 1990, emission savings from recycled aluminum have
more than doubled. However, as recycling becomes more prominent, efforts need to be supported by
increased collection and separation from end-of-life products.3

 Aluminum is globally traded, but with increasing recycling, larger proportions of the value chain occur
on a regional basis. Since 1970 production has grown by 35 percent in China, 23 percent in Australia,
11 percent in Brazil, and 4 percent in India. The combined market share of these countries is about 70
percent.4 Annual consumption has grown by about 3 percent per year in the past half century, with
forecast growth expected to continue. Global aluminum production has increased since the economic
recession, driven primarily through Chinese and Middle Eastern production, with Western countries losing
market share.

     Figure 1.16 Regional Primary Aluminum Production	                         Figure 1.17 Global Annual Primary Aluminum Production
                                                                               (thousand tons)
                                                                               60,000

                                                          Row Est.
            Oceania    4%                            2%   UN-Reported         50,000
              East &                                 3%   Africa
      Central Europe
                       7%
                                                                              40,000
       West Europe     7%                            4%   Asia (ex China)

                                                                              30,000
      South America    3%                            9%   GCC


      North America    9%                           52%   China                20,000



                                                                               10,000


                                                                                        1973 1976 1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010 2013
    Source: World Aluminum Data 2015.                                         Source: World Aluminum 2013a.



The current global market is binary, divided into China as the biggest producer and consumer and the
rest of the world. In 2014 Chinese production accounted for about 52 percent of global production. The
sector has experienced significant structural change, with geographical relocation of key production
centers and shifts in the concentration and integration of the industry (Box 1.2).

Emerging economies, such as China, India, and Africa, are successfully using energy-efficient
technologies, and the average energy efficiency of the industry in non-OECD countries runs ahead of that
in OECD countries. The cost of energy, access to competitively priced raw inputs and recycled product,
innovative capacity, and the ability to cluster sites in order to gain system efficiencies are important
factors in remaining competitive.




1
 	 World Aluminium. 2013a. “The Global Aluminium Industry: 40 years from 1972.” http://www.world-aluminium.org/media/filer_public/2013/02/25/
    an_outlook_of_the_global_aluminium_industry_1972_-_present_day.pdf.
2
 	 World Aluminum. 2013b. “Global Aluminum Recycling: A Cornerstone of Sustainable Development.” http://www.world-aluminium.org/media/filer_
    public/2013/01/15/fl0000181.pdf.
3
  	 World Aluminum. 2015. “Aluminium for Future Generations”. http://recycling.world-aluminium.org/home.html.
4
 	 World Aluminium. 2013a. “The Global Aluminium Industry.”



38
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




   BOX 1.2 KEY STRUCTURAL CHANGES TO THE ALUMINUM SECTOR

   Like other industrial sectors, the aluminum sector has experienced a number of important
   structural changes that have shaped the current aluminum market. These can be summarized as
   follows:

   •	 The emergence of new consuming regions
   •	 The geographical relocation of bauxite, alumina, and aluminum production centers
   •	 Shifts in the degree of concentration and integration
   •	 The development of new end-use markets and the threat of substitutes, including recycled
      metal
   •	 The historical decline in real prices of the metal and the recent upward shift in the industry cost
      curve
   •	 The market adjustment mechanisms and, more recently, the rising popularity of commodities as
      an asset class

   Energy consumption within the aluminum sector is dominated by the reduction process, requiring
   significant electricity. Countries that are located close to bauxite mines, are within close proximity
   to port facilities, and have access to power generation capacity-namely, coal, gas, hydropower,
   and nuclear power (the key power sources of aluminum facilities)-have a natural competitive
   advantage.

   Further new builds across West Africa, Southeast Asia, the Middle East, and China have been able
   to implement best available technologies (BAT), and are not necessarily subjected to emissions
   taxation or trading systems. This has allowed them build strong competitive advantage.

        Figure B1.2.1 Focus of Primary Energy across the Aluminum Sector


        MJ primary energy per tonne of aluminium


        180
        160
        140
        120
        100
        80
        60
        40
        20

              Bauxite mining (fuel   Anode production        Ingot casting        Alumina refining
                                                                                                         Reduction (electricity)
                and electricity)     (fuel combustion)    (fuel combustion)     (fuel and electricity)

     Note: MJ= Mega joule
     Source: World Aluminum 2015.




THE CHALLENGES IN INDUSTRIAL COMPETITIVENESS AND ENVIRONMENTAL ACTION

Maintaining competitive advantage and growth in output while continuing to meet societal demands to
decarbonize is a considerable challenge facing today’s industrial sectors. Industrial emissions are strongly
correlated to economic development, where growth in economic activity results in strong demand
for industrial products-and results in increased emissions. This remains the case, despite a partial
decoupling of emissions and production across a range of industrial sectors. (See Box 1.3 for an example.)




                                                                                                                                   39
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




With changes in the international economy, downward pressure on costs, and the need to remain cost
competitive, many of the energy efficiency retrofit quick fixes have already been deployed.1 To a large
degree, current success rates have been the result of implementing easily applied interventions that
neatly align with the drive to remain cost competitive. The present challenge for industry is to turn to
more complex and costly interventions if the decoupling trend is to continue. However, this needs to be
aligned with competitive motives in order for business to remain commercially viable. This is a formidable
and multifaceted challenge, with no single stop solution.


     BOX 1.3 PRODUCTION AND GHG DECOUPLING ACROSS THE EU CHEMICAL SECTOR
     European chemical sector production grew by 60 percent between 1990 and 2012. During the same period
     GHG emissions decreased by 54 percent. This means that GHG intensity fell by 71 percent. This decoupling of
     emissions can be attributed to the following:

     •	   The use of low-carbon fuels and the abatement of nitrous oxide
     •	   Development of cleaner technologies
     •	   Waste recycling processes
     •	   New energy efficient products

     However, it is estimated that in order for further decoupling to occur, industry will need to turn to more
     aggressive and higher cost abatement technologies that currently conflict with EU competitive aspirations.

           Figure B1.3.1 Decoupling of GHG and Production

               Greenhouse gas emissions                      Chemicals production*
                Index (1990=100)
           180
           170
           160
           150
           140
           130
           120
            110
           100
            90
            80
             70
            60
            50

                      1990                      1995                 2000             2005                    2010                   2013
           Figure B1.3.2 Energy Intensity of EU Chemical Production

               Energy intensity*                                                                 Average growth rate p.a. 1990-2012
                                                                                                 EU chemicals production 2.1%
               Energy consumption                                                                Energy consumption -0.8%	
                                                                                                 Chemicals intensity -2.9%
               Chemicals production
                                                                                                                           Index (1990=100)
           180
           170
           160
           150
           140
           130
           120
            110      100.0
           100
            90
            80                                  69.8
             70
                                                                     57.7             54.7                                          52.9
            60                                                                                                51.4
            50

                      1990                      1995                 2000             2005                    2010                   2013
         Source: Cefic and European Environmental Agency 2014.



     	 See DECC (2015) Industrial Decarbonisation and Energy Efficiency Roadmaps to 2050. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/industrial-
     1

       decarbonisation-and-energy-efficiency-roadmaps-to-2050.; and IEA (2015b) Energy Technology Perspectives. http://www.iea.org/etp/etp2015/.



40
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Broadly, there is one set of challenges and economic barriers that apply to those companies operating
within jurisdictions that impose stringent environmental regulations and another, lesser set of challenges
for those who operate outside.

While the former are faced with greater constraints, there are core societal and business benefits to
being front runners in decarbonizing and reducing the energy intensity of operations.

Despite the market failures that hold back low-carbon investment, the benefits of green growth
interventions are well documented and extend beyond stakeholder financial return. Mitigating the
adverse impacts of climate change can provide the following:

•	   Increased climate change resilience
•	   Enhanced energy security
•	   Economic benefits (for example, sector productivity and reduced fuel import costs)
•	   Social benefits (for example, less local pollution)

Further, while downsides to carbon policies exist, there are strong benefits to implementation. For
example, introducing a carbon scheme can result in the development of innovative and cost-reducing
technologies with positive social benefits. In particular, by putting a predictable and strong price
on carbon, developed and emerging economies can send signals across the economy that can help
accomplish the following:

•	 Guide investment and consumption choices away from carbon intense activities
•	 Increase fiscal revenues
•	 Phase out energy subsidies that discourage decarbonization and increase exposure of importing
   countries to volatile prices1

Challenges for Companies That Operate within Carbon Regulation Zones
Complying with carbon regulations can be costly to business and detrimental to competiveness relative
to companies that are not required to comply with such regulations. However, as traditional fuels and
commodities become scarcer, sector transformation to a more sustainable pathway is ultimately
required.

Today much of the narrative surrounding industrial competiveness involves carbon taxes and cap-and-
trade schemes, the most prominent being the EU Emission Trading Scheme (EU ETS). Companies that
face a carbon tax or are subject to an emissions trading scheme will face costs that other companies
will not. This is the inevitable result of the partial and nonbinding climate policy landscape. However, an
increasing number of countries and cities are looking to carbon taxes and cap-and-trade schemes (Figure
1.18). To date 40 national and 20 subnational jurisdictions – including seven of the ten largest economies-
have implemented or preparing to implement carbon pricing mechanisms. For example Mexico, China,
California, Quebec, Portugal, and South Africa aim to launch cap-and-trade schemes in the coming years.
The countries, regions, and cities with plans for carbon taxes and such schemes are responsible for 22
percent of global emissions. These schemes would cover 13 percent of global emissions2.

Despite the positive direction, many of these plans have yet to be formally implemented or progressed
beyond pilot schemes. In addition, linking of national carbon markets with regional and international
trading partners is required to reduce competitive disadvantages. This is highly relevant to industrial
competitiveness, where products subject to different regulatory environments are traded between the
jurisdictions.




	 Rydge, J. 2015. “Implementing Effective Carbon Pricing,” New Climate Economy Working Paper, Washington, DC. http://2015.newclimateeconomy.report/
1

  wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Implementing-Effective-Carbon-Pricing.pdf.
	 World Bank. 2016b. “Pricing Carbon.” Washington, DC: World Bank. http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/pricing-carbon.
2




                                                                                                                                                  41
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     Figure 1.18 Countries That Have or Are looking to Implement a Carbon Tax or ETS and Linkage Occurring between Different Schemes




                                                                   Manitoba
                                                        Alberta                                                             Iceland

                                                                                                   Quebec
                           British Columbia                              Ontario
                                                                                           RGGI
                                  Washington
                                     Oregon

                                      California




                                                    Mexico




                                                                                                  Brazil



                                                                                                            Rio de Janeiro
                                                                                  Chile                    Sao Paulo




          ETS implemented or scheduled for implementation

          Carbon Tax implementedor scheduled for implementation

          ETS or Carbon Tax under consideration

          Carbon Tax implemented or scheduled, ETS under consideration

          ETS and Carbon Tax implemented or scheduled




 Note: ETS = emission trading scheme.
 Source: World Bank Group; ECOFYS. 2016.




42
                         A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                  Sweden
                                   Finland
               Norway
                                                                                                      Republic of Korea
          UK                      Estonia
               Denmark               Latvia
Ireland                        Poland
                                Ukraine                   Kazakhstan
      France

                Switzerland         Turkey
                                                                                                                              Japan
   Portugal               Greece                                                        China




                                                                                          Thailand




                                                         Beijing
                                                          Tianjin                                                               Saitama
                                                                                                          Kyoto
                                                                                                                    Tokyo
                                                       Hubei                                         Shanghai
                         South Africa
                                              Chong Qing                                                                    Guangdong


                                                                                                  Shenzhen                     New Zealand




                                                                                                                                             43
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     Figure 1.18 Countries That Have or Are looking to Implement a Carbon Tax or ETS and Linkage Occurring between Different Schemes (Continued)




                                                     WCI’
                                                                                           Quebec

                                     Washington



                                                                               RGGI**
                                            California




                                                                   Mexico




                                                                                                      Brazil



                                                                                      Chile


          Status of implementation

          Implemented (in force with established rules)

          Implementation scheduled (mandate agreed, start date communicated, rules in preparation)

          Under consideration*** (government gave public signal towards the development of an ETS)

          National

          Sub-national or regional




 Note: ETS = emission trading scheme.
 Source: World Bank Group; ECOFYS. 2016. Carbon Pricing Watch 2016.




44
         A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




              European Union


                                                  Kazakhstan               China
                                Ukraine
                                                                                                              Japan
                                                                                            Republic
Switzerland                                                                                 of Korea

                     Turkey


                                                Republic of Korea


                                                                              Thailand




               Beijing                                                                   Saitama
                Tianjin                                              Kyoto
                                                                                         Tokyo
                                    China Tianjin


                                              Hubei            Shanghai
              Chong Qing
                                                                                                                       New
                                                    Guangdong                                                         Zealand

                                                                      Shenzhen
                                                             Offisetting                            Linking

                                                             CDM and Jl credits                     Planned link
                                                             Bilateral offsets                      Link

                                                             Domestic offsets




                                                                                                                                45
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Figure 1.18 provides an overview of sectors covered by a number of cap-and-trade schemes.
Understanding which sectors have previously been targeted can assist in designing future programs and
limiting risks that affect industrial competitiveness.1 While Figure 1.19 demonstrates a strong coverage
of industrial sectors, a large proportion of free allowances or total exemptions have traditionally been
provided to industry to reduce the risk of hindering competition.2 Industries must develop strategic
plans and collaborate to graduate beyond a world of free allowances and determine how to minimize
competitive disadvantages when this occurs.

     Figure 1.19 Sectors Covered Emission Trading Schemes




                                                                                                                  Agriculture
                                                                            Fossil fuel




                                                                                                                                Transport
                                                                                          Buildings
                                                   Industry




                                                                                                                                            Forestry
                                                               Aviation




                                                                                                      Waste
                                      Power




                 EU



             California



           New Zealand



                RGGI



               Korea



               Beijing



            Kazakhstan




    Source: Adapted from World Bank 2015, State and Trends of Carbon Pricing.



There are three main types of carbon costs: direct, indirect, and compliance. Direct costs arise from the
fee associated with purchasing emission allowances or paying a carbon tax. These vary considerably
across regions. Carbon taxes in Switzerland, Sweden, and Finland are particularly high and range between
about $60 and $130 per tCO2e, (tons of carbon dioxide equivalent) while the pilot ETS in China, New
Zealand and the EU ETS prices are closer to $5 to $15 per tCO2e.3

Indirect costs can manifest themselves through a carbon price increase knock-on effect, which can lead
to a rise in the cost of energy, increased costs of process emissions, and a pass-through to an increase in
the price of electricity for consumers.




1
 	 For comprehensive guides to the operation and design of emission trading schemes, see World Bank. 2016a. Emissions Trading in Practice: A Handbook on
   Design and Implementation. Washington, DC: World Bank; European Commission. 2014. EU ETS Handbook. Brussels: European Commission.
2
 	 For example, within phase three of the EU ETS, industry sectors deemed at risk of carbon leakage receive 100 percent of free allowances for emission
   trading.
3
 	 World Bank. 2015. State and Trend of Carbon Pricing. A World Bank Study. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/
   Worldbank/document/Climate/State-and-Trend-Report-2015.pdf.



46
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




The cost of compliance with environmental policies and its impact (both positive and negative) varies by
sector. These will be influenced by factors such as the following:

•	   Energy intensity of the business
•	   	
     Technology deployment costs
•	   	
     Cost of any penalty for noncompliance
•	   	
     Extent of free allowances or sector exemptions
•	   Transaction costs and the ability to overcome or pass on these transaction costs
     	

The risk of industry relocating or exiting a country due to carbon policies is a concern of business leaders
and national governments. Of particular concern is the prospect of investment, jobs and gross domestic
product growth relocating to countries with relaxed GHG emission policies. This phenomenon is known
as carbon leakage. Today, both operational and investment carbon leakage is of a particular concern to
governments in countries with advanced climate-based policies.

The European Commission (EC) defines carbon leakage as follows: “Carbon leakage is the situation that
may occur, if for reasons of costs related to climate policies, businesses were to transfer production to
other countries which have laxer constraints on greenhouse gas emissions. This could lead to an increase
in their total emissions. This risk of carbon leakage may be higher in certain energy intensive industries.”1

The risk of carbon leakage differs by industrial subsector. For example the steel sector is at larger risk
than the cement sector. There are a number of factors to consider in determining if a sector is at risk of
carbon leakage.2 These can be summarized as follows:

•	 Direct CO2 intensity from energy use or process
•	 Use of energy that internalizes CO2 costs (for example, electricity-intensive industries-especially in
   countries with low renewable uptake)
•	 Importance of the cost of carbon relative to other variables
•	 Trade intensity
•	 Abatement potential or cost of abatement
•	 Ability to pass costs downstream or through to consumers

Power sectors within the EU have been able to successfully pass on costs of the EU-ETS. The ability to
pass through costs is in turn subject to a number of considerations. These can be summarized as follows:

•	   Extent of exposure to international competition
•	   Market concentration
•	   Product differentiation
•	   Availability of substitutes that are less energy intensive
•	   Exchange rate risks
•	   Customer reaction to a price increase
•	   Vertical integration of the industry
•	   Quality issues and long-term contracting
•	   Legal and political environment
•	   Coverage of a global pricing mechanism3

The state of California’s assessment of carbon leakage is demonstrated in Figure 1.20 and within the EU
ETS sectors are deemed at risk from carbon leakage if any criteria within Figure 1.21 are met.




1
 	 EC (European Commission). 2016. “Carbon Leakage.” http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets/cap/leakage/index_en.htm.
2
 	 Marcu, Andrei, Christian Egenhofer, Susanna Roth, and Wijnand Stoefs. 2016. Carbon Leakage: An Overview. CEPS Special Report no. 79. Brussels: Centre
   for European Policy Studies. http://aei.pitt.edu/46163/1/Special_Report_No_79_Carbon_Leakage.pdf.
3	
   Renaud, J. 2008. “Issues behind Competiveness and Carbon Leakage: Focus on Heavy Industries,” IEA Information Paper, Paris; Droge, Susan. 2010.
   Tackling Leakage in a World of Unequal Carbon Prices. Climate Strategies, London.



                                                                                                                                                     47
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Industry’s exposure to carbon regulation and its effect on sector competiveness needs to be analyzed
at the company or economic zone level. In 2010 the Carbon Trust and Climate Strategies identified
EU industrial sectors at risk of carbon leakage (see Figure 1.21). This demonstrates that the chosen
sectors are at risk of carbon leakage. More recently in 2014 the EC reconfirmed that industrial sectors
were particularly affected by carbon leakage with strong growth in production experienced in emerging
markets. Industrial sectors have been provided with free allowances to alleviate the risk of carbon
leakage.

     Figure 1.20 California Assessment of Carbon Leakage Risk

       Emissions Intensity


             >5,000 High                    High                        High                         High


       1,000-4,999 Medium                 Medium                      Medium                         High


            100-999 Low                     Low                       Medium                       Medium


            <100 Very Low                   Low                          Low                         Low


                                         <10% Low                 10-19% Medium                   >20% High                Trade Intensity



    Source: California Environmental Protection Agency 2015.


     Figure 1.21 Risk of Carbon Leakage across EU Industry in 2010

       EU ETS sectors at risk if:

       A) Carbon costs increase production costs by at least 5% of gross value added and non EU trade intensity is over 10%
       (combined criterion)
       B) OR direct costs by at least 30%
       (carbon cost criterion)
       C) Or non EU intensity is over 30%
       (trade intensity criterion)



           Carbon Cost as % of GVA

     100

                                                            Leakage Criteria:                          Example Sectors:

     80                                                     A) Combined Criteria                       Cement

                                                            B) Carbon Cost Only                        Refineries

     60                                                     C) Trade Intensity                         Basic iron & steel

                                                            No carbon leakage                          Aluminum

     40




     20



                   20                           40                             60                            80                          100
                                                                                                                                   Trade Intensity %
    Source: Adapted from Carbon Trust 2010.        1




	 Carbon Trust. 2011. Tackling Carbon Leakage: Sector-specific solutions for a world of unequal carbon prices. https://www.carbontrust.com/media/84908/
1

  ctc767-tackling-carbon-leakage.pdf; and European Commission. 2015. Carbon Leakage. http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets/cap/leakage/index_en.htm.




48
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




While identified as administratively burdensome, regulatory compliance with such schemes has not had
as severe an impact on competitive advantage as the recent structural shift in centers of consumption,
access to low input costs, geographical trade route access, surpluses in capacity, and national and
regional protectionism. Work undertaken by the London School of Economics Centre for Economic
Performance in 2010 demonstrated that a complete relocation of business outside of the EU due to
carbon price was unlikely, with carbon intensity bearing more impact on competiveness than trade
intensity.1

Carbon trading schemes such as the EU ETS were initially identified as a driver for implementing
decarbonizing initiatives. Those companies that are within a carbon tax jurisdiction are incentivized to
implement such initiatives in order to reduce their exposure to the carbon tax.

However, for businesses that operate within a carbon market or face a carbon tax, there is incentive
to carry out low-carbon interventions only with abatement costs equal to or below the carbon price or
carbon tax level. With the current low-carbon price and high level of free allocations for the industrial
sectors in the EU ETS, companies are not yet facing a strong driver for change. Furthermore, as the price
of carbon has decreased over the past five years and uncertainty with the scheme rose, the strategic
importance of the scheme fell in priority for industrial executives.2 Without a strong floor price and
confidence that the price of carbon will increase over time there is not a strong push for plant managers
to invest in high-cost abatement technologies. As and when the EU ETS scheme is revised, and in
tandem a suite of other national and subnational jurisdictions launch similar cap-and-trade schemes, the
driver for increased investment in low-carbon interventions will return.3 To the extent that such schemes
cover a substantial share of global industrial emissions, this would have limited detrimental effects on
competiveness for companies.

A level international playing field is strongly advocated by industry. This would require an international
carbon price and/or similar levels of carbon regulations in numerous countries. International carbon taxes
could in theory drive the development and implementation of carbon capture, low-carbon feedstocks,
further energy efficiency improvements, and a reduction in industrial process emissions. However,
government action and policies (both carbon and non-carbon related) are currently focused at the
regional and national levels.

It needs to be recognized that compliance with long-term global climate targets implies that industrial
transformation is inevitable, and a strong carbon price is ultimately required.

Challenges for Companies not within Jurisdictions with a Carbon Price
Companies faced with a carbon tax or emission trading schemes today will not face the same pressures
as those who do have to comply. In the short term companies not facing a carbon price could benefit
from this position. However, as previously highlighted, there are numerous societal and financial benefits
to reducing the energy and carbon intensity of industry. In addition, companies will be able to leverage
learnings from early adopter companies found within jurisdictions with a carbon price and can prepare
themselves for future carbon taxes and minimize negative externalities related to fossil-fuel-intensive
emissions. Ultimately, companies that strategically position themselves as early followers can reap the
benefits while minimizing investment costs.

The Introduction of Carbon Pricing across Emerging Economies
It is in the interest of emerging economies to transition away from fossil-fuel-intensive development
and avoid the consequences of heavy polluting pathways. Carbon pricing mechanisms offer an efficient
means for meeting this objective. However, there are pros and cons associated with the introduction of
carbon pricing schemes within developing and emerging economies.

On the plus side, greater coverage of the world with emissions standards would lead to a more
competitive global environment for industry. This would spur industry to invest in energy efficient
technologies in order to limit their exposure to carbon pricing where abatement costs are below the
carbon price, rather than to move to areas not covered by carbon pricing, that is-minimizing effects on
carbon leakage.
1
   	 See Martin, R. et al. 2010. Europe’s Emissions Trading Scheme: Tax Payers versus the Industry Lobby. LSE. http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/cp311.pdf
2
 	 Climate Strategies. 2014. Carbon Control and Competiveness Post 2020: The Cement Report. London: Climate Strategies. http://climatestrategies.org/
     wp-content/uploads/2014/02/climate-strategies-cement-report-final.pdf.
3
  	 New Climate Economy. 2014. Better Growth, Better Climate. Washington, DC: New Climate Economy. http://newclimateeconomy.report/wp-content/
     uploads/2014/08/NCE_GlobalReport.pdf.



                                                                                                                                                          49
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




On the negative side, at the national level, industrial companies within countries introducing carbon
pricing may face additional costs of operation (compliance costs) and increased energy costs (if
the power sector were included in the carbon pricing mechanism and were to pass on the costs of
compliance onto end users). Depending on the extent to which these prices could be passed on to final
consumers, such increases would squeeze profit margins.

For emerging economies looking to try carbon pricing, a carbon tax may be an easier avenue to
pursue in the short term. It is can be more straightforward and may be more readily, given existing tax
regimes that are already in use (for example, existing fuel excises).1 In addition, if information on current
abatement costs across the economy is limited, taxes give industry certainty regarding the maximum
additional costs they face compared with a trading scheme where costs could turn out to be higher than
anticipated.

Alternatively, emerging countries could look to pilot emissions trading schemes. As with trading
schemes in other countries, mechanisms such as border carbon adjustments and free allowances
could be utilized to minimize the cost impact on industry at introduction. Furthermore, coordinating
policies internationally with key trading partners could reduce or streamline administration costs, with
lessons learned applied as appropriate. Such coordination would minimize any distortions in competitive
advantage.

For emerging countries contemplating carbon pricing, there is a wealth of helpful documentation. In 2016
the World Bank published the technical paper “Emissions Trading in Practice: A Handbook on Design and
Implementation.”2 It complements the European Commission’s EU ETS Handbook by focusing on the 10
steps to designing an ETS. Countries can also turn to a number of initiatives and principles such as the
2015 joint World Bank and OECD “FASTER Principles for Successful Carbon Pricing,”3 an overview of best
practices in designing an ETS. An excerpt of that overview is provided in Figure 1.22.




1
 	 Rydge, J. 2015. Implementing Effective Carbon Pricing.
2
 	 Partnership for Market Readiness; International Carbon Action Partnership. 2016. Emissions Trading in Practice: A Handbook on Design and
   Implementation. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/23874 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
3
 	 World Bank. 2015. The FASTER principles for successful carbon pricing: an approach based on initial experience. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
   http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/09/25060584/faster-principles-successful-carbon-pricing-approach-based-initial-experience



50
              A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                   Figure 1.22 Steps to Improve Emission Trading Schemes



                                                                               10 practical steps to create an ETS
                                                                       10	  practical	  steps	  to	  create	  an	  ETS	  


                                                                                                                                                             Leverage
                                                                                                                                                                  Leverage	  international	  
                                                                                                                                                             international
         World	  B           nd	  OECD	  
                    ank	  aBank
                  World               and
                                                                                                                                                             collaboration
                  OECD FASTER                                                                                                                                    collaboration	  initiatives	  
          FASTER	  Principles	  for	                                                                                                                      initiatives, e.g.
                  Principles for
        Successful	  Carbon	  Pricing	  
                  Successful
       • Fairness	                                                                                                                                         •         Carbon	  Pricing	  Leadership	  
                  Carbon Pricing
                                                                                                                                                             •	    Carbon Pricing
                                                                                                                                                                      Coalition	  
       • Alignment	  of	  Policies	  and	                                                                                                                      Leadership
                                                                                                                                                            •         International	  Carbon	  
                                                                                                                                                                   Coalition
                  •	 Fairness
           Objectives	                                                                                                                                      •	
                  •	 Alignment of                                                                                                                                     Action	  Partnership	  
                                                                                                                                                                   International
       • Stability	  a nd	  Predictability	  
                       Policies and                                                                                                                         •
                                                                                                                                                                   Carbon Action
                                                                                                                                                                      Partnership	  for	  Market	  
                                                                                                                                                                   Partnership
       • Transparency	  
                       Objectives                                                                                                                                     Readiness	  
                                                                                                                                                             •	    Partnership
                  •	 Stability
       • Efficiency	                and
                        and	  Cost	  
                       Predictability
                                                                                                                                                            •      forPrince	  
                                                                                                                                                                       Market    of	  Wales	  Corporate	  
           effectiveness	  
                  •	 Transparency                                                                                                                                     Leaders	  Group	  
                                                                                                                                                                   Readiness
                                                                                                                                                             •	    Prince of Wales
       • Reliability	   and	  
                  •	 Efficiency                                                                                                                             •         Caring	  for	  Climate	  
                                                                                                                                                                   Corporate
                          and Cost                                                                                                                                    Initiative	  
              Environmental	   Integrity	  	  
                       effectiveness
                                                                                                                                                                   Leaders    Group
                    •	 Reliability and                                                                                                                      ••	             forCarbon	  Initiative	  
                                                                                                                                                                      Pricing	  
                                                                                                                                                                   Caring
                                                                                                                                                            	     Climate
                          Environmental
                                                                                                                                                                   Initiative
                          Integrity
                                                                                                                                                             •	    Pricing Carbon
                                                                                                                                                                   Initiative



                                                                                   Laying	  the	  foundation	  for	  an	  ETS:	  
                          •Setting	  ETS	  objectives	  •Tailoring	  the	  E              ocal	  
                                                                                  TS	  to	  lthe
                                                                                Laying                  circumstances	  
                                                                                                   foundation     for an  •Managing	  
                                                                                                                           ETS:         policy	  interactions	  •Incorporating	  lessons	  
                                                                                                             learned	  
                                                                               •	 Setting ETS objectives
                                                                               •	 Tailoring the ETS to local circumstances
	                                                                             •	 Managing policy interactions
                                                                               •	 Incorporating lessons learned




              In conclusion, regardless of whether a company has to comply with regulation, as growth occurs across
              emerging economies, combined with future and unmet energy demand, there remains strong potential
              to alter the trajectory of GHG emissions by enacting green growth policies today. Energy efficiency
              measures, carbon abatement technologies, and demand management including standards, technical
              guidelines, and incentives are integral to the policy discussion.1 These are examined in the following
              sections.

              Countries looking to deploy carbon tax or trade schemes must consider their parameters at the outset.
              For instance, starting with a low-carbon price and incrementally increasing the price will allow industry to
              come to terms with the system and implement new technologies as they are developed and fall in cost
              (through targeted R&D and support programs). In addition, when considering schemes, countries must
              closely examine the state of competitiveness and identify which sectors should be targeted initially. This
              will inform negotiations with governments in key producer and consumer countries to minimize barriers
              to success.




              1
               	 WEC. 2015. “Energy Price Volatility: The New Normal,” in 2015 World Energy Issues Monitor. https://www.worldenergy.org/publications/2015/world-energy-
                 issues-monitor-2015/.



                                                                                                                                                                                              51
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




INTERVENTIONS

This section explores decarbonization technologies within industry. Technology research and
development, innovation spending, and producer and client acceptance are key to decarbonizing the
industrial sector. However, a number of barriers need to be overcome and enablers and incentives
diligently aligned in order for successful technology adoption.

As previously highlighted, decarbonization strategies must aim to minimize their impact on
competiveness in order to maximize the chance of deployment at the scale and pace needed to meet
carbon reduction targets. Interventions can provide significant benefits beyond financial gain, but
improved valuation of these benefits is required in order for these nonfinancial benefits to be understood
and integrated within investment decisions.1

Several interventions are available to industrial plant managers today. Given their link with energy costs,
implementing energy efficient technologies and undertaking soft process improvements is within the
industries’ own interests.

Best practice solutions exist. They are usually easy to retrofit and have quick paybacks. More innovative
solutions also exist, but these are generally less mature and typically require larger investments with
longer paybacks and longer operational shutdown periods.

Retrofitting existing stock is key to decarbonizing the sector, as is integrating best available technologies
within new builds. It must be noted that installing new technologies alone does not automatically
guarantee the largest emission-reduction potential. The manner which they are operated and maintained
is crucial to realizing energy efficiency potential.2 Intervention adoption rates vary across regions, and
evidence suggests that non-OECD nations have high adoption rates, which for the most part can be
attributed to new builds using best available technologies within emerging economies.

Technology solutions across the industrial sector can be broadly categorized into three discrete areas:
•	 Energy efficiency improvements
•	 Low-carbon substitutes, both fuel and material
•	 Innovative and alternative processes

Downstream emission-reduction activities exist, which pertain to the manner in which the product is
utilized further along in the value chain Such activities may entail design considerations that result in less
material input and recycling opportunities at the end of a product’s use.

Table 1.3 provides examples of technological and process solutions across the four industries examined.
It is worth noting that comparison between different interventions is difficult due to a large number of
variables, ranging from the locations of sites to types of installed equipment. Furthermore, the gains in
the implementation of different technologies and processes depend on material flows and the type and
availability of feedstocks. Interventions must be tailored to geography, industry, and process in order to
maximize operational success, efficiency, and GHG reduction gains.




	 Detailed commentary and suggestions on how to do this can be found in IEA. 2014. Capturing the Multiple Benefits of Energy Efficiency.
1

	 WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable Development). 2009. The Cement Sustainability Initiative: Cement Industry Energy and C02
2

  Performance. Geneva: WBCSD. http://www.wbcsdcement.org/pdf/CSI%20GNR%20Report%20final%2018%206%2009.pdf.



52
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     Table 1.3 Examples of Technological Solutions, by Category and Industry



                            Iron and steel                  Cement                                Aluminum             Chemicals
                   • Furnace retrofit-top
                   gas recycling                            • Kiln energy efficiency
                   • Basic oxygen                           improvements
                   furnace technologies                     • Oxygen enrichment
                   • Coke dry quenching                     technology                                                 • Improvements
                   • Endless strip                          • Voltage power                                            in catalyst
      Energy       production                               optimization                          • Energy             technologies
      efficiency   • Improved oven                          • High-efficiency belts               efficient            • Improved
      improvements ignition efficiency                      • Electricity from waste              smelters             insulation
                   • Improved ladle                         heat                                                       • Improved steam
                   heating                                  • Variable speed drives                                    system efficiency
                   • Continuous casting                     • High-efficiency mills
                   • Improved insulation                    • Preheaters and
                   • Walking beam                           precalciners
                   furnace
                                                                                                                 • Biomass as fuel
                                                                                                                 • Low-carbon
                                                                                                  • Increased
                                                                                                                 electricity
                                                            • Cementitious                        fuel recycling
                                                                                                                 • Decarbonized
                                                            substitution-leveraging               • Biomass,
      Low-carbon                                                                                                 methane as fuel
                      • Low-carbon                          pulverized ash, natural               low-carbon
      substitutes for                                                                                            • Hydrogen by
                      electricity                           pozzolanic materials,                 methane as
      feedstock and                                                                                              electrolysis
                      • Biomass as fuel                     ground blast furnace slag             fuel
      fuels                                                                                                      • Recycled plastics
                                                            • Natural gas, biomass,               • Electricity
                                                                                                                 as feedstock
                                                            hydrogen fuel switching               from waste
                                                                                                                 • Waste as fuel
                                                                                                  heat
                                                                                                                 • Combined Heat
                                                                                                                 and Power (CHP)
                                                                                                               • Improved
                                                                                                               separation (e.g.
                            • HISarna                       • Alternative cements                 • Direct     new solvents,
                            • Finex                         including Calcium                     carbothermic membrane
                            • Corex                         Sulfoaluminate- Belite                reduction of technology)
                            • Selective waste gas           Concrete cements,                     alumina      • High temperature
      Alternative           recycling                       magnesium-oxide-based                 • Kaolinite  cracking
      or innovative         • Increased recycling           cements, thermoplastic                reduction    • Methanol-to-
      processes             via electric arc                carbon-based cements                  • Wetted     olefins1
                            furnaces                        • Fluidized bed advanced              drained      • Retrofit Oxygen
                            • Co-melting and                kilns                                 cathodes     depolarized
                            twin shells                     • Direct separation                   • Inert      cathode (ODC )for
                            • Hot charging                  reactors                              anodes       chlorine production
                                                                                                               • New chemical
                                                                                                               pathways
                            • Carbon capture and storage (CCS), carbon capture and utilization (CCU)
                            • Improved energy management, automation, process control, optimization,
                            insulation, and maintenance regimes
      Sector-wide
                            • System engineering and clustering of sites, providing efficiency gains
      interventions
                            • Efficient use of the end product and increased recycling and engagement with the
                            value to chain to realize the benefits of a circular economy
                            • Advanced heat recovery



    Sources: IETD 2015. “Iron and Steel”; Ricardo-AEA 2013. DECC 2015.




	 Olefin, also called alkene, compound made up of hydrogen and carbon that contains one or more pairs of carbon atoms linked by a double bond. Olefins
1

  are examples of unsaturated hydrocarbons (compounds that contain only hydrogen and carbon and at least one double or triple bond). Retrieved on June
  2, 2016 from Encyclopedic Britannic at http://www.britannica.com/science/olefin



                                                                                                                                                    53
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




ENERGY EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENTS

Industrial energy efficiency interventions can simultaneously assist in increasing energy productivity and
reducing the cost of energy. It can therefore be a very attractive up-front investment that pays for itself
over time.

Energy efficiency improvements for the most part can be classified as incremental solutions that can be
integrated within existing infrastructure (see Figure 1.23). Each intervention offers small to medium gains
in efficiency. In total, the global or sector gain can be significant. Indeed, the IEA identified that about 40
percent of the emissions reductions required by 2050 could come from energy efficiency interventions,
and despite good take-up to date across the industrial sector, there is still ample room for economic and
climate gain.1 Significant energy efficiency gains have been experienced across European industry. These
gains can be attributed to both technological improvements, such as improved utilization rates of plants
and equipment, and structural changes, such as the closure of inefficient plants.2

     Figure 1.23 Energy Maturity Model




                                                                         Simple                         Process                     Alternative
          Housekeeping                 Control systems
                                                                       modification                   integration                    processes



                                                                    Energy reduction


    Source: Adapted from Oung, K. 2013.


Deploying energy efficiency interventions in the industrial sector can be challenging, because
interventions may require expensive plant shutdown periods (depending on the size of the intervention),
but these closures are expected to be less significant than innovative or alternative process integration.
Furthermore, the literature suggests that the benefits and paybacks of certain interventions available
today outweigh potential losses, which are at times overstated. Energy managers are required to carefully
plan improvements before implementing an energy reduction program. In particular, care should be
taken not to implement potential improvements that are of no economic value, have a knock-on effect
elsewhere that has not been assessed, and waste time in improving the wrong part of the processes.3

In addition to improving energy practices, gains can be realized through deployment of state-of-the-art
machinery and components. Retrofitting industrial operations or including best available energy efficient
machinery and system components within new builds can provide valuable energy efficiency gains.
Furthermore, designing new builds with a view for future system integration facilitates future energy
efficiency realizations.

Across the industrial sector, technologies that reduce system heat and energy loss, provide real time
measurement of constituents, and reduce the material or energy input requirements within kilns,
furnaces, and production lines are being implemented and can provide important gains. Robust data on
technology adoption rates, costs, readiness levels, and performance is currently lacking, and success
extends beyond installation, requiring diligent supporting management processes. Box 1.4 outlines the
state of best-available-technology adoption.




1
 	 IEA. 2015a. Energy Efficiency Market Report 2015.
2
 	 Arens, M., E. Worrell, and J. Schleich. 2012. “Energy Intensity Development of the German Iron and Steel Industry between 1991 and 2007.” Energy 45 (1):
   786–797. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544212005427.
3
 	 Oung, K. 2013. Energy Management in Business. Farnham. Gower Publishing.



54
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




   BOX 1.4 BEST AVAILABLE TECHNOLOGIES

   Implementing best available technologies (BAT) is often cited as critical to successfully
   decarbonizing the industrial sector. Best available techniques reference documents for some
   industrial sectors are available (EU BREFs), but not for all. Beyond these documents and the
   guidance of association working groups, there is limited consensus or standard practice to
   determine how to bring nascent technologies to a state where they can be considered a BAT and
   further adopted within industry. Confidence in the technology or intervention requires senior level
   management buy-in, and management often requires guarantees of benefits and assurances of no
   or limited downsides (for example, operational shutdown periods). However, for this to occur there
   is greater need to understand and quantify the direct energy gains, cost savings, and auxiliary or
   non-energy benefits. The notion of a BAT will also vary considerably from sector to sector.



LOW-CARBON SUBSTITUTES FOR FEEDSTOCK AND FUELS

Low-carbon alternatives and fuels are substitutes to carbon-intensive raw materials and fuels and
alternatives to changing the underlying raw materials of production. Examples include biomass or
low-carbon electricity displacing coal- or fossil-fuels-based electricity. Displacing carbon-heavy inputs
can provide substantial gains and do not necessarily require wholesale system changes. However,
consideration to system integration is required, and local factors need to be considered. Future-proofing
for potential low-carbon substitutes can ease integration during plant improvement procedures.

Gaining industry acceptance of a novel substitute and the process to bring it to an industry BAT
standard can be challenging at times (see Box 1.5). High confidence in the availability, performance, and
price of low-carbon substitutes is required before industrial plants will commit to using such sources.
Availability and price can be influenced by increased demand as other sectors across the industrial sector
and beyond also look to decarbonize. However, the current economic feasibility of low-carbon substitutes
does not always compare favorably with traditional and often subsidized fuels.

Given the strong impact of fuel and material input on profitability, cheaper, readily available, or subsidized
alternatives will remain an attractive prospect. With the recent decline in oil prices, compounded by
stagnating demand, the switch to low-carbon substitute fuels or raw materials can be seen as a tough
investment decision.

ALTERNATIVE AND INNOVATIVE PROCESSES

Innovative or alternative processes may offer a significant gain in GHG mitigation, but these
interventions may also require significant plant shutdown periods or plant rebuilds at significant cost
(both in capital costs and operational shutdown). Interventions can look to gain efficiencies in energy use
but can also look to decrease carbon emissions within the operational phase. For example, the process
that turns limestone into clinker in cement production produces CO2. Further, alternative processes and
technologies can assist in reducing process emissions during operation.

There remains significant advantage in integrating innovative processes within new builds and future-
proofing new builds through continuous process improvements. This can help avoid high emission lock-in
for the plant’s operational life. Still, as with low-carbon substitute fuels and feedstocks, industry can be
hesitant to invest in “unproven” and costly technologies. Companies may also be wary when technologies
are ready for adoption but may not easily adapt to plant design or may require capital expenditures
beyond what is available to plant engineers. Importantly, there is the need to manage the transition to
alternative low carbon processes and work with investment cycles in order to avoid depleting existing
capital assets.




                                                                                                           55
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     BOX 1.5 GAINING ACCEPTANCE FOR LOW-CARBON CEMENTS

     Gaining sector-wide acceptance for low-carbon substitutes to Portland cement CEM I (formerly
     known as “ordinary Portland cement”) is challenging. End users of cement products require a
     cement to be “fit for purpose,” that is, made to withstand stringent structural requirements. The
     process of getting a novel low-carbon cement accepted is a nonlinear process with taxing sector
     buy-in requirements. These entail underwriting of insurance indemnities, independent certification,
     and initial qualification followed by national or regional standardization once the product has been
     tried and tested. Even after this process is completed, gaining acceptance is challenging with
     customers who are risk averse and have to adhere to compliance requirements, such as legal or
     engineering codes of practice. A route to acceptance and sector-wide deployment would involve
     demonstration projects and significant capital expenditure given that Portland cement CEM I
     benefits from sizeable economies of scale based on existing products and production facilities.
     In addition, there is no guarantee that low-carbon cement would pass structural requirements.
     Finally, due to the importance of in-country economic activity and local production, government
     has an incentive to maintain the status quo and avoid disruption to the current value chain. This
     can deter a move away from established Portland cement CEM I value chains to novel low-carbon
     cement solutions.

     Source: MPA Cement 2013.



SECTORWIDE INTERVENTIONS

A range of interventions are applicable across all industrial sectors. First, operating and system
management improvements can result in energy gains, realized through energy management systems
(EnMS).1 EnMS is an approach that helps energy managers think systematically about the use of energy
within the plant and allows them to take action and measure impact. A well-implemented EnMS can
provide the foundation for energy efficiency improvements, improved process control and automation,
recycling and reuse of material, and operation and maintenance regimes. These are broad actions that
can be undertaken across all industrial sectors and are conducive to current best practice management
and site operating procedures.

Second, carbon capture, through carbon capture and storage (CCS) or carbon capture and utilization
(CCU), offers significant potential for CO2 abatement, offering up to about 85–90 percent in emissions
reduction2. CCU in theory involves leveraging captured CO2 and redirecting it to processes that can utilize
CO2 waste, for example, ammonia, drinks, and enhanced oil recovery.

Demand in the industrial sector is likely to be relatively small in the immediate future because centers
of demand are likely to be geographically dispersed, which results in entailing upward pressure on
transportation costs. In addition, questions remain on the permanency of CO2 abatement through CCU
due to the potential rerelease of CO2 emissions into the atmosphere. However, CCU is viewed by some as
a good bridging technology or option to CCS as it helps offset the current high costs of deployment. CCS
is the process of capturing carbon from emitting sources and storing it underground. It offers strong
potential to the power sector, with potentially less immediate application within the industrial sector (due
to a weaker cost-benefit analysis and a greater variety of CO2 sources that require integration into a CCS
plant.)3 Industrial application will likely increase if industrial sites are able to connect to CCS power supply
sites via a network of integrated pipelines.




1
 	 ISO recently released the ISO50000 EnMS. However, it is worth noting that while EnMS provides a framework to take and monitor action, the ISO
   application provides no guarantee of significant results.
2
 	 IPCC. 2005. Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage. https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-reports/srccs/srccs_wholereport.pdf
3
 	 Challenges include considerations in how to process varying concentrations of CO2 emissions across different sectors, and future-proofing for CCS
   integration within planning processes for new builds.



56
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




CCS requires sustained demonstration and further consideration of technical aspects before wide spread
adoption occurs within the industrial sector. Government intervention and support is required to assist in
kick starting CCS plants.

Third, industrial symbiosis through the clustering of sites and interventions such as advanced heat
recovery and transfer can provide important efficiency gains and reductions in GHG emissions. The
process of sharing resources, particularly industrial waste, among different businesses is referred to as
industrial symbiosis. In order to increase the sustainability of industrial production, there is the underlying
need to identify and evaluate opportunities to share resources (including materials, energy, and utilities)
among production units. This is particularly true in complex production sites, such as those for steel
making and chemical production. There are strong economic and sustainable benefits to industrial
symbiosis for both the producer and consumer of industrial waste. Competitive advantage and improved
environmental performance through industrial symbiosis is demonstrated by the industrial park in
Kalundborg, Denmark, where savings of 130 kt CO2 emissions per year and reduced water consumption
by 1.2 million m³ per year were realized (Figure 1.24).1 However, strong cooperation and long term
commitments between firms is required to achieve successful implementation2.

     Figure 1.24 An Example of Industrial Ecosystem in Denmark


     Industrial Ecosystem at Kalundborg, Denmark




    Source: Sustainable Sanitation and Water Management (SSWM) 2010.


Finally, given the energy-intensive nature of the industrial sector, decarbonization of the power sector
through a shift to renewables could significantly help alleviate the sector’s GHG footprint. However,
certain industries require constant base loads for operation, and the “peaky” nature of a portfolio of
intermittent renewables are not well suited for industrial energy needs. Hydro, geothermal, natural gas,
and nuclear are well suited to meet the industrial sector’s production needs. Grid and energy system
balancing technologies (such as energy storage) are required to support a shift to renewables, and the
implementation of these are beyond the control of the industrial sector.




	 Onita, J. A. 2006. “How Does Industrial Symbiosis Influence Environmental Performance?” MSc thesis, Linköpings University, Sweden.
1

	 Danielsson, “M. Reuse Water between Business”. SSWM. http://www.sswm.info/content/reuse-water-between-businesses. Retrieved November 2015.
2




                                                                                                                                               57
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




EXAMPLES OF GHG IMPROVEMENTS ACROSS INDUSTRIAL SECTORS

Boxes 1.6 through 1.9 briefly highlights examples of GHG-reducing technologies and the associated
pros and cons across the four industry sectors that are the focus of this report: iron and steel, cement,
chemicals, and aluminum.


     BOX 1.6 IRON AND STEEL GHG REDUCTION

     The largest share of sector emissions occurs from the primary steel-making process. The energy
     efficiency of steel-making facilities hinges on the production route, type of iron ore and coal used,
     the steel product mix, operation control technology, and material efficiency.1

     Efficiency interventions, such as the ones listed below could provide good opportunity for GHG
     reduction gains:
     •	 Reduce waste gas emissions related to power generation
     •	 Update control systems for hot and cold rolling mills to improve material efficiency,
     •	 Increase recycling rates
     •	 Move to higher value steel and more efficient use
     •	 Adopt breakthrough CCS

     Estimates show there is still technical potential to reduce CO2 emissions and energy consumption
     by 20 percent2 driven by a reduction in output and increased efficiency, the EU-27 steel sector’s
     emissions decreased by 25 percent from 1990 to 2010.3

     Practices on efficiency improvement in EU
     The majority of European steel emissions are associated with the highly energy-intensive basic
     oxygen furnaces (BOFs). Shifting from BOF technologies to EAF (which uses reduced or scrap
     iron, thus omitting the need for coke and iron-making processes) and achieving efficiencies in
     smelting reduction provide significant gains. These, however, are dependent on securing access
     to supplies of scrap steel. The EU’s EAF sector produces 42 percent of all EU crude steel from
     scrap. Compared to the blast furnace sector, it consumes 78 percent less energy and generates 85
     percent less CO2.4

     It should be noted that BOFs are used to create higher grade steel (for use, for example, in the auto
     industry), while EAF primarily produces lower grade steel (for construction, for example). Therefore
     BOF innovations are required in addition to reductions through EAF’s use of scrap iron. Novel
     technologies applied to BOFs offer future potential gains in carbon reduction-for example, through
     the use of BOF heat and gas recovery, CO2 reductions are estimated at 50 kilograms (kg) per ton
     of steel.5 A plant in Belgium applied BOF gases resulting in CO2 reductions of 170,000 tons per
     year.6 Finally, potential exists in reducing emissions in the supply of power to the plants.
     1
      	    World Steel Association 2014b.
     2
      	    IEA 2009.
     3
       	   BCG 2013.
     4
      	    LaPlaceConseil 2013.
     5
       	   US EPA 2010.
     6
       	   ArcelorMittal 2015.




58
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




   BOX 1.7 CEMENT GHG REDUCTION

   Cement-related CO2 emissions account for 5 percent of global emissions. In the United States the
   cement industry has been identified as the most energy-intensive of all manufacturing industries.1
   However, the carbon intensity of cement has decreased 3– 5 % since 2005 in the EU.2 The industry
   as a whole has managed to partially decouple GHG emission growth with production, but further
   action is required to maintain this trend. Approximately 60 percent of the cement industry’s direct
   CO2 emissions arise from the decomposition of the raw materials, with the remaining arising
   from burning of fuel during the manufacturing process. Indirect emissions from electric power
   contribute an additional 10 percent to overall CO2 emissions.3 Interventions should therefore aim
   to focus on the reduction of process, fuel-related, and indirect emissions. Potential levers for GHG
   reduction include:
   •	 Alternative fuels
   •	 Energy efficiency improvement
   •	 Clinker substitution
   •	 Efficient cement use
   •	 Development of alternative cements
   •	 CCS technologies.

   Among which, fuel switching, process optimization within kilns, and clinker substitution offer the
   greatest immediate potential today.

   •	 Fuel switching: Industry estimates note that alternative fuels could provide 60 percent of kiln
      energy requirements, which could include up to 40 percent biomass by 2050.4
   •	 Process optimization within kilns: Multistage preheater/precalciners dry kilns offer greater
      fuel efficiency than wet kilns. Adoption of decarbonization strategies within the EU has started
      to take place largely through fuel switching to biomass and waste fuels in cement production.
      However, investment is required to successfully move away from the heavy dependence on
      petroleum coke and coal.
   •	 Fuel substitution may be hindered by increasing costs of low-carbon alternatives as demand
      increases from other sectors that are also looking to reduce their carbon footprint. Interventions
      such as substitution away from Portland cement CEM I to low-carbon cements (for example,
      CSA-belite and MSWIA cements), which are produced at lower temperatures (about 1200°C)
      and already adopted in China and Japan, can result in 25 percent energy gains and 20 percent
      reduction in CO2.5 In addition, the use of magnesium-based cements provides the potential to
      bypass the GHG-heavy calcination process.
   •	 Energy efficiency improvement: Downstream efficiencies and the use of combined heat and
      power offer good mitigation potential.6 Through the adoption of best available technologies, it is
      estimated that global energy intensity could reduce 1.1 GJ/t-cement resulting in a CO2 saving of
      about 119 Mt.7
   1
    	    US EIA 2013.
   2
     	   Climate Strategies 2014.
   3
     	   IEA and WBCSD 2009.
   4
     	   Cembureau 2013.
   5
     	   Imababi, M. et al. 2012.
   6
     	   Ricardo-AEA 2013.
   7
    	    IEA and WBCSD 2009.




                                                                                                           59
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     BOX 1.8 CHEMICALS GHG REDUCTION

     There is a wide range of technologies and processes that can assist in sector decarbonization.

     Table B1.8.1 Decarbonization technologies1

         Solutions with short-term           Deep carbon reduction                     Low technical risk options
         payback period                      solutions                                 (with relatively low costs)
         Distillation column design          Advanced membrane                         Improved insulation
         Process control                     Solvent                                   Increased heat recovery
                                             Catalyst technologies                     More efficient steam systems

     Clustering of sites can create synergies, reduce energy use, increase recycling, and therefore help to
     reduce emissions. Further, substitute feedstocks and CHP can greatly assist in the decarbonization
     of the sector.2 The bulk of carbon and energy stored in synthetic organic materials is released in the
     use-phase or in the waste phase, indicating that in addition to energy efficiency, biomass feedstock
     could help to decarbonize the sector.3

     The IEA estimated energy savings between 5 and 15 percent were possible in the short term. Since
     1990 the United States chemical industry has cut its GHG emissions by 13 percent, while in the EU
     energy used per unit of chemical output decreased by 53 percent compared to 1990 levels.4 Overall
     energy consumption fell by 16 percent in the EU chemical industry compared with 1990 levels;
     this was primarily achieved by using CHP, continuous process improvements, and shifts to less
     energy intense products.5 Due to the high use of chemical products in other sectors, reducing GHG
     emissions in the production process will allow reductions in embedded emissions in a wide variety
     of end-use products.6 Life-cycle assessments are important to assess the impact of chemical
     products, as the impact of technological interventions on embedded emissions is complex and
     uncertain.
     1
      	    Ricardo-AEA 2013.
     2
      	    IETD 2015.
     3
       	   IEA 2009.
     4
      	    ICCA 2013.
     5
       	   Cefic 2014.
     6
       	   ICCA 2013.




60
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




   BOX 1.9 ALUMINUM GHG REDUCTION

   From 1990 to 2010, energy required to smelt one ton of aluminum was reduced by 10 percent,
   with industry goals for a further 5 percent reduction by 2020.1 The majority of production
   emissions originate from indirect sources due to the high electricity consumption required within
   the reduction and smelting process. Aluminum production is powered by electricity, generated
   predominantly through power sources such as coal, gas, and hydro power. The extent of the carbon
   emitted will depend on the source utilized. China’s dependence on coal, for example, will result in
   higher levels of CO2 than found in Norway’s plants, which are predominantly generated via hydro
   power. It should be noted that renewable energy providing intermittent power (e.g. wind) is not
   particularly well suited to the sector as it requires a constant source of power. However, aluminum
   smelters provided they have production flexibility, may play a role in supporting the shift to
   intermittent renewables sources by running when there is excess power, and powered down during
   supply shortages.2 Decarbonization of the power sector (either through renewables or through the
   application of CCS) could significantly reduce indirect CO2 emissions.

   Recycling and resource efficiency is increasingly an important part of the aluminum industry
   producing aluminum from recycled scrap is 20 times less energy intensive than production from
   ore.3 Direct emissions, in the EU, from the primary smelting and casting of one tonne of aluminum
   are between 1.5 and 2.7 tCO2, whilst recycling aluminum emits about 0.2 tCO2 per tonnes of
   product.4 Gearing supply chains toward the characteristics of a circular economy can assist in
   decreasing energy and input costs for producers. Current action advocated by the European
   Aluminum Association is to maximize the energy-saving potential of aluminum products, increase
   recycling through improved aluminum collection, and streamline energy use during production.5
   Direct decarbonization technologies such as carbothermic reduction and Kaolinite reduction are
   still in development and need further capital resources to reach the commercial stage. Applying
   best available technologies provides the potential to reduce emissions in production by 11 percent.6
   Efficiency in the smelting process varies according to the applied technology. The best smelters
   use 13 kWh of electricity compared to the world average of 15 kWh.7 In addition, the combination
   of high electricity use and steam for calcination and refining processes mean that combined heat
   and power can be deployed for facilities that don’t have access to hydro power.8
   1
    	 World Aluminum 2015.
   2
     	 Brown, T. et al. 2012.
   3
     	Ibid.
   4
     	 Ecofys 2009 2015.
   5
     	 European Aluminum 2015.
   6
     	 IEA 2014.
   7
    	 Alcoa 2015.
   8
     	 Vivid Economic 2014.




                                                                                                          61
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




BARRIERS AND DRIVERS

Energy efficiency and decarbonization interventions can play a crucial role in reducing the industrial
sectors’ GHG footprint and contributing to cost reductions. However, these interventions require
immediate capital expenditure while offering only future savings, which are incremental and can
encounter verification and measurement issues, making them potentially unattractive.1

The rate of development and adoption of technological solutions across the industrial sector is hindered
by a number of barriers, which can be summarized as follows (see also Box 1.10):

Cost
•	 High capital costs of technological solutions, compounded by competing internal demands for capital
•	 Unattractive payback periods and return on investment
•	 Difficulty in valuing noneconomic benefits related to low-carbon interventions
•	 Low, uncertain, and lack of price for carbon, both regionally and nationally, reducing confidence in
   pricing mechanisms and future cost and distorting competition
Institutional and market barriers
•	 Lack of enough targeted regulations and lack of coherency among those that exist deter investment
•	 Lack of customer awareness and demand for low-carbon products
•	 Internal and external risk aversion, which is compounded by policy, standards, legal requirements, and
   client expectation lock-in2
•	 Long economic life of industrial plants (more than 25 years) limits opportunities to introduce new
   technologies (due to long investment cycles)
•	 High sensitivity to fuel and resource prices, which when distorted through subsidies can impact sector
   competitiveness
Technical barriers
•	 Relatively old plant systems may not be compatible with new technologies
•	 Lack of experienced and skilled staff with knowledge to deploy measures
•	 Unproven technology and low technology readiness (for example, CCS)
•	 Raw material availability

Despite the challenges, encouraging levels and demonstrable adoption of green growth interventions
have occurred across the industrial sector. This is evidenced by carbon reductions to date.3 There are
numerous factors driving the development and deployment of low-carbon industrial interventions. The
key factors can be summarized as follows:

•	 Cost control and desire to improve profitability and remain competitive-in particular the price of fuel or
   energy and resources as an input can impact sector competiveness at the national and global levels
•	 The desire to reduce to the environmental impact of production
•	 Compliance with and or future-proofing for regulations and government policies

Public and client demands for greener products and the importance of a green brand are at times
cited as drivers that could lead to the deployment of energy efficient and carbon friendly interventions.
However, across the industrial sector the tangible impact of client demands on green growth investment
decisions within companies is uncertain, with the expectation that client demands on quality, durability,
price, and internal cost considerations trump sustainability drivers.4




1
 	 WEC. 2015. “Energy Price Volatility.”
2
 	 Consider, for example, moral and legal obligations on design engineers and architects to utilize Portland CEM I cement over novel cements whose durability
    is yet to be fully vouched by end-use customers. MPA Cement. 2015. “Modern Cements (Bulk).”
3
  	 See, inter alia, IETD. 2015. “Iron and Steel”; WSA. 2014. “Energy Use in the Steel Industry”; Cembureau. 2014. Activity Report 2014; World Aluminium. 2015.
    “Energy & Water”; and Cefic.2014. “The European Chemical Industry: Facts and Figures 2014”
4
 	 MPA Cement. 2013. “Novel Cements.”



62
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




        BOX 1.10 SHORT-TERM VOLATILITY IN ENERGY AND COMMODITY PRICES
        DETERS LOW-CARBON TECHNOLOGY INVESTMENT

        Short-term volatility in energy and commodity prices deters carbon technology investment
        despite long-term trends depicting a steady growth in prices. Business understandably operates
        and makes investment decisions with a short-term horizon in mind. The current global markets
        are deeply uncertain, with volatility across energy and commodity prices. A difference exists
        between secular demand (long-term projections) and cyclical demand (affected by events such as
        financial crises). The main driver for carbon-reduction technology implementation has been the
        ability for these to counter the cost of energy and the availability and cost of input commodities.
        Long-term secular projections demonstrate that costs are expected to increase and availability to
        decrease, making a strong business case for implementation. However, recent projections highlight
        a decrease in commodity prices over the short term (as shown in figures B1.10.1 and B1.10.2).
        The decreases in price are due to a decrease in global demand arising from the recent economic
        downturn. Metal prices in particular have fallen due to slowing demand from China and substantial
        increases in the supply of metals. These short-term fluctuations are potentially challenging for
        plant managers. Such managers are faced with the complex decision-making process of trying
        to understand the business case for plant refurbishments or technology interventions. Included
        within the set of criteria will be a cost benefit of the solution compared to the current setup.
        Uncertain evolution of the price of commodities (see Figure B1.10.2, which demonstrates the large
        future variation in the price of crude oil brent) can make low-carbon technology investment a risky
        investment.

                Figure B1.10.1 Commodity Price Indices                                    Figure B1.10.2 Brent Price Prospects
                (2005 = 100)                                                              (US$ per barrel)
                All Commodities        Food                                                Futures                           86 percent confidence interval
                Energy                 Metals                                              68 percent confidence interval    95 percent confidence interval



          300                                                                                                                                                            140
          275                                                                                                                                                            120
          250
                                                                                                                                                                         100
          225
                                                                                                                                                                          80
          200
          175                                                                                                                                                             60
          150                                                                                                                                                             40
          125                                                                                                                                                             20
          100
                                                                                                                                                                              0
           75
                                                                                                                                                                         -20
           50

                  2005      06    07      08    09   10   11   12   13   14   Aug.15       2012         2013          2014   2015         2016           2017   2018   2019


         Source: IMF 2015.



PATHWAY FOR TECHNOLOGY DEPLOYMENT

A wide number of studies have been carried out on the potential impact of interventions to reduce carbon
emissions across the industrial sector. These studies identify carbon capture as the greatest opportunity
in terms of the volume of emissions abatement, with several other interventions also able to deliver
substantial reductions. Figure 1.25 displays a 2014 meta-analysis of interventions across the cement
sector and their potential abatement impact by 2050. A similar pattern of opportunities exists across
most industrial sectors, with carbon capture dwarfing other interventions in potential carbon abatement.1

However, the future of carbon capture is uncertain, with increased demonstration required to prove the
technology and bring it to a higher readiness. Recent developments have put into question the exact
timing of carbon capture development and deployment. Furthermore, once proven, both CCS and
CCU interventions entail significant capital investment. At least at current costs they will require policy
incentives such as carbon prices and synchronization of future plant locations with CCS/CCU sites or
pipe networks in order to be viable solutions. In light of the challenges to deployment of CCS in the short
term, there is a strong need to deploy-and, where still necessary, develop-industrial energy efficient
improvements, both technological and procedural, and develop and deploy low-carbon substitutes
for feedstocks and fuel. In tandem there is a strong requirement for the public sector to support the
development of early stage alternative or innovative processes.

1
    	 It should be noted that such analysis carries inherent uncertainties, and actual carbon reduction across any given plant will vary significantly and be
      dependent on a wide range of factors.



                                                                                                                                                                                  63
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                                                    Figure 1.25 Potential Carbon Abatement Potential across the Cement Sector by 2050
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               High abatement options revolved
                                                       Share of Total Emissions Reduced                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Baseline Adjustment                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                around CCS, a technology that isn't
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               economically competitive today.

                                                     60%
    Percentage Share of Emissions Reduced by 2050




                                                     50%

                                                     40%

                                                     30%

                                                     20%

                                                     10%

                                                     0%
                                                                                       Ecofys/WWF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ecofsy/WWF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ecofys/WWF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ecofys/WWF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ecofys/WWF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ecofys/WWF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ecofys/WWF
                                                           IEA (low demand scenario)



                                                                                                    UK Committee on Cilmate Change

                                                                                                                                     Association

                                                                                                                                                   Mineral Products Association

                                                                                                                                                                                  WBSD/ECRA Technology Report

                                                                                                                                                                                                                IEA low demand scenario



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UK Committee on Climate Change

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cembureau

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mineral Products Association

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WBSD/ECRA Technology Report

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IEA low demand scenario



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        UK Committee on Climate Change

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cembureau

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mineral Products Association

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WBSD/ECRA Technology Report

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IEA low demand scenario



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UK Committee on Climate Change

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cembureau

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mineral Products Association

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WBSD/ECRA Technology Report

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IEA low demand scenario



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          UK Committee on Climate Change

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cembureau

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mineral Products Association

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IEA low demand scenario



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UK Committee on Climate Change

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cembureau

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mineral Products Association

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IEA low demand scenario



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UK Committee on Climate Change

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cembureau

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mineral Products Association

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             WBSD/ECRA Technology Report
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Carbon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Substitution/Efficient                                                                                         Innovative
                                                                                           Biomass (waste)                                                                                                                                Pre-treated (waste)                                                                                                                                 Energy Efficiency                                                                                                                             Clinker Substitution                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Capture and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Use of Cement                                                                                           Cement Based Materials
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Storage

                                                           Baseline Adjustments are based on the data collected from GNR database Pre-treated waste have been calculated with the
                                                           assumption that alternative fuel use mainly consists of biomass and pre-treated waste.

           Source: Climate Strategies 2014.


LOW-CARBON TECHNOLOGIES’ ROLE IN COMPANY COMPETITIVENESS

Given recent structural market changes and increased global competition, there is a strong drive across
each of the industries examined to reduce costs in order to remain competitive. Remaining competitive
and implementing decarbonizing strategies are not necessarily mutually exclusive. In fact they often
correlate.

Currently, low-carbon technology implementation rates vary across the sectors. By and large, there has
been good uptake in both Western production facilities, where companies have sought to counteract
high energy prices and carbon policies, and across new builds in emerging economies, where companies
have sought to minimize operational costs from the outset.

High energy and feedstock prices provide an incentive for the partial adoption of low-carbon
technologies, substitutes, and process improvements. Companies that implement these measures
reduce the quantity of energy and commodities consumed and enhance their competitive position vis-
à-vis companies that do not implement these measures. However, with current low costs of traditional
fossil fuels and commodities,1 the business case for low-carbon technology investment is difficult and
unlikely to be prioritized as a means to improving competiveness.

The extent to which low-carbon interventions are advanced as a means to improve competitiveness
largely depends on the following:

•	                              The ability to provide quick paybacks
•	                              Minimal operational disruption
•	                              Absolute value of the intervention, that is, how much capital the intervention will tie up
•	                              Access to finance
•	                              The cost of current inputs versus the cost following the intervention
•	                              A world with a strong and globally implemented carbon policy and limited energy subsidies
•	                              The extent to which competitors around the world are implementing these measures

There are a suite of interventions available to industry to decarbonize and modernize their operations,
albeit over different timelines.2 These are summarized in Figure 1.26.

	 Since 2000, the main trend in commodity and energy has been upward. Current low levels are a relatively recent fluctuation.
1

	 Climate Strategies. 2014. Carbon Control and Competiveness Post 2020.
2




64
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




   Figure 1.26 The Impact of Interventions on Competitiveness



                                                  Current impact of interventions on competitiveness


                                                                                                    Innovative abatement
                                   Energy efficiency            Low-carbon substitutes
                                                                                                        technologies




                                                                     - Early movers                 - Global carbon policy
        Context for
                                  - Business as usual          - Dependent on price and                   agreements
        successful
                               - Low margins/high costs         availability of substitutes      - Period of economic growth
      implementation
                                                               - Extent of Policy Support        - Strong innovation support



                                Low                              Extent of policy support                             High

                            = positive impact for                 = both positive and negative      = negative impact for
                            companies who implement               impacts for companies who         companies who implement
                            these versus those who                implement these versus            these versus those who
                            do not.                               those who do not (dependent       do not.
                                                                  on market and company
                                                                  circumstances).




Figure 1.26 clearly places energy efficiency interventions at the forefront of available options that can
reduce GHG emissions without damaging a company’s competitiveness. Generally, these interventions
are easy to implement, require relatively low capital expenditure, have low payback periods, and have
low transaction costs. These interventions would sit on the left-hand side of a marginal abatement cost
curve and could be implemented without a price on carbon.

More complex interventions, which require substantial capital expenditure and in some cases further
development, may not help companies achieve competitive advantage in today’s current environment.
Policy levers, such as a strong carbon price and cap-and-trade scheme across key competing countries,
are required in order for these interventions to provide a net benefit to business. Without such levers
there is little incentive for deployment.

More complex carbon abatement interventions should not be discounted, however, as innovative
abatement technologies will be required in order to further decarbonize industry to meet long-term
carbon abatement targets. Strategizing on the right policy-enabling environment and strong innovation
R&D support is needed in order to reduce costs and facilitate deployment in the medium term.




                                                                                                                               65
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     Figure 1.27 Impact of Interventions on Abatement Potential, Timeframe, and Cost



                                                                                               Timeframe of
                      Action                                 Abatement potential                                                   Cost
                                                                                              implementation



       Carbon capture and storage (CCS)                                High                          Long                          High



           Novel low-carbon processes
                                                                       High                        Medium                    Medium–High
                 (excluding CCS)


        State-of-the-art plant using best
                                                                  Medium–High                    Short–Long                Negative–Medium
             available technologies


           Resource efficiency, circular
                                                                    Low–High                   Medium–Long                      Low–High
              economy measures


        Adoption of cost-effective energy
                                                                  Low–Medium                   Short–Medium                  Negative–Low
               efficiency options

      Passive operational energy efficiency
       measures (e.g. measurement and                                  Low                          Short                          Low
                benchmarking)


    Source: Based on Brown, T. et al. 2012.




Broadly, energy efficiency measures that have an acceptable payback rate will provide a competitive
advantage, achieved through cost reduction.1 Retrofitting existing plants with low-cost, quick-payback
energy efficiency solutions is particularly pertinent for business located in countries with high energy
costs. Countries with a low energy costs often maintain this via energy subsidies. The longevity of such
policies, which are increasingly negatively viewed, is uncertain, and therefore it is in the interest even of
businesses within these countries to tackle such uncertainty through proactive technology adoption.
This can future-proof such companies for potential increases in energy costs. New builds in emerging
economies have been able to implement best available energy efficient technologies, giving them a
further competitive edge over traditional production centers.

Conversely, carbon abatement technologies (such as CCS) contribute additional costs to a business and
will likely provide a competitive edge only if there is a strong global carbon cap-and-trade and carbon
tax scheme. These technologies require wholesale changes that are capital intensive with long payback
periods. Installing these technologies can require shutdown periods that disturb market supply and key
customer relationships.

Finally, substitute fuels and feedstocks may be compatible with competitiveness. However, this depends
on the price of traditional fuels and or the extent of government subsidies in the home country and in
key competing countries.

To gauge the appetite for adoption of technologies, it is important to understand why organizations
undertake sustainability-focused actions (see Box 1.11). Businesses undertake voluntary decarbonizing
actions only if they are likely to support company growth or reduce costs, with an acceptable return on
investment. Scarcity of capital and natural resources have pushed these industrial sectors toward the
use of best available technologies that can help to reduce costs and remain competitive. However, not
all industrial sectors are alike, and the motivational factors behind investment decisions and the market
conditions that influence these vary according to subsector and geographical locale.



	 Investments that provide paybacks within two to four years are generally deemed acceptable. However, in periods of scare financing, acceptable payback
1

  periods may be shorter.



66
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




   BOX 1.11 FINDING THE RIGHT BALANCE BETWEEN REGULATION AND
   TECHNOLOGY SUPPORT

   With competing demands for capital investments across business for future interventions, a
   key lever for further action remains regulation. Regulation, however, takes significant time to be
   designed, proposed, ratified, and implemented, the latter often with mixed results. Despite nascent
   signs of strong commitment to launch cap-and-trade and carbon tax schemes across a variety
   of global jurisdictions, the coverage of such policies remains incomplete, meaning the impact on
   competitiveness can be negative for the companies covered by the scheme and positive for those
   outside. This creates the potential for carbon leakage. A suite of carefully aligned regulatory and
   technological solutions are required in order to spur action in lieu of global carbon agreements.
   Furthermore, well-designed, sector-specific emission-reduction strategies are required. Without
   such support mechanisms in place, reaching carbon reduction targets will be expensive and
   potentially unattainable.


RECOMMENDATIONS

In the international arena, a shift in perspectives is taking place. Climate change is no longer identified
as a burden. In many quarters, it is seen as an opportunity. Emerging economies see that they can
transition to a clean energy pathway, avoiding the historical polluting pathway of Western economies.
Global mitigation action across the industry and the power sectors is the surest path toward meeting the
targets agreed in Paris in 2015.

However, there is currently a gap between global climate targets and the carbon reduction actions that
businesses are willing to implement. To date there has been a good level of GHG emission reduction
across industry, largely driven through energy efficiency interventions. However, uptake has occurred
principally because there is a strong business case for reducing emissions on a cost-improvement basis,
as opposed to action that is driven by carbon reduction commitments. This momentum is now at risk of
being clouded by competitive concerns.

Policy makers face a dilemma if competitive concerns sit at the forefront of political decision making
while carbon reduction targets take a back seat. There is the potential that targets set in Paris would
be missed in deference to understandable local competitive pressures. However, this would leave policy
makers in an awkward position. In the future, they would have to design frameworks to cope with
higher mitigation costs associated with implementation of an accelerated decarbonization strategy. It is
therefore imperative that action takes place across government, industry, and consumers.

These recommendations are divided into two sections. First, recommendations are made that would
enable the uptake of technological solutions while mitigating competitiveness concerns. Second,
recommendations to increase dialogue and global collaboration are presented.

ACTIONS TO DECREASE GHG EMISSIONS AND MAINTAIN COMPETITIVENESS THROUGH
TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION

With shifting global dynamics and high internal and external barriers to implementation-including
systemic management issues-the rationale for further carbon reduction action remains a difficult
argument to make to senior company executives. This is particularly true regarding expensive and not yet
mainstream abatement technologies that do not succinctly align with internal business objectives.

In short, from a business perspective the importance of decarbonizing can easily fall out of the picture.
What this ultimately means is that the rate of future carbon reduction is uncertain and unlikely to be at
the scale and pace required to meet ambitious carbon reduction targets.




                                                                                                         67
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




There is a need to develop policies that protect against carbon leakage in the short term and
simultaneously create an environment that encourages the implementation of easily adoptable solutions
and funding for technologies that will be key to meeting long-term targets.

From a technology standpoint, the path to decreasing GHG emissions while maintaining competitiveness
is straightforward:

1.	 Industry should focus on cost-effective energy efficiency options that can be deployed today with
    short payback periods, low transaction costs, and easy-to-access finance. While many of these
    options have been implemented by leading companies already, there remains substantial variation in
    global practice, meaning opportunities for such actions still exist.
2.	 Industry, governments, and consumers should focus on enabling technologies and interventions
    that are on the cusp of cost-effectiveness. These may have positive net present values, but because
    they have long payback periods or high transaction costs, or finance is difficult to obtain, they are
    not progressing. Regulation or procurement policies can signal the direction of demand for a low-
    carbon product. Making consumer demand visible can encourage solutions currently at the margin of
    viability. S&L is an example of an enabling solution.
3.	 Governments should pursue framework policies such as removing distorting production subsidies
    or trade tariffs and putting a comprehensive price on carbon. They should also develop technology-
    incentive programs for solutions that currently have a weak business case-for example, in the
    adoption of large-scale and capital-intensive carbon abatement technologies. In addition, government
    should seek to adopt industry mitigation policies within strategic development plans and harmonize
    these across jurisdictions.

In order to achieve these, a number of key enablers need to be in place. For the most attractive energy
efficiency option, the following are needed:

•	 Management and board buy-in on the need to decarbonize-improved valuation of noneconomic
   benefits can help to build the business case
•	 Implementation support and awareness programs, for example, energy surveys, management system
   and communication campaigns

For energy efficiency and substitute feedstock and fuel options where the business case remains
challenging, the following are needed:

•	 Specific economic incentives to support the more complex energy efficiency interventions, for
   example, concessional (subsidized) energy efficiency finance to reduce payback periods
•	 Research into methods to reduce the administrative burden of complying with energy and carbon
   regulations
•	 Strong labeling schemes and building and construction codes, practices, and standards that support
   the implementation of novel solutions
•	 Additional small scale, low cost R&D demonstration support to prove survivability and reliability on the
   market
•	 Strengthening collaboration and interaction between producers and consumers-share visions and
   pathways for technology development and deployment
•	 An improved framework for changing fuels and increasing recycling
•	 Improved finance solutions, based on greater awareness and certainty of energy payback (e.g. via
   energy service companies (ESCOs) giving companies greater certainty of energy savings.

For the most ambitious carbon mitigation options, it is essential to do the following:

•	 Design policies to encourage private sector growth. Businesses have highlighted that what they want
   from government are strong and clear signals. Businesses need the time to respond to policies that
   may impact the way they operate. Therefore, political consensus on credible, consistent, long-term
   policy signals is required. This would include strong, consistent, flexible, and globally implemented
   carbon taxes or cap-and-trade schemes.
•	 Phase out country-level energy subsidies, as these have an artificial impact on competiveness and are
   especially detrimental to the implementation of carbon taxes or cap-and-trade schemes.




68
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




•	 Develop sector-specific carbon reduction strategies. Without them, achieving carbon reduction targets
   will be expensive and potentially unattainable.
•	 Provide financial support for R&D investment in early stage products and process innovations that
   can help overcome market barriers and increase manufacturers’ and consumers’ confidence in the
   technologies or resulting products. This will support the business case for breakthrough interventions.

DIALOGUE AND COLLABORATION TO ACHIEVE SUCCESSFUL OUTCOMES AT
MARRAKESH AND BEYOND

With uncertainty surrounding the timing and extent of enabling technologies and the introduction
of carbon prices in new geographies, international cross-sector and governmental dialogue and
collaboration on interventions are urgently required.

Maintaining momentum from Paris will be key to successful implementation of the ambitious Intended
Nationally Determined Contributions. Industrial decarbonization must be on the agenda, and policy
makers and negotiators should not shy away from it because of competitiveness concerns. In addition,
ensuring that emerging economies pursue a greener path to production is crucial. Regional dialogue will
be essential to seeing success in this arena.


   BOX 1.12 EXAMPLES OF DRIVING CHANGE INDUSTRIAL THROUGH
   COLLABORATION

   International collaboration can assist the acceleration of industrial decarbonisation. A wide number
   of initiatives exist today, that span from company to trade association to country and international
   initiatives. A non-exhaustive list illustrates some of the current and recent private sector and
   international initiatives that look to progress the uptake of low carbon interventions across the
   industrial sector.

   Multi Sector	
   •	 UK industrial energy efficiency accelerator
   •	 EU Horizon 2020 EU-MERCI programme
   •	 SE4ALL- UN initiative

   Iron & Steel	
   •	 EU ULCOS programme
   •	 COURSE 50 program in Japan
   •	 Industrial Technologies Program in the United States.
   •	 Chinese Industrial Energy Performance Standards Programme
   •	 ArcelorMittal’s 10 sustainable development outcomes
   •	 Tata Steel’s certification of 19 construction products

   Cement
   •	 European standards for cement and concrete
   •	 Australia investigating Alkali-activated geopolymeric cements
   •	 Roadmaps produced by DECC, MPA, WBCSD, IEA, and EU
   •	 EU Low Emissions Intensity Lime & Cement (LEILAC) Project 1

   Chemicals
   •	 	
      UN Strategic Approach International Chemical Management
   •	 	
      The global Responsible Care initiative and EU Care+ project
   •	 	
      EU SpiCE3 sectoral platform in chemicals for energy efficiency excellence

   Aluminum
   •	 	
      International Aluminium Institute- ‘Towards sustainable cities’
   •	 	
      World Aluminum supported by associations in China, USA, EU and Japan push for sustainable
      green growth within the industry

    	 Carbon Trust. April 2016.” Breakthrough technology to be demonstrated in Europe to cut carbon from cement and lime sectors” Retrieved on
   1.

      June 12th, 2016 from https://www.carbontrust.com/news/2016/04/breakthrough-technology-to-be-demonstrated-in-europe-to-cut-carbon-
      from-cement-and-lime-sectors/




                                                                                                                                                 69
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




In addition to above the recommendations, policy makers should undertake the following as they devise
solutions:

•	 Establish private-public partnerships that aim to reduce costs and increase market confidence in
   decarbonizing interventions. Such partnerships are already under way (see Box 1.12), but increased
   regional, international, and cross-sectoral collaboration and research would help improving the
   readiness of potential technology solutions. The goal is to future-proof companies for increasing
   global uptake of interventions. In particular in-situ technology demonstration programs supported by
   the public sector would greatly assist in building confidence and increasing uptake of expensive and
   unproven carbon abatement technologies. For this to occur in a timely fashion and at sufficient scale,
   resources may need to be pooled regionally or globally, not least to dampen competiveness concerns
   for any particular country or region.
•	 Create and maintain dedicated institutions and organizations to support these initiatives. These
   will be important efforts to support emerging economies as they leapfrog to a green industrial sector.
   However, this will require strong country and regional buy-in and a strong approach to governance and
   transparency.
•	 Supplement unilateral action on phasing out energy subsidies with dialogue at a regional level.
   Subsidies not only distort international competition and disincentivize action for energy efficiency
   but they can also create problems for industry if a subsidy is rapidly changed. Regional dialogue may
   increase the momentum or pressure for individual jurisdictions to act.
•	 Provide long-term support for local energy and industrial entrepreneurs. The oligopolistic nature
   of the global industrial sector is not always conducive to solutions that meet national growth needs.
   Finding ways to utilize Green Climate Funds will help provide autonomy for countries’ growth plans.


     CASE STUDY 1 - RUSAL ALUMINUM PRODUCTION: TACKLING CLIMATE CHANGE
     THROUGH TECHNOLOGY INTERVENTIONS

     UC RUSAL, a leading global aluminum producer, produces aluminum with one of the world’s lowest
     carbon footprints by utilizing the renewable hydropower resources of Siberian Russia. More than
     90 percent of RUSAL’s aluminum production is powered by water. Since 1990, RUSAL has more
     than halved direct emissions from its smelters and continues to increase its share of energy from
     hydropower and other renewable energy sources. The company continues to improve its carbon
     footprint and aims to achieve almost 100 percent of its energy from hydropower.

     Background: For a long time, RUSAL’s focus has been on cutting greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
     Today, RUSAL has one of lowest records of GHG emissions per ton of aluminum produced.
     RUSAL’s strategic goal is to not exceed 6 tonnes level of CO2 per ton of aluminum. Since 1990, the
     CO2 emissions per ton of aluminum produced from RUSAL smelters was cut by 53 percent. From
     2012 to 2015, RUSAL went through a significant transformation by optimizing its output through
     the curtailment of its least efficient smelters which used out-of-date eco-unfriendly technologies
     and coal-fired energy in the European part of Russia.

     Another of RUSAL’s green competitive advantages is its in-house R&D, engineering, and design
     resources, which enable the company to develop cutting-edge technologies, state-of-the-art
     equipment, and technically advanced facilities. RUSAL is the proprietor of a number of energy
     efficient smelter technologies, including RA-300, RA-400, and RA-500, which have helped to
     cut energy consumption, drive down emissions, and boost production efficiency by reducing
     production costs. Currently RUSAL is developing the most upgraded version of RA-potroom,
     introducing efficient RA-550 technology.

     One of largest GHG emissions sources is oxidation of anodes made from carbon blocks, and
     RUSAL is currently involved in the development of inert anode cells. The use of inert anodes in
     the aluminum smelting process has the potential to radically reshape the industry as the only
     by-product of the inert anode smelting pot will be pure oxygen. Once introduced, the inert anode
     technology will enable RUSAL to completely eliminate any GHG and polyaromatic hydrocarbon
     emissions. A single reduction cell will be able to generate the same amount of oxygen as 70
     hectares of forest.




70
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     Figure CS1.1.1 The Khakas Aluminum Smelter is the most          Figure CS1.1.2 “Boges,” RUSAL’s new Boguchansky Aluminum
     up-to-date and Technologically Advanced Smelter in Russia       Smelter, will be the main consumer of Electricity Generated by
                                                                     Boguchanskaya Hydropower Plant




   Environmental initiatives and goals: Over the past three years RUSAL has invested around
   US$295 million to implement environmental actions. As a result, between 2011 and 2014 RUSAL
   managed to reduce industrial water waste by 55 percent. Among RUSAL’s key activities has been
   the creation of a closed-circuit water supply system for the main production processes, increasing
   the volume of treated and used waste products and their safe disposal, replacing and safe
   disposing of electrical equipment containing polychlorbiphenyls in line with Stockholm Convention
   on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) valid till 2025, rehabilitating land and assisting in the
   maintenance of biodiversity, and creating corporate systems to manage environmental aspects
   and risks in compliance with ISO 14001:2015 environmental management systems.

   In addition, RUSAL has joined the Aluminum Stewardship Initiative with a view of participating in
   the development of global sustainability standards for international application in the aluminum
   value chain. The initiative was launched at the end of 2012 by key participants in the aluminum
   industry including producers, converters and end users.

   On a corporate level, RUSAL has identified five strategic goals for reducing GHG emissions. In
   particular, in 2020 the company plans to switch completely electricity produced from renewable
   or other carbon-free sources. At the same time, the annual consumption of aluminum smelters
   will be reduced by 3,400 GWh compared with 2011. By 2025, specific GHG emissions at aluminum
   smelters will be reduced by 15 percent and at alumina smelters by 10 percent compared to 2014.
   By the same date, 85 percent of RUSAL’s primary aluminum production will generate specific
   direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions in CO2eq not exceeding six tons per ton of metal. This
   figure applies to the entire production chain, from bauxite mining to aluminum smelting.




                                                                                                                                      71
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     CASE STUDY 2 - ENERGY EFFICIENCY AT LG CHEM: REDUCING GHG EMISSIONS
     ACROSS THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA’S CHEMICAL INDUSTRY

     LG Chem, Ltd. has grown steadily since its founding in 1947 and has become Korea’s representative
     chemicals company by continuously developing new technologies and products and making
     innovations in quality. LG Chem is transitioning from a traditional petrochemical business to high-
     value businesses focusing on information-electronics materials and batteries for future growth
     engines and is growing into a global firm offering unique materials and solutions.

     LG Chem’s NCC Plant produces basic petrochemicals such as ethaline and propylene using
     naphtha as the key ingredient. It is located in facilities in both Yeosu and Daesan. The Yeosu facility
     has increased capacity from 385,000 tons of ethaline to 1,160,000 tons by revamping the plant
     four times since 1991. In addition, the basic petrochemicals produced at the NCC Plant have been
     utilized in downstream vertical integration to provide a stable supply of source material for basic
     chemical products. This enhances internal competitiveness.

     LG Chem has gone beyond regulatory compliance by proactively taking voluntary measures to
     reduce energy consumption. This has led to numerous innovations. In particular, the Yeosu NCC
     facility operates a high-temperature cracking furnace that uses 62 percent of manufacturing
     costs (excluding raw material costs) for energy. Following this, LG Chem is actively reducing energy
     consumption to gain a comparative advantage over competitors.

     In addition, the continued growth of downstream businesses has led the company to adopt a
     differentiated strategy for increasing production. The goal is to stabilize supply and implement an
     innovative and unique production process; already the company it has achieved a global level of
     ethaline production for a single plant.

     By identifying measures to reduce energy consumption in the Yeosu NCC facility’s cracking furnace
     and unique new NCC processes, it has achieved the best energy intensity on a global scale.

     The measures to improve efficiency in the highest consumption cracking furnace led the
     company’s achievements in energy intensity. First, using the new material Aerogel as an insulant
     reduced the exterior temperature from 90 degrees to 70 degrees, significantly reducing heat loss.
     In addition, the installation of a mass transfer convection and heat exchanger stack reduced flue
     gas temperatures from 170 degrees to 100 degrees. These are part of the many measures taken to
     improve energy efficiency.

                   Figure CS2.1 Energy Efficiency in Cracked Furnace




72
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




   In addition, a new ethane process was put in place to separate the ethane that was processed in
   the existing NCC process. To treat it more easily, low-cost C3LPG was adopted in the new process
   to maximize output. Other ways of increasing production have been continuously identified in order
   to secure competitiveness while reducing GHG emissions.

   Results: According to a study conducted by an NCC consulting specialist, Solomon Associates,
   in February 2013, LG Chem recorded the best energy intensity out of 115 firms across the globe.
   LG Chem’s Yeosu NCC Plant’s energy intensity was 4,170 kcalorie/kg, 40 percent above the global
   average, and it consumed 24 percent less energy than the global top 25 percent of firms. Various
   efforts have been made since this study to maintain the global lead position.

       Table CS2.1 Comparison of LG Chem to Competitors



                                                                        Global Top 25%
                                                     LG Chem                                           Global Average
                                                                    Companies First tier
        Energy intensity
                                                          4,170                       5,561                          7,460
        (kcal/kg, ethylene)
        Energy costs
        (one hundred million                              Base                       +1,310                      +3,100
        KRW per year)


     Source: Based on research by Solomon Associates. (Compared energy competitiveness of 115 companies worldwide)




   LG Chem is participating in efforts to combat climate change by continuously transitioning toward
   a low-carbon business structure and process innovation. Not only is it working toward directly
   reducing GHG emissions by improving energy efficiency in production processes, it is working to
   contribute to reducing indirect emissions by transitioning to a production structure of high-added
   value and low consumption products. Of these products, LG Chem is particularly focusing on
   developing EV batteries and supplying ESS technology.

       Figure CS2.2 New insolation technology, Aerogel adoption



                         Aerogel installation                              Aerogel installation




                                                                       Aerogel is installed so there
                                                                      is no gap between the burner
                                                                      tile and where it connects to
                                                                               the Aerogel




                                                                                                                             73
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




PART 2
SCALING CLIMATE ACTION AND COMPETITIVENESS
THROUGH ENERGY EFFICIENT PRODUCTS


INTRODUCTION

Part 2 focuses on energy efficiency S&L, which improve the energy performance of the products that
households and businesses use, thereby reducing the GHG emissions associated with their use. These
policies have yielded substantial reductions in GHG emissions and other public benefits. In many cases,
they also benefit firms that manufacture the regulated products.

In the following sections, a review of key developments in S&L policies and their impact in terms of
energy savings and GHG emissions reduction is described. A discussion of S&L impact on manufacturers
in theory and practice follows that section. The study analyzes cases from countries that have long-
standing product energy efficiency policies. This report is a first attempt to include analysis from the
most recent cases in developing countries, complementing it with more quantitative analysis from
developed countries. Future research will be needed to assess the impacts of more recently implemented
policies.

It is important to note that while product efficiency policies have been implemented for the most
commonly used products in a number of countries, there remains considerable potential for further
expansion in geographical and product coverage and for increases in stringency.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS AND LABELING POLICY

Energy efficiency S&L programs for appliances, lighting, and equipment have been used by governments
around the world for nearly 40 years. These programs cost-effectively reduce energy consumption and
lessen peak electricity demand while maintaining the level of energy service for consumers.
Policy makers can use energy performance S&L to move markets away from inefficient products
and toward energy efficient ones. Minimum energy performance standards (MEPS) specify an energy
performance level and prohibit the manufacture, import, or sales of new products that are less efficient
than that minimum level. Energy labels describe the energy performance of a product, telling consumers
how much energy it uses, how efficient it is, or what energy costs to expect. This gives consumers
information necessary to make informed purchases. Figure 2.1 shows a few common examples of the
two principal types of energy labels: comparative and endorsement labels.

     Figure 2.1 Examples of Energy Labels




74
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




The first minimum energy performance standards were enacted in 1977 by the U.S. state of California
for refrigerators and air conditioners. The first comparative label, Canada’s Energy Guide label, was
introduced in 1978. In 1992 the first endorsement labeling program, Energy Star, was launched in the
United States. Figure 2.2 shows the number of economies that have adopted standards and/or labeling
programs since 1977. This number has grown to include at least 45 economies,1 excluding the 28 EU
member states.

                            Figure 2.2 The Uptake of S&L Programs and Policies

                                         Countries with an S&L Program           Cumulative S&L Policies
                                    50                                                                                                      1600
                                    45
     Countries with an S&L Policy




                                                                                                                                            1400




                                                                                                                                                   Cumulative S&L Policies
                                    40
                                                                                                                                            1200
                                    35
                                    30                                                                                                      1000

                                    25                                                                                                      800
                                    20
                                                                                                                                            600
                                    15
                                                                                                                                            400
                                    10
                                     5                                                                                                      200

                                           1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014

         Source: CLASP S&L Database 2015.


As of 2015 these programs included at least 551 MEPS, 515 comparative labels, and 350 endorsement
labels (Figure 2.3).2 These programs cover approximately 125 residential, commercial, and industrial
products ranging from globally traded products such as televisions to regionally specific products, such
as an industrial tortilla making machine.

                            Figure 2.3 Total Number of S&L Policies in Effect by Type, 2015

                                    Mandatory            Voluntary

                            600


                            500

                            400

                            300

                            200

                            100

                                                 MEPS                         Comparative Labels                          Endorsement Labels
         Source: CLASP S&L Database 2015.



Despite this progress, there are still many economies that do not have a robust S&L program in place.
This includes many emerging economies where energy-demand growth rates are rising exponentially.
Figure 2.4 illustrates the current number of S&L policies in various countries. Within those economies
that have S&L programs, there remain many opportunities to expand product coverage and raise
the stringency of the efficiency level. Demonstrating co-benefits of S&L programs such as industrial
competitiveness adds to the body of evidence demonstrating the value of robust and effective appliance
efficiency policies.
1
    	 This number counts the European Union as a single economy. Thus, the total number of countries that have S&L programs is nearly 75.
2
    	 See CLASP S&L Database http://www.clasp.ngo/Tools/Tools/SL_Search



                                                                                                                                                              75
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     Figure 2.4 Number of Standards and Labeling Policies around the Globe, by Country




     # of S&L Policies
          >100

          81-100

          61-80

          41-60

          21-40

          0-20


 Source: CLASP S&L Database 2015.




76
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                                                                                           77
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




GHG EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS AND ENERGY IMPACTS OF S&L POLICIES

Research shows that S&L is a highly cost-effective policy tool that yields significant benefits in terms
of both GHG emissions and energy demand reductions. A recent International Energy Agency-4E report,
for example, summarized the energy and GHG emissions savings from a number of policies from various
jurisdictions (Table 2.1).1 The scale of these savings are very significant compared to overall energy
consumption, as reported in the same study:

•	 S&L programs are estimated to have saved 12 percent of electricity consumption and 4 percent of
   end-use natural gas demand in 2014 in the United States.2 The voluntary Energy Star program saved a
   further 5 percent of electricity consumption in 2014.
•	 S&L programs are estimated to have saved 6.2 terawatt hours (TWh) of electricity within the
   residential sector in Australia and New Zealand in 2012,3 equivalent to 10 percent of the residential
   sector electrical energy consumption in that year.
•	 The EU Eco-Design program is expected to achieve an annual primary energy savings of 19 percent by
   2020 and residential sector savings equivalent to 25 percent of residential energy consumption.4
•	 Annual savings from residential energy efficiency programs in China are expected to save 11 percent of
   residential electricity use by 2020.5

     Table 2.1 Examples of Diverse Savings within Different Jurisdictions



                                                                               Savings Savings                         Savings              Savings
      Jurisdiction                              Product types
                                                                         accrual period (TWh)                            (US$)             (MtCO2e)
      European                           Ecodesign/Labeling
                                                                              1990–2010                   213                 N/A                  N/A
      Union                                       directives
      European                           Ecodesign/Labeling
                                                                             2010–2020                  1,719       120 billion                    320
      Union                                       directives
                                Federal energy and water
      United States                                                           1987–2013              10,753                   N/A                 2,113
                                 conservation standards
                                Federal energy and water
      United States                                                                 In 2013             1,187         56 billion                    218
                                 conservation standards
                                     Energy Star, voluntary
      United States                                                           1992–2013               2,700         295 billion                  2,198
                                                   program
                                     Energy Star, voluntary
      United States                                                                 In 2013              380          32 billion                   294
                                                   program
      China                                        All programs                    to 2020              1,143                 N/A                  N/A
      Australia                   Air conditioner program                   2003–2020                     6.5        0.8 billion                   N/A
      Australia                       Refrigerator/Freezers                  1986–2009                    5.9                 N/A                      6
      Fiji                            Refrigerator/Freezers                   2012–2014               0.005 0.85 million                        0.002
      India                                        All programs              2012–2030                     70                 N/A                  N/A


    Source: IEA-4E 2015.




1
 	 IEA Technology Collaboration Program on Energy Efficient End-Use Equipment (4E) is a program of 12 countries from the Asia-Pacific, Europe, and North
    America that have joined together to share information and transfer experience in order to support good policy development in the field of energy efficient
    appliances and equipment.
2
 	 Nadel, S., et al. 2015. “Energy Efficiency in the United States: 35 Years and Counting. ACEEE.”
3
  	 Equipment Energy Efficiency Committee (E3). 2014. “Impacts of the E3 Program: Projected Energy, Cost and Emission Savings, 2014.”
4
  	 Kemna, R. 2014. Ecodesign Impact Accounting: Part 1-Status Nov. 2013. Delft, The Netherlands: Van Holsteijn and Kemna.
5
  	 Fridley, D., et al. 2007. Impacts of China’s Current Appliance Standards and Labeling Program to 2020. Berkeley, CA: LBNL.



78
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




The S&L policies already in place have achieved significant energy and GHG savings. However, there
remains large potential for further energy savings that can be achieve by spreading S&L policies to
additional countries (Figure 2.4), broadening product coverage, increasing the stringency of existing
policies, and spurring further technological innovation. A recent European Union report estimated that
global final energy consumption could be reduced by 9 percent if the most stringent MEPS were adopted
and harmonized worldwide.1 The resulting savings-8,950 TWh per annum-are equivalent to the output of
165 coal-fired power plants or 132 million cars.

Another analysis by the SEAD Initiative found that improving product efficiency to the level of the best
technologies available in 2010-across a group of 18 major economies-could reduce GHG emissions by
1.5 GtCO2e in 2030, an amount equal to 45% of all countries’ Nationally Determined Contributions
(NDCs) taken together. This 1.5 Gt would add to the 0.5 Gt already locked in by product efficiency policies
implemented during the six-year period from 2010 through 2015 (Figure 2.5).

     Figure 2.5 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions in 2030 from Product Efficiency Policies (Gt CO2e)


                                                                                                    0.52
      Business as usual:     NDCs                              Remaining potential


       59.5 Gt                                                                                 Impact of recent
                                                                                                   policies

                                                  45%                 -1.48




                              -3.3



                                                                   Unit: GtCO2.e


    Sources: UNFCCC and CLASP1 2016.


Adopting and harmonizing (worldwide) the most stringent MEPS could reduce 9% of the global total
energy consumption2 --- The 8,950 TWh saving per annum is equivalent to shutting down 165 coal-fired
power plants or getting 132 million cars off the road.




	 NDCs data were sourced from “Aggregate effect of the intended nationally determined contributions: an update” published by UNFCCC, May 2016. Other
1

  data from unpublished analysis conducted by CLASP and LBNL on behalf of the SEAD Initiative.
	 European Union. 2015. “Savings and Benefits of Global Regulations for Energy Efficient Products: A ‘Cost of non-World’ Study.”
2




                                                                                                                                                  79
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




THE IMPACT OF S&L ON MANUFACTURING COMPETITIVENESS

Appliance energy efficiency S&L programs enable consumers to make better informed decisions.
They also affect manufacturers’ decisions about what to offer for sale and how to market products.
S&L programs can spur innovation and drive competition in the market. In the absence of an S&L
program, if most consumers were interested only in the price of products and not in energy efficiency,
manufacturers would predominantly supply cheap but energy-inefficient products. Investment in R&D
on energy efficiency would not be stimulated if customers did not recognize and prefer energy efficient
products. Manufacturers may also be risk averse, not wanting to be first to offer significantly more
efficient products whose market success is unknown.

S&L programs can have both positive and negative impacts on domestic and global manufacturers’
competitiveness. In the absence of access to capital for R&D and energy-efficient technologies, smaller
domestic manufacturers may find it hard to compete. Global manufacturers may find it easier to
compete and comply with standards because of more flexible manufacturing practices and dedicated
resources for R&D. However, domestic manufacturers could gain consumer confidence and remain
competitive if they invest in energy efficient improvements of their products and use energy efficiency
labels as a marketing tool. In other words, manufacturers could use energy efficiency labels to help them
differentiate their products from their competitors’.

The post implementation effects on manufacturers of appliance energy efficiency S&L programs have
not been analyzed in a comprehensive way. To understand the impacts, environmental regulations can be
accepted as a proxy for S&L programs within the scope of this publication, since they can be considered
as a subset of S&L.

The Porter Hypothesis (PH) was identified as the theoretical foundation for the study.1 The hypothesis
states that stringent but economically efficient environmental regulations can trigger environmental
innovation in firms and that the innovation leads to improved competitiveness. However, the PH may
not apply directly to voluntary schemes, such as voluntary S&L programs. In voluntary schemes, the
stringency level is endogenous to the firm’s choice of adopting (or not) that scheme. Hence, it is not as
much of a driver for innovation at the firm level as for other levels.

The PH is studied in three versions:2
•	 The weak version of the PH suggests that stringent regulation spurs innovation as firms react to the
   new restrictions on their activities.
•	 The narrow version suggests that flexible regulatory approaches with strict objectives, such as
   economic instruments, create stronger incentives for firms to innovate than more restrictive
   regulations, such as technology mandates.
•	 The strong version suggests that complying with the regulation increases firm profitability and/or
   competitiveness by means of innovation offsets.

The literature usually presents strong empirical evidence for the weak and narrow PH versions that
show positive links between environmental regulations and innovation. However, the evidence that ties
innovation to competitiveness is conflicting, and hence strong PH is not supported unanimously. The
following are the potential causes identified for variation among the empirical literature’s results looking
at the strong PH version:

•	 The study’s sector focus: Literature shows that sectors react differently to environmental
   regulations. Some sectors are not affected, while some are affected positively and others negatively.
   Chalermthanakom and Ueta3 identified electronics and food industries as sectors that are not
   affected. Brannlund’s4 study of five Swedish manufacturing sectors showed that pulp and paper
   industry is negatively affected due to regulations (which are potentially more stringent on this
   particular sector). Looking at EU exports, Constantini and Mazzanti)5 found that reactions are
   also technology-level specific: high-tech sectors respond to environmental regulations much more
   positively than more energy-intensive medium-tech and low-tech sectors.

1 	 Wagner, M. 2006. “A Comparative Analysis of Theoretical Reasoning and Empirical Studies on the Porter
	 Hypothesis and the Role of Innovation.” Journal of Environmental Law and Policy 3: 349–368.
2	 Ambec, S., and P. Barla. 2006. “Can Environmental Regulations Be Good for Business? An Assessment of the Porter Hypothesis.” Energy Studies Review 14
    (2): 42.
3	 Chalermthanakom, A., and K. Ueta. 2011. “Impact of Environmental Regulation on Productivity: Case Studies of Three Industries in Japan.” Kyoto Economic
    Review 80 (2): 167–187.
4	 Brännlund, R. 2008. “Productivity and Environmental Regulations.” Umeå Economic Studies (728).
5	 Costantini, V., and M. Mazzanti. 2012. “On the Green and Innovative Side of Trade Competitiveness? The Impact of Environmental Policies and Innovation
    on EU Exports.” Research Policy 41 (1): 132–153.




80
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




•	 The regulation’s target: It matters whether the regulation aims toward efficiency improvements
   or pollution mitigation matters. Efficiency improvements demonstrate positive impacts. However,
   mitigation-focused regulations affect firms negatively in the short term but may have long-term
   positive impacts. For S&L programs in particular, it should be expected there will be differences
   between mandatory and voluntary programs
•	 Time scale: Although initial impacts are negative, compliance costs can eventually be offset over
   time, and competitiveness impacts can eventually be positive. There may also be time lags for any
   effect to be observed. Some studies may have overlooked this.1 Such a time lag was the case in
   Chalermthanakom and Ueta’s study2 involving the automobile industry. The sector’s productivity and
   economic performance shifted from a negative link with environmental regulations to a positive link
   when a one-year lag was introduced to the model.
•	 Innovation type triggered: Bernauer et al.3 emphasize that different testing indicators may be required
   to measure whether process or product innovation is triggered by an environmental regulation and to
   understand the impact of these innovations on competitiveness.

Another reason for results variation is the variety of indicators used in each study for measuring
competitiveness, innovation, and market share in relation to regulations. Regulations are usually
identified through the costs or investments required for compliance4.

As mentioned in Part 1, indicators for competitiveness vary depending on the scale. In terms of S&L, for
firm-level competitiveness, changes in market share are the most common indicator.5 For sector-level
competitiveness, productivity and total factor productivity are the most commonly used indicators.6
Activity heterogeneity is also found to be a crucial indicator for determining competitiveness in a number
of studies.7 Innovation is usually tested through R&D and patenting expenditures, or number or patents.8
Table 2.2 addresses the competitiveness factors as they relate to manufacturers of products affected
by S&L, along with overall factors identified in major reports based on the World Economic Forum Global
Competitiveness Index, Deloitte’s Manufacturing Competitiveness, and European Innovation Scoreboard.




1
 	 Broberg, T., P. O. Marklund, E. Samakovlis, and H. Hammar. 2013. “Testing the Porter hypothesis: The Effects of Environmental Investments on Efficiency in
    Swedish Industry.” Journal of Productivity Analysis 40 (1): 43–56.
2
  	 Chalermthanakom and Ueta. 2011. “Impact of Environmental Regulation on Productivity.”
3
  	 Bernauer, T., S. Engel, D. Kammerer, and J. Sejas Nogareda. 2007. “Explaining Green Innovation: Ten Years after Porter’s Win-Win Proposition: How to
    Study the Effects of Regulation on Corporate Environmental Innovation?” Politische Vierteljahresschrift 39: 323–341.
4
  	 Broberg et al. 2013. “Testing the Porter Hypothesis.”; Chalermthanakom and Ueta. 2011. “Impact of Environmental Regulation on Productivity.”; Arouri, M. E.
    H., G. M. Caporale, C. Rault, R. Sova, and A. Sova. 2012. “Environmental regulation and competitiveness: Evidence from Romania.” Ecological Economics 81:
    130–139.
5
  	 Ghisetti, C., and K. Rennings. 2013. “Environmental Innovations and Profitability: How Does It Pay to Be Green? An Empirical Analysis on the German
    Innovation Survey.” ZEW-Centre for European Economic Research Discussion Paper, 13-073.; Delchet-Cochet, K., L.C. Vo, and H. Akeb. 2015. “From
    Compliance with Environmental Regulations to Pursuit of Environmental-Based Competitive Advantages: Mediators of the Relationship in an SME
    Context.” Journal of Applied Business Research 31 (3): 987–1004.
6
  	 Carayannis, E., and E. Grigoroudis. 2014. “Linking Innovation, Productivity, and Competitiveness: Implications for Policy and Practice.” Journal of Technology
    Transfer 39 (2): 199–218.; Brännlund. (2008. Productivity and Environmental Regulations.
7
 	 Ghisetti and Rennings. 2013. “Environmental Innovations and Profitability.”; Bradburd, R. M., and D. R. Ross. 1989. “Can Small Firms Find and Defend
    Strategic Niches? A Test of the Porter Hypothesis.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 15(6) 258–262; Costantini and Mazzanti 2012. “On the Green and
    Innovative Side of Trade Competitiveness?”
8	
    Ghisetti and Rennings. 2013. “Environmental Innovations and Profitability.”; Costantini and Mazzanti. 2012. “On the Green and Innovative Side of Trade
    Competitiveness?”; Doran, J., and G. Ryan. 2012. Regulation and Firm Perception, Eco-Innovation and Firm Performance.” European Journal of Innovation
    Management 15 (4): 421–441.



                                                                                                                                                              81
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     Table 2.2 Profile of Competitiveness Indicators



                               • Environmental and/or energy compliance investments
                               • Policy and/or regulation stringency
          Regulations          • Stability of regulations
                               • Environmental and energy tax
                               • Compliance with regulations and/or S&L
                               • R&D expenditure
                               • R&D budget
           Innovation          • Patent expenditure
                               • Number of patents approved
                               • Type of innovation (product versus process)
                                                • Added share in total manufacturing value added
                               Country
                                                • Aggregate value of the domestic manufacturing industry
                                            • Profitability (e.g., value added, market value)
                                            • Export share
                                            • Employment (e.g., labor costs, levels of gross domestic
                                            product per worker, employment share)
                                   Firm /
                                            • Productivity (e.g., total factor productivity, productivity
                                   Sector /
                                            growth)
       Competitiveness             Country
                                            • Export intensity (ratio of exports to sales)
                                            • Change in cost of material and/or resource supply
                                            • Price premiums
                                            • Change in cost of production
                                                • Firm activity heterogeneity
                                                • Costs of promotion to consumers and retailers for
                                Firm
                                                manufacturers
                                                • Market share, change in market share, impact on sales
                               • Changes in product supply
                               • Changes in product demand
         Market share
                               • Number of domestic versus international manufacturers
                               • Shares of import and export in market


 a. The data for the indicators will have different sources based on whether firm, sector, or country-level competitiveness is
 being assessed.

 Source: WEF Global Competitiveness Index, Deloitte’s Manufacturing Competitiveness, European Innovation Scoreboard,
 with others.


It should be noted that PH theory covers all environmental regulations and is not specific to energy
performance S&L. In fact, although environmental regulations can be considered as a proxy for S&L
programs, the literature showcasing PH within the scope of S&L is rare. On the other hand, the indicators
identified through these studies are applicable to the publication’s S&L–focused scope.

Ex Ante (Anticipated Changes) Analyses and U.S. DOE’s Manufacturer Impact Assessments
As part of determining whether an energy efficiency policy under consideration is economically justified,
governments typically estimate the energy savings expected to result from the policy. Such estimations
are called ex ante estimation.




82
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is required to conduct ex ante analyses to forecast the economic
impact of a proposed standard on the manufacturers and consumers of those products. In addition to ex
ante estimation of energy savings, DOE also conducts a manufacturer impact analysis (MIA) to estimate
the financial impact of a new or amended energy conservation standard on manufacturers.1 The MIA
must include an assessment of the impacts of a standard on competition among manufacturers, direct
employment, and manufacturing capacity.

The U.S. DOE’s MIA has both quantitative and qualitative aspects. DOE uses the Government Regulatory
Impact Model (GRIM) to conduct the quantitative assessment. GRIM is an input-output model that
requires industry cost structure, product shipments, and costs as the model’s input parameters. The
output of the GRIM is the industry’s net present value (INPV).2 The model estimates the financial
impact of new and amended energy conservation standards for each product. It compares INPVs
between a base case and standards case. The MIA’s qualitative part addresses product characteristics,
manufacturer characteristics, market and product trends, as well as the impact of standards on
subgroups of manufacturers.

The U.S. DOE has published results from dozens of such MIAs conducted in developing energy
conservation standards over the years. Thus, a large number of manufacturer impact ex ante analyses
exist.

Ex Post (Past Performance) Analyses in the Literature
Ex post analysis of any policy is essentially an effects estimation after the fact (after the policy
implementation). In the case of appliance energy efficiency standards, cost and savings ex post
estimations are generally considered a more accurate representation of actual costs and savings due
to standards implementation than the ex ante analysis. For example, in India the Bureau of Energy
Efficiency (BEE) conducts ex post energy estimation of GHG emissions reduction from BEE’s policies
(including appliances S&L program) annually. These are published those in BEE’s annual reports.3 Results
from some of these ex post analyses are summarized in Table 2.1.

There have been efforts to estimate the ex post energy and cost savings because of efficiency
standards. However, very little is known about the effects of appliance energy efficiency standards on
manufacturers after their implementation.

The following sections present specific product policy cases and how actions affected manufacturers.
These policies on domestic and global manufacturers vary in their results. Some were positive and some
negative. Not only S&L policies, but also complementary policies such as tax incentives, capacity building,
and other upstream policies were examined.

The case studies are organized around the four major product groups: lighting, space cooling, home
appliances, and industrial equipment. These groups contain some of the most important energy-
consuming products globally and the products that new S&L programs typically address first.

Standards alignment’s effects are also studied in these sections. Alignment on product definitions, test
methods, and efficiency metrics, or even performance levels, is perceived as beneficial for both national
manufacturers and importers. It reduces the manufacturing, testing, and administrative costs to the
manufacturers and importers. Also, the harmonization of test procures and performance standards
within a larger economy or in the region provides access to new markets. That could enable export-led
growth and spur innovation.

The case studies provide broad coverage of countries where S&L policies are implemented and that are
major GHG emitters. These case studies are drawn from China, the United States, the European Union,
India, and Mexico. The cases examined are listed in Table 2.3.




	 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), title 10, part 202, section 21.
1

	 See DOE, “Standards Development and Revision. http://energy.gov/eere/buildings/standards-development-and-revision.
2

	 Bureau of Energy Efficiency, India, annual reports. https://beeindia.gov.in/content/annual-report.
3




                                                                                                                       83
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     Table 2.3 List of Cases Examined



     Product group         Case study                 Key features
                           Compact                    Illustrates how stringent S&L policies coupled with
     Lighting              fluorescent lamps          government investment has helped domestic firms
                           in China                   compete in global markets
                                                 Illustrates how S&L policies spurred innovation and
                           Room air
     Space cooling                               enabled domestic manufacturers to compete with
                           conditioners in India
                                                 imports of global brands
                                                      Illustrates how a tax policy built on a solid S&L foundation
                           Major appliances in        helped domestic manufacturers compete with global
                           the United States          brands while increasing the sales and affordability of
                                                      highly energy-efficient products
                                                      Illustrates how a combination of policies, including
     Home                  Clothes dryers in
                                                      government procurement schemes, can be used to tip
     appliances            Switzerland
                                                      the scales in favor of a new technology
                                                      Illustrates how standards alignment enabled Mexico to
                           Refrigerators in           realize consumer benefits from market transformation,
                           Mexico                     while enjoying the macroeconomic benefits of export-led
                                                      growth
                           Distribution
                                               Illustrates how the standard-setting process was able to
                           transformers in the
                                               take into account domestic firms’ concerns
                           United States
     Industrial
     equipment                                        Illustrates how Siemens, a global motor manufacturer,
                           Electric motors:
                                                      responded to the ratcheting-up of energy efficiency
                           A case study of
                                                      policies by strategically positioning itself to gain
                           Siemens
                                                      competitive advantages in the European market




For each product group, the report first explains the group’s significance in terms of market size and
energy consumption and gives an overview of current S&L policy, in order to provide context for the
case studies that follow. Each case study is structured to describe (1) the situation before the policy
intervention, (2) the policy intervention, (3) the situation after the policy intervention, and finally (4)
impacts on manufacturers.

The authors mined published and unpublished documents and conferred with government and industry
representatives and other individuals knowledgeable about the specifics of these cases. The hope is that
qualitatively and quantitatively assessing the selected cases furthers understanding of how appliance
policy can help reduce GHG emissions and encourage industrial competitiveness, innovation, and export-
led growth.




84
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




LIGHTING

The value of the global lighting market was an estimated 69 billion euros in 2010. It is expected to have
grown by an average of 6 percent per year from 2010 to 2016 and 3 percent per year from 2016 to
2020.1 The lighting market was estimated to reach a value of 110 billion euros by 2020.

The principal lighting technologies are incandescent, linear fluorescent lamps (LFL), compact fluorescent
lamps (CFL), high-intensity discharge lamps (HID), and light-emitting diode (LED). The lighting market in
the past was dominated by incandescent and linear fluorescent lamps. However, the much more efficient
but relatively expensive LED is quickly gaining market share due to rapid price decline and product
performance improvement. The market shares of LED has been increasing in recent years in various key
economies as demonstrated in a recent benchmarking study (Figure 2.6).

                                  Figure 2.6 LED Sales as a Percentage of All Sales of Domestic Lamps

                                                  Australia     Denmark                    United Kingdom                              Solid=robust data
                                                                                                                             Dashed line=indicative data
                                                  Austria       Japan                      EU
                                                                                                                             Dotted line=illustrative data
                                                  Canada        Republic of Korea          Poland and Spain

                                            25%
    Percentage of all sales that are LEDs




                                            20%



                                            15%



                                            10%



                                             5%



                                            0%

                                                     2004     2005      2006        2007        2008          2009   2010   2011       2012        2013
        Source: IEA-4E 2015.


The United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) estimates that lighting accounts for approximately
15 percent of global electricity consumption and 5 percent of worldwide greenhouse gas emissions.
By replacing all the inefficient lighting worldwide, an estimated 1,044 TWh of electricity can be saved
annually, equivalent to 530 MMt of CO2 emission reduction and $120 billion savings in electricity bills.2

GLOBAL OVERVIEW OF CURRENT LIGHTING S&L POLICY

Lighting is a relatively simple energy-using product and makes up a large percentage of end-use energy
in both developed and developing economies. For this reason it is usually one of the first products to be
regulated when an S&L program is introduced.

The first energy efficiency labels for lighting products were introduced in 1984 in Brazil, and the first
MEPS program followed shortly in Israel in 1985. There are now over 250 S&L policies in place in nearly
40 countries (see Figure 2.7). These policies cover ballasts, lamps, and specialized lighting products such
as traffic signals and string lights.




	 McKinsey & Company. 2011. “Lighting the Way: Perspectives on the Global Lighting Market.”
1

	 UNEP-GEF en.lighten initiative. 2014. “Green Paper: Policy Options to Accelerate the Global Transition to Advanced Lighting.”
2




                                                                                                                                                             85
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                      Figure 2.7 The Uptake of Lighting S&L Policies Worldwide


                              45                                                                                                                    300

                              40
                                                                                                                                                    250
                              35
    Countries with a policy




                                                                                                                                                          Number of policies
                              30                                                                                                                    200
                                                                 Countries with lighting policies
                              25
                                                                                                                                                    150
                              20

                              15                                                                                                                    100
                                                                                                           Cumulative lighting policies
                              10
                                                                                                                                                    50
                               5

                              0                                                                                                                     0


                                   1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
      Source: CLASP S&L Database 2015.



Incandescent bulbs have been in use for over a hundred years. However, the past 10 years have seen a
dramatic shift in the market to more efficient technologies, including principally CFL and LED lamps.
These technologies have a higher up-front cos, but are significantly more efficient and have much longer
lifetimes than incandescent options. Public policy has thus focused on accelerating the adoption of the
more efficient lighting technologies while ensuring quality and consumer satisfaction. Government and
nongovernmental organizations are using policy tools and awareness campaigns to encourage the mass
adoption of the more efficient technologies such as CFL and LED.1

Lighting products are globally traded, and test standards for most lamp types have a high-level of
international alignment.2 A key benefit to global lighting industry competitiveness is that trade barriers
can decrease and export-led growth increase by further aligning performance and test standards. The
en.lighten initiative is supporting harmonization efforts, and there are regional harmonization efforts
under way in Latin America, West Africa, and Southeast Asia.

Going one step further, these performance levels could also be aligned with quality characteristics. Many
lighting programs for highly efficient products already incorporate quality characteristics, such as color
quality or longevity, to ensure consumer satisfaction with the overall product.3 Shared definitions in
terms of aligned performance and test standards ensures a healthy competition within the global lighting
industry. This, in turn, increases the likelihood that consumers will make an energy efficient product
choice in the future, rather than developing a distrust of new energy efficient technologies.4




1
 	 See UNEP en.lighten program and the CEM Global Lighting Challenge.
2
 	 CLASP. 2013. Improving Global Comparability. Washington, DC: CLASP.
3
  	 Examples include ENERGY STAR, for lamps (http://www.energystar.gov/sites/default/files/ENERGY%20STAR%20Lamps%20V1%201_Specification_0.pdf)
    and luminaires (http://www.energystar.gov/sites/default/files/specs/private/Final_Luminaires_V1_2_1.pdf); the IEA-4E Solid State Lighting Annex, http://ssl.
    iea-4e.org/; and the SEAD Global Efficiency Medal competition for efficient lighting products, http://superefficient.org/lightingawards.
4
  	 Jenny Corry Smith, Debbie Karpay Weyl and Ari Reeves. 2015. “How and When to Increase Alignment of Appliance Policies.” EEDAL Conference Paper.



86
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




HISTORICAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSUMER PRICE TRENDS

Figure 2.8 charts the typical luminous efficiency of major lamp technologies from 1940 to 2010, with
projections to 2020. The efficiency of incandescent and halogen lamps has remained relatively flat, while
the efficiency of fluorescent and HID lamps has improved steadily. White LED lamps have improved
in efficiency very rapidly since their introduction just a few years ago, and are expected to continue
improving rapidly in the coming years.

                              Figure 2.8 Historical and Predicted Efficiency of Light Sources


                                       200
 Luminous Efficacy (Lumens per Watt)




                                                                                                                                White LED Lamp

                                        150




                                        100                HID


                                                  Low             High            Linear Fluorescent
                                                 Wattage         Wattage
                                        50                                                                Compact Fluorescent

                                                                                        Halogen                                           White OLED
                                                   Incandescent
                                                                                                                                            Panel
                                         0
                                          1940                        1960                        1980                 2000                      2020
      Source: U.S. DOE 2012.


MEPS for lamps have helped to lock in improvements in luminous efficiency. An analysis of the savings
expected to accrue from the MEPS established in the United States since 2009, for example, shows that
lamp standards are expected to yield cumulative savings of more than 2100 TWh of electricity and 1000
MMt CO2 emissions by 2030. This is nearly half of the total savings from all U.S. standards established
during that time (Table 2.4).

                              Table 2.4 Cumulative Energy and CO2 Savings through 2030 from Recent Lighting Standards in the United States



                                                                                                       Cumulative Cumulative Net present
                                                                                                        electricity        CO2      value of
                                                                           Final rule       Effective
                                       Lighting product                                                    savings  reductions savings (US$
                                                                                date            date
                                                                                                          through      through      billions,
                                                                                                      2030 (TWh) 2030 (MMt)           2012)
                                       General service lamps
                                                                     March 2009              2012–14           1,511             704             168.7
                                       (EISA 2007a)
                                       General service
                                                                           July 2009              2012          415              193              17.6
                                       fluorescent lamps
                                       Incandescent reflector
                                                                           July 2009              2012          98                46               6.7
                                       lamps
                                       General service
                                                                           Jan 2015               2018         140                90              0.8
                                       fluorescent lamps
                                       Total for lighting
                                                                                                             2,164              1,034             194
                                       products


      Source: ASAP (Appliance Standards Awareness Project) 2015b.




                                                                                                                                                         87
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




CHINA - S&L POLICIES FOR COMPACT FLUORESCENT LAMPS

Manufacturer Impacts
China has a long history of indigenous electric light source production. With steady growth in the past
several decades, it is now the leading producer of lighting products worldwide and plays dominant roles
in the high-efficiency lighting market globally. A deep market transformation has resulted from improved
and expanded MEPS programs, an initiative to phase out incandescent lights, and a state-driven
industrial upgrade toward high-efficient lighting products, including LEDs. This has bred competitiveness
improvement along with energy savings and carbon reduction.

China’s Green Lights Program (CGLP), initiated by the Chinese government in 1996, played a critical role
in China’s emergence as the leading supplier of high-efficiency lighting products. It has raised consumer
awareness of efficient products, spurring demand for efficient lighting within China. By 2015, there were
more than 30,000 lighting manufacturers in China, with annual sales of more than 48 billion unit lamps,
of which about 29 billion are exports.1

China’s accelerated urbanization in the early 1990s spurred large energy demand.2 The energy consumed
by the lighting sector grew at about 15 percent annually during much of the decade.3 This posed great
challenges to the then out-of-date electrical power system. In addition, most of the lighting in use at
that time was very inefficient, resulting in considerable electricity waste. The market for efficient lighting
products was immature and consumer’s awareness of these products was low. As a result, there were
great challenges to but also huge opportunities for policy intervention.

Policy Intervention
China implemented the CGLP via public education, consumer incentives, national product testing, and
investments in R&D and manufacturing capacity for efficient lighting. The program has achieved great
success. Specific measures include the following:

•	 Disseminating information about efficient lighting through mass media outlets and establishing CGLP
   product display sites to familiarize shoppers with energy efficient options
•	 Funding channels set up by the government to incentivize efficient-lighting manufacturer and various
   rebate programs for efficient lighting products, targeting consumers with different income levels
•	 Organizing training sessions and study tours abroad for product engineers and managers

The program included three pilot projects-in Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangdong-and succeeded in training
400 engineers and managers on CGLP policies and measures, product certification, quality standards,
and the design and implementation of pilot projects.4

Witnessing the CGLP’s early implementation stage success and realizing the market growth potential,
the Chinese government took further steps by implementing MEPS for fluorescent lamp ballasts and
compact and linear fluorescent lamps in 1999 and 2003, respectively.5

In 2004, the CGLP was identified as one of the 10 key energy-saving projects in China’s Medium- and
Long-Term Plan for Energy Conservation. China also launched financial incentives in 2008 that provided
a 50 percent and 30 percent subsidy for household and bulk users, respectively,6 to realize the goal of
converting 80 percent of installed lamps to efficient technologies.7 The program led to a record sale of 1.3
billion efficient lamps (subsidized) in 2008, which is a 250 percent increase over the previous year (Figure
2.9). An estimated 8.8 billion KWh electricity savings and 8.8 MtCO2 reduction were achieved annually
with these efficient lamps installed compared to the business-as-usual scenario.




1
 	 Data sourced on Sept 15, 2016 from Euro monitor 2014 at http://www.euromonitor.com/
2
  	 Xu, T., T. Ma, C. Zhou, and Y. Zhou 2014. “Characterizing Spatio-Temporal Dynamics of Urbanization in China Using Time Series of DMSP/OLS Night Light
    Data.” Remote Sensing 6 (8): 7708–7731.
3
  	 Min, G. F., E. Mills, and Q. Zhang. 1997. Energy Efficient Lighting in China: Problems and Prospects. Energy Policy 25 (1): 77–83.
4
  	 Zhuo, Wang. 2011. The lighting Industry Development in China. China Association of Lighting Industry.
5
  	 Tan, Q., Song, Q. and Li, J., 2015. The environmental performance of fluorescent lamps in China, assessed with the LCA method. The International Journal
    of Life Cycle Assessment, 20(6), pp.807-818.
6
  	 Yuan, Jiahai, Junjie Kang, Cong Yu, and Zhaoguang Hu. 2011. “Energy Conservation and Emissions Reduction in China: Progress and Prospective.”
    Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 15 (9): 4334-4347.
7
 	 National Ministry of Construction of China. 2006. The Implementation Guideline on City Green Lighting Project during the 11th Five Year Plan.



88
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




In 2010, the third phase of CGLP, the Phasing-Out of Incandescent Lamps and Energy Saving Lamps
Promotion (PILESLAMP) Project, was rolled out by the United Nations Development Program–Global
Environment Facility (UNDP-GEF) and the Chinese government collaboratively. The objective is “the
enhanced promotion and resulting higher utilization of energy-saving lamps (ESLs) in China through
the transformation of the local lighting products market and the phasing-out of incandescent lamp
production and sale.”1 The plans calls for saving 15,880–20,832 GWh of electricity annually 5 years
after the project’s end in late 2012, and 12,334–33,335 GWh annually 10 years after the project ends.
Cumulative CO2 saving will reach 80.3–90.0 Mt 5 years after the project ends and 174.7–237.4 Mt 10
years after the project ends (Table 2.5). The Industrial restructuring and upgrade within the lighting
industry in China constitutes a critical component of the project, it becomes the outcome, but also the
cause of such profound change.

     Table 2.5 Energy and CO2 Targets for PILESLAMP Project



                                                                   Project end        5 years after end                10 years after
      Indicator
                                                                   (late 2012)               of project                end of project
      Electricity savings
                                                                            4,011        15,880–20,832                12,334–33,335
      (GWh realized in each year)
      CO2 reductions
                                                                               4.4              17.3 – 22.9                13.5 – 36.6
      (Mt realized in each year)
      Cumulative CO2 savings (total Mt)                                        514              80.3–90.0                  174.7–237.4


    Source: UNEP/GEF2 2014.


Achievements
The green lighting program initiated in 1996 has accelerated the industry upgrade and improved the
average product quality substantially. The production ratio of energy-saving lamps to incandescent
lamps has witnessed a vigorous growth from 1:34 in 1996 to 1:1 in 2010.




    LED Lighting


Domestic sales volumes also shifted markedly from incandescent to energy-saving CFL and LED lamps
between 2005 and 2012. Energy-saving lamps comprised only 22 percent of the lamps sold in China in
2005, but about 45 percent in 2012 (See Figure 2.9).




1
 	 UNDP-GEF, and Government of China. 2008. “Phasing-Out of Incandescent Lamps & Energy Saving.” Lamps Promotion (PILESLAMP) Project (PIMS#
   4166).
2
 	 UNDP-GEF and Government of China. 2014. “Phasing-Out of Incandescent Lamps.”



                                                                                                                                              89
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                              Figure 2.9 Number of Lamps Sold in China by Type, 2005–12


                                         Incandescent lamps                               Tungsten halogen lamps                                  Energy saving lamps

                                        2.0

                                        1.8       1.8                   1.8

                                                                                            1.6                                                                                                    1.6                1.6
                                        1.6
                                                                                                                 1.5                                  1.5
                                        1.4                                                                                               1.4

                                                                                                                                                                  1.2
                                        1.2
                                                                                                                              1.1                                                     1.1                 1.1
                                                                                                                                                                              1.1
                                        1.0                                                              1.0
                                                                                                                                                0.9

                                                                                                                                                                        0.8                  0.8
                                        0.8
                                                                                    0.7           0.7                  0.7                                                                                      0.7
                                        0.6
                                                              0.5
                                        0.4

                                        0.2
                                                        N/A                   N/A
                                                    2005                  2006                2007                   2008                   2009                    2010                    2011               2012
       Source: China Auto Logistics Inc. (CALI), China Illuminating Engineering Society (CIES), and General Administration
       of Customs of China 2014.



Chinese exports of energy-saving lamps have also grown considerably. Figure 2.10 shows the number
of energy-saving lamps produced in China each year from 1996 to 2012 and what proportions were
consumed domestically and exported.

                              Figure 2.10 Annual Energy Saving Lamp Production and Export in China, 1996–2012 (billion lamps)

                                         Export                     Domestic use

                                            Billion
                                         4.5

                                         4.0
    Production of energy saving lamps




                                         3.5                                                                                                                                                             1.6      1.6
                                                                                                                                                                                      1.5          1.1
                                         3.0

                                         2.5                                                                                                                                    1.1
                                                                                                                                                                    1.0
                                         2.0                                                                                                                0.7


                                          1.5                                                                                                   0.5                                                3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.8      2.8
                                                                                                                                    0.3
                                          1.0                                                                                                                                  2.1    2.2
                                                                                                                        0.3                                         1.9
                                                                                                                                                            1.7
                                                                                                        0.3    0.3                              1.3
                                         0.5                                               0.2                                      1.1
                                                                         0.1        0.1                                 0.8
                                                    0.0        0.1                                  0.5        0.5
                                         0.0        0.1        0.1       0.1        0.2    0.3
                                                  1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

        Source: National Lighting Test Centre 2012.



China’s domestic energy efficiency policy has had spillover effects beyond its borders. Australia
harmonized its self-ballasted CFL product standards to allow it to align with China’s standards. This
reduced the cost of product testing in Australia, since China already has the world’s most stringent
MEPS and endorsement label energy performance levels for self-ballasted CFLs.1




	 National Appliance and Equipment Energy Efficiency Program. 2005. “Evaluation of MEPS and Endorsement Label Options for CFLs.” In Minimum Energy
1

  Performance Standards: Compact Fluorescent Lamps. https://www.scribd.com/doc/205975385/Australia-MEPS.



90
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




The energy efficiency S&L policies for lighting products in China also help to alleviate poverty and
improve industrial competitiveness. Overall, by 2010, it is estimated that the CGLP yielded savings of
18,715 million kWh per year, 7.5 MMt CO2 per year, and annual savings to the consumer of $172 million.1
As LED emerges strongly as the new favorite for lighting, China, along with a few other Asian countries, is
leading the market transition, driven by swift penetration of LED in general lighting.2

SPACE COOLING

Space cooling products include air conditioners (ACs) and cooling fans for residential use. Both AC and
cooling fan markets have been growing rapidly over the past decade (Figure 2.11). Cooling fans have a
larger market than AC in terms of units sold annually, but the overall energy consumption of ACs is much
higher than cooling fans. The massive electricity consumption from ACs presents a significant energy
saving and GHG reduction opportunity by setting more stringent S&L policies. It has been reported that
by adopting the best available technology on the market, ACs could save 369 TWh of electricity and
reduce 241 MMt of CO2 annually by year 2020.3

                     Figure 2.11 Annual Sales of Air Conditioners and Cooling Fans in India


                            Cooling fans                        Split air conditioners

                            Window air conditioners             Room air conditioners


                            400

                            350
    Sales (million units)




                            300

                            250

                            200

                            150

                            100

                            50

                                  2001     2002   2003   2004   2005    2006    2007     2008    2009      2010      2011     2012      2013      2014

      Source: Euromonitor International 2016.


The production of ACs, like other major home appliances, is concentrated in China, which was responsible
for about three-quarters of the nonducted ACs manufactured in 2015.4 However, in recent years many
other countries, particularly in the Asia Pacific region have emerged as production hubs and a significant
increase in AC production is observed in many countries (Figure 2.12). The difference is, in countries like
India, Brazil and Mexico, the production mostly stays to meet domestic demand, while almost half of
Chinese production, and nearly 90% of air conditioners manufactured in Thailand, the world’s second
manufacturer, are exported.5 The overall increase in AC production will likely to have a significant impact
on the global electricity demand.




1
 	 Hong, Liu, Adam Hinge, and Stuart Jeffcott. 2002. “China Green Lights: A National Programme with Global Repercussions.” Right Lights (5): 21 –215. http://
    www.eceee.org/library/conference_proceedings/RL5/session_10/liuhong.
2
 	 Baumgartner, T., F. Wunderlich, A. Jaunich, T, Sato, G. Bundy, N. Grießmann, and J. Hanebrink. 2012. “Lighting the Way: Perspectives on the Global Lighting
    Market.” London: McKinsey & Company.
3
  	 Shah, Nihar, Amol Phadke, and Paul Waide. 2013. Cooling the Planet: Opportunities for Deployment of Superefficient Room Air Conditioners. Berkeley,
    CA: SEAD.
4
  	 Includes window, portable, and split-packaged (minisplit) air conditioners, but not central (ducted) air conditioners.
5
  	 U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2013. Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS). https://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/data/2009/
    index.cfm?view=microdata. Calculated from Table HC7.1 Air Conditioning in U.S. Homes, by Housing Unit Type, 2009.



                                                                                                                                                          91
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     Figure 2.12 Global Production of Nonducted Air Conditioners

         2010             2015

                    Million units

          China

        Thailand
           Brazil
        Malaysia
          Japan

     Korea, Rep

       Indonesia

           India

       Argentina

         Turkey

                    0                 20                  40                   60                  80                 100                 120

    Source: Euromonitor International 2016.


Energy demand for space cooling is growing rapidly around the world. The rise in demand for is driven
mainly by rising incomes of households-especially in emerging economies such as India, Indonesia, and
Brazil and so forth. People have a natural preference for comfortable temperatures, and so there is a
natural demand for cooling products. Room ACs are becoming a more affordable product segment than
they were just five to six years ago, and they are increasingly within reach of the rising middle class.

Emerging economies such as India, Indonesia, and Brazil have a relatively low penetration of ACs, while
the developed economies such as the United States and the EU have a much more saturated market.
Around 87 percent of U.S. households have AC equipment1, while the penetration of ACs in India is still
below 5 percent2. However, ACs are among the most prevalent purchases for the growing middle class in
the emerging economies. For example, in India, room AC ownership and usage are increasing rapidly due
to growing income and increased cooling days per year. The Indian AC industry estimated sales of close
to 4 million new units in 2014.3 Similarly, “rapid economic development and urbanization in China has led
to increasingly significant sales of AC units over the last decade. The AC sales rose rapidly in 2010 and
2011 as a result of the various subsidy programs targeting ACs, but the annual sales fell back following
the phase-out of these incentive policies in 2012.”4

GLOBAL OVERVIEW OF CURRENT S&L SPACE COOLING POLICY

Space cooling makes up a significant portion of energy demand in warm climates and puts a lot of stress
on electricity grids at times of peak demand. Air conditioners have therefore been a priority product for
most S&L programs.

The first energy efficiency standards for space cooling came into effect in 1977 for central air
conditioning units in California. S&L policies are currently in place in nearly 40 countries to help mitigate
energy demand and encourage the uptake of more efficient technologies.




1
 	 U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2013. Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS). https://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/data/2009/
    index.cfm?view=microdata. Calculated from Table HC7.1 Air Conditioning in U.S. Homes, by Housing Unit Type, 2009.
2
 	 The Economic Times. 2015. Market penetration in India for ACs is still below 5 per cent, we can grow: Satish Jamdar, Blue Star. http://articles.
    economictimes.indiatimes.com/2015-07-29/news/64997120_1_satish-jamdar-cash-flow-blue-star
3
  	 Euromonitor, Indian Bureau of Energy Efficiency data.
4
 	 Li, Jayond, Yang Yu, and Steven Zeng. 2014. “2014 Market Analysis of China Energy Efficient Products.” Washington, DC: CLASP.



92
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                                  Figure 2.13 The Uptake of Space Cooling S&L Policies

                                            40                                                                                                         160

                                            35                                                                                                         140

                                            30                                                                                                         120
    Countries with a space cooling policy




                                            25                                                                                                         100




                                                                                                                                                             Cumulative policies
                                                                                      Countries with a policy
                                            20                                                                                                         80

                                            15                                                                                                         60

                                            10                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                        All cooling policies
                                             5                                                                                                         20

                                            0                                                                                                          0

                                                 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016

        Source: CLASP S&L Database 2016.



Residential room ACs are the most commonly regulated cooling product, but S&L policies are in place
for several other residential, commercial, and industrial product categories, including central ACs, chillers,
and packaged terminal ACs. (See Figure 2.13 for the growth in cooling S&L policies.) Standard split-
packaged (minisplit) air conditioners are among the most energy efficient options for room ACs and
dominate sales in most parts of the world, including Asia and Europe.1

Most countries reference the ISO 5151 testing procedure for packaged products and use the energy
efficiency ratio (EER) as a metric. A seasonal energy efficiency metric (SEER) is also adopted by several
economies. SEER is a better measure of part-load performance and accounts for variations in outdoor
air temperature. However, SEER values are not easily comparable between economies making it likely
that it will become more difficult to compare AC performance in the future.2

The demand for space cooling products is rising rapidly in emerging economies across the global South.
In many countries, first time consumers are faced with only poor choices-the most affordable products
are typically inefficient, low-quality imports or rebuilds found on secondary markets. There are, however,
many existing technologies that can significantly improve efficiency, such as nonvapor compression
technology, variable speed motors, thermal expansion valves, advanced compressors, and microchannel
heat exchangers.3 S&L programs can spur R&D and innovations, speeding the introduction of new cost-
effective technologies to meet the rise in global demand for cooling.

HISTORICAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSUMER PRICE TRENDS

Improvements in energy efficiency of products often result in an increase in their initial purchase costs.
However, the marginal cost of adopting energy efficient technologies decline over the time, and the
products become relatively less costly. As per the analysis conducted by the Lawrence Berkeley National
Lab (LBNL), in the United States, AC prices stayed flat despite a major MEPS revision (>20 percent) in
2006, as shown in Figure 2.14.




	 Shah, Phadke, and Waide. 2013. Cooling the Planet.
1

	 CLASP. 2013. Improving Global Comparability.
2

	 ASAP. 2013. Better Appliances: An Analysis of Performance Features and Price as Efficiency has Improved. Roslindale, MA: ASAP.
3




                                                                                                                                                                    93
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                                     Figure 2.14 The Relationship between Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio (SEER) and the Adjustable Consumer Price
                                     Index for ACs in the United States between 1990 and 2010

                                                   Price Index (1990=1, all ACs)         SEER US Central ACs ( Spit System)

                                                                     1992-2006 MEPS=10                                                           2006-2015 MEPS=13
                                                 1.10                                                                                                                    15


                                                                                                                                                                         14
                                                 1.00
    Adjusted Price Index (All ACs, 1990=1)




                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                 0.90
                                                                                                                                                                         12




                                                                                                                                                                              SEER (Btu/hr)
                                                 0.80                                                                                                                    11


                                                 0.70                                                                                                                    10

                                                                                                                                                                         9
                                                 0.60
                                                                                                                                                                         8

                                                 0.50
                                                                                                                                                                         7


                                                 0.40                                                                                                                    6
                                                        1990       1992       1994          1996   1998     2000        2002       2004      2006          2008   2010

        Source: Shah, Nihar, and Amol Phadke 2016.



In Japan, after introduction of the top runner program, AC prices dropped steadily despite rapid
efficiency gains. The relationship between cooling coefficient of performance (COP) and the consumer
price index between 1990 and 2010 is shown in Figure 2.15.

                                     Figure 2.15 The Relationship between Cooling Coefficient of Performance (COP) and the Consumer Price Index for
                                     Room ACs in Japan between 1990 and 20101

                                                   Price Index (1990=1)            Cooling COP
                                                 1.20                                                                                                                    7

                                                                                                                   1 Target Year
                                                                                                                   st
                                                                                                                                                     2 Target Year
                                                                                                                                                      nd


                                                                                                                                                                         6
    Consumer Price Index for Room ACs (1990=1)




                                                 1.00


                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                 0.80
                                                                                                                                                                                Cooling COP




                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                 0.60
                                                                                                                                                                         3

                                                 0.40
                                                                                                                                                                         2


                                                 0.20
                                                                                                                                                                         1


                                                 0.00                                                                                                                    0
                                                        1990                         1995                   2000                          2005                    2010



1
 	 Nihar Shah, Max Wei, Virginie Letschert and Amol Phadke. 2015. Benefits of Leapfrogging to Super-efficiency and Low Global Warming Potential
   Refrigerants in Air Conditioning. 36th Open-ended Working Group of the Parties to the
	 Montreal Protocol, Paris, France. http://conf.montreal-protocol.org/meeting/oewg/oewg-36/pubs/English/The%20Benefits%20of%20Leapfrogging%20
   Presentation.pdf



94
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




INDIA - S&L POLICIES FOR AIR CONDITIONERS

Manufacturer Impacts
In response to growing usage of AC units in the country, the Indian BEE launched a voluntary energy
efficiency S&L program for ACs in 2006, which became mandatory in 2010. The S&L program for ACs
enabled domestic manufacturers to better compete with global brand imports.

The room AC market in India is divided between two types of ACs: window units and split units.1 Their
rated cooling capacity is usually up to 11 kW. Annual sales of the two air conditioner types in India grew
with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 14 percent between 2006 and 2014, even faster than
GDP growth in India during this time. (India was one the fastest growing economies during the past
decade, with an average annual growth rate of around 7 percent).2 The annual sales of ACs in India
between 2006 and 2014 is shown in Figure 2.16. The market is estimated to be close to 4 million units in
2014, with a CAGR of 14 percent between 2006 and 2014.

A sudden growth between 2009 and 2010 might have also negatively affected sales the following
year. Many think this resulted from a bonus offered by the Indian government to central government
employees, which translated in higher appliance purchases in that period.

                               Figure 2.16 Room Air Conditioner Sales in India, 2006–14


                                         Total Market Size (million)

                                        4.50
                                        4.00
    Annual AC C sales (million units)




                                        3.50

                                        3.00

                                        2.50

                                        2.00

                                        1.50

                                        1.00

                                        0.50


                                               2005       2006         2007   2008   2009   2010     2011          2012          2013          2014



Sales of ACs in India are still significantly lower than in such countries as Japan and the United States,
which have annual sales of more than 6 million and 9 million units, respectively. Additionally, sales are
lower than in economies like China and Brazil that are expected to reach similar market sizes in the
coming years.3

In India, the ownership of ACs is estimated at between 4 to 5 percent. The market penetration potential
is still very large, and growth in the coming years is expected to rise. The AC market in India is dominated
by LG, Voltas, and Samsung. In 2005, LG had a 21 percent market share followed by domestic firm Voltas
and Samsung with 19.4 percent and 11.2 percent, respectively. Another domestic manufacturer, Godrej,
had a market share between 2 to 3 percent in 2005 and 2006. There were also some other smaller
domestic manufacturers, such as Gujral Aircon, with limited geographical coverage and annual sales in
the Indian market.4



1
 	 The term “window AC” describes a type of AC in which a single unit contains all the components of the air conditioning system. A split AC incorporates
    two separate units: an indoor unit and an outdoor unit.
2
 	 U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2014. India - International energy data and analysis. http://www.eia.gov/beta/international/analysis_includes/
    countries_long/India/india.pdf
3
  	 Shah, Phadke, and Waide. 2013. Cooling the Planet.
4
  	 Discussion with AC S&L expert in India.



                                                                                                                                                            95
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Policy Intervention
The Indian BEE launched a voluntary comparative labeling program for room ACs in 2006. The program
covers single-phase split and unitary (window) ACs of the vapor compression type for household use,
up to a rated cooling capacity of 11 kW, being manufactured in, imported to, or sold in India.1 The energy
efficiency of ACs is measured by the EER2 and then rated by the number of stars displayed on the energy
label. The label shows between one and five stars, with one star being the least efficient and five stars
being the most efficient.

In 2010, the S&L program was made mandatory for room ACs. BEE adopted a phase-wise approach
for ratcheting up of AC MEPS in every two years.3 The first revision took place in January 2012, with 8
percent improvement in MEPS and in every subsequent star level. Similar revision in MEPS occurred in
January 2014 and remained effective till December 2015. The EER values for MEPS and other star ratings
for split ACs between 2010 and 2015 are shown in Table 2.6.

     Table 2.6 Energy Performance Standard for Room ACs (Minisplit) in India



                              07 January 2010 to 31                       01 January 2012 to 31                       01 January 2014 to 31
                                 December 2011                               December 2013                               December 2015
                                                                                   EER (W/W)
     Star rating                        Min.                 Max.                   Min.                 Max.                   Min.                 Max.
     1 Star                               2.3                 2.49                    2.5                2.69                     2.7                2.89
     2 Star                               2.5                 2.69                    2.7                2.89                    2.9                 3.09
     3 Star                               2.7                 2.89                    2.9                3.09                     3.1                3.29
     4 Star                               2.9                3.09                      3.1               3.29                    3.3                 3.49
     5 Star                                3.1                                        3.3                                        3.5




S&L programs are typically designed help to consumers make better (more energy efficient) choices
by addressing information asymmetry problems. Labeling requirements for ACs made it easier for
consumers to know and compare the electricity consumption and energy performance of ACs. The
setting of MEPS prohibited sale of ACs whose energy efficiency ratio is lower than the one-star level.
Thus, consumers who might have been tempted to purchase a low-cost appliance with very low energy
efficiency were prevented from doing so.

After the AC S&L program’s implementation, Indian consumers became more aware of the product’s
energy efficiency. In a recent CLASP impact assessment study of BEE’s S&L program, urban consumers
ranked AC energy efficiency as their top priority while making a purchase decision. Also, over 90 percent
of the survey respondents were convinced that the higher star rated ACs will lead to electricity savings
and reduction in their monthly energy bill.

Since the beginning of the S&L program for ACs, the one- and three-star remained the dominate product
categories. However, sales of five-star ACs in India have significantly increased in recent years due to
increased consumer awareness. In 2014, the market share of five-star ACs was 21 percent compared
to 1 percent and 14 percent in 2008 and 2010, respectively. The market share of one- to five-star rated
products between 2008 and 2014 is shown in Figure 2.17.




1
 	 BEE (Indian Bureau of Energy Efficiency). 2013. Schedule – 3: Room Air Conditioners. Revision May 20, 2013. http://beestarlabel.com/Content/Files/
   Schedule3A-RAC9jun.pdf.
2
 	 The energy efficiency ratio (EER) is a ratio of the cooling capacity in watts to the electricity consumption in watts when measured at full load at a specific
   outdoor temperature (usually 95 degree Fahrenheit).
3
 	 BEE. “Schedule – 3.” Revision May 20, 2013.



96
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                Figure 2.17 Indian Market Share of AC Products Rated One to Five Stars, 2008–14


                        One Star     Two Star      Three Star       Four Star         Five Star

                       100%


                       80%
    Market Share (%)




                       60%


                       40%


                       20%




      Years                   2008         2009            2010             2011            2012              2013     2014
     Source: Saurabh Diddi, 2015.



The weighted average EER of the annual AC sales has also gone up significantly due to increased sales
of three- and five-star products and the rise in energy efficiency standards every two years since 2010.
In 2014, the weighted average EER was 3.17 compared to of 2.61 in 2007 when the S&L program for ACs
was introduced.1 This is an almost 18 percent average efficiency improvement in ACs in India over the
period of eight years.

The S&L program for ACs in India has also resulted in significant energy savings and GHG emissions
reductions. The BEE estimated cumulative electricity savings of over 42 billion kWh and avoided capacity
of over 5,000 MW in 2014 alone. The program resulted in over 30 million tons of GHG emissions
reductions in past eight years.

The Indian AC S&L program has helped some domestic manufacturers in competing with the global
brands such as LG Electronics and Samsung Electronics. Two domestic manufacturers, Voltas, a TATA
group company, and Godrej used a star-rated range of ACs as a marketing tool. In one advertisement,
Godrej claimed that its latest five-star air conditioner uses less power than a hair dryer.2 In a story
released by the TATA group in July 2013, Voltas mentioned that its research team realized that most
customers were concerned not just with an AC’s purchase cost but also with its operating cost.3
This finding led to a change in company’s manufacturing and marketing strategy. Voltas’s product
development team found that it could make ACs more energy efficient at a marginally higher cost.
Their marketing campaign then centered on energy efficiency and clearly communicated that an energy
efficient AC, though more expensive upfront, would help consumers save more money because of energy
savings during usage. One of the many print advertisements that Voltas used in its marketing campaign
is shown in Figure 2.18.




	 Presentation made by Saurabh Diddi.
1

	 “Godrej Energy Efficient AC.” 2012. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fc14G1UFhhs.
2

	 TATA. 2013. “Cooling Minds, Winning Hearts.” http://www.tata.com/company/articlesinside/DOQREdk8wHI=/TLYVr3YPkMU=.
3




                                                                                                                              97
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     Figure 2.18 Voltas Used Its Energy Efficient ACs as a Key Differentiator to Gain Market Share in India




98
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




In 2010, when India’s BEE made it mandatory to display an AC’s energy efficiency through the star
rating label, Voltas moved forward with its marketing campaign of “sensible cooling.” The campaign tried
to educate consumers about the energy-saving features of their ACs, such as sleep mode, eco-mode,
timer, and so forth. Voltas claimed that the campaign was very successful and market share improved
in 2010–11. In an interview to a business newspaper, Voltas’ president and chief operating officer said,
“We expect to continue with a double-digit growth this season with an assortment of energy efficient
products in split and window category.”1

Achievements
S&L programs affect not only consumers’ choice behavior but also manufacturers’ strategies in
designing and pricing products for the market place. An S&L program enables innovation and drives
competitiveness in the market. Energy efficiency labels can act as a differentiator and provide support
for domestic manufacturers to compete with global brands. This is especially true for ACs since Indian
consumers ranked energy efficiency as the top priority over brand in a recent S&L impact assessment
study commissioned by CLASP.

In India, the introduction of the BEE’s S&L program for ACs enabled some of the domestic manufacturers
to compete with global brands and spurred innovations. Voltas achieved the market leadership position
in 2012 with 19.4 percent market share, ahead of LG Electronics. Voltas was also the winner of Ministry
of Power’s National Energy Conservation Award in 2013, which recognized the company’s efforts to
promote and sell energy efficient ACs in India. The award is given annually to recognize those appliances,
equipment manufacturers, and energy-intensive industries that have made significant contributions to
effective utilization and conservation of energy.

Voltas’s success in Indian AC market arises from its leadership in room ACs across the country, coupled
with its industry leadership in five-star AC production in 2013. Voltas has remained the market leader in
the Indian AC market since 2012. The annual AC sales of leading brands (Voltas, LG, and Samsung) from
2005 to 2014 is shown in Figure 2.19.

                       Figure 2.19 Annual AC Sales of Leading Brands (Voltas, LG, and Samsung) between 2005 and 2015 in India

                                 LG
                                 Voltas
                                 Samsung

                               900,000

                               800,000
    Annual ACC sales (Units)




                               700,000

                               600,000

                               500,000

                               400,000

                               300,000

                               200,000

                               100,000


        Years                              2005   2006    2007      2008      2009      2010      2011      2012      2013       2014




In terms of CAGR, Voltas performed slightly better than the industry’s average. The AC industry CAGR
was about 14 percent between 2006 and 2014. Voltas achieved a 15 percent CAGR in that period.




	 “AC Makers Bet on Smaller Cities to Drive Growth This Summer.” Hindu Business Line, March 29, 2015.
1

	http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/companies/ac-makers-expect-smaller-cities-to-drive-growth-this-summer/article7045421.ece.



                                                                                                                                        99
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Another domestic AC manufacturer, Godrej, achieved a CAGR of 20 percent between 2006 and 2014.
In an interview with the Alliance for an Energy Efficient Economy, Godrej claimed to have strategically
invested in R&D for energy efficiency improvement of its products.1 Godrej claimed that some of its ACs
are designed in such a way that they will retain the five-star rating for two more rounds of policy updates
in upcoming years. Godrej is also the first brand in India to launch an AC with 3.7 EER, significantly better
than the five-star level in 2014, and it used climate-friendly, low global warming potential refrigerant.
Some of the Godrej’s AC models registered with BEE in the S&L database are shown in Figure 2.20.2

                                       Figure 2.20 Godrej’s AC Models Registered with BEE in Its S&L Database


                                                       One star             Five star           Godrej AC models
                                                 4
           Energy efficiency ratio (EER) (W/W)




                                                 3.8
                                                 3.6
                                                 3.4
                                                 3.2
                                                 3
                                                 2.8
                                                 2.6
                                                 2.4
                                                 2.2
                                                 2

                                                        2010             2011            2012             2013              2014            2015          2016


MAJOR HOME APPLIANCES

The global home appliances market has been growing fast since the turn of the twenty-first century. The
annual sales for major appliances such as refrigerators, washing machines and dishwashers all expanded
significantly over the past decade, despite the severe economic downturn of 2008 and 2009 (Figure 2.21).

                                       Figure 2.21 Annual Sales of Major Appliances Worldwide, 2001–14


                                                     Refrigerators              Automatic Washing             Automatic                Dishwashers
                                                                                Machines                      Tumble Dryers
                                       300


                                       250
    Sales (million units)




                                       150


                                       100


                                       50




                 Years                                   2001     2002   2003    2004   2005    2006   2007   2008   2009     2010   2011   2012   2013   2014

               Source: Euromonitor International 2015.


The rapid increase in the appliance market is due largely to the raising demand from emerging markets such
as Latin America and Asia Pacific regions. With the living standards and quality of life improving in these
regions, the global market for appliances is expected to continue to grow for the years to come (Figure 2.22).
	 NRDC. 2015. Expert Interview: Increase in Demand for ACs, Growth for Industry Likely in India. Last accessed on November 17, 2015. https://www.nrdc.
1

  org/experts/anjali-jaiswal/expert-interview-increase-demand-acs-growth-industry-likely-india
	 BEE. S&L Search and Compare Database. Last accessed on November 17, 2015. http://beestarlabel.com/SearchCompare/Searchandcompare.
2




100
                 A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                                                                                                            101




Washing Machine Drum
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




   Figure 2.22 Expected Appliance Market Growth, 2014–19




         Growth Volume (Measured in Total
         Number of Units Produced) (000) 14-19
         3,500-31,000

         1,000-3,499

         0,999

         <0

         Not Illustrated




 Source: Euromonitor International 2014.




102
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                                                                                           103
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




The production of major home appliances, like air conditioners, is concentrated in China, which was
responsible for more than half of the household dishwashers, laundry, and refrigeration appliances
produced worldwide in 2015. Figure 2.23 shows the total number of units of these appliances produced in
2010 and 2015 in each of the top 10 producing countries.

      Figure 2.23 Global Production of Home Appliances

          2010            2015

            China

    United States
           Mexico
           Turkey
             Brazil

             India

         Thailand

           Poland

       Korea, Rep.

        Indonesia

     Million units    0          20         40          60           80          100         120          140         160          180         200

    Source: Euromonitor International 2016.


Unavoidably the large global appliance market and its rapid growth rate have resulted in significant energy
consumption. However, huge energy saving opportunities are also available by adopting effective S&L policies.
The following examples demonstrate the scales of the energy consumption and savings potential from major
household appliances:

•	 Refrigerators
A report in 2012 estimated that the global electricity consumption of refrigerators and freezers was over
649 TWh, causing over 450 MMt CO2-equivalent GHG emission.1 However, if every time an old refrigerator or
freezer were to be replaced, the most energy efficient model was selected, a total of 240 TWh of electricity
and 159 million tons of CO2-equivalent per year can be saved by 2020.

•	 Washing machines
A report in 2012 estimated that the annual global electricity consumption of washing machines was 92 TWh,
causing over 62 MMt of CO2-equivalent GHG emission.2 However, if every time an old washing machine was
replaced, the most energy efficient model was selected, a total of 62 TWh of electricity per year can be saved
by 2020.

•	 Clothes dryers
Clothes dryers are responsible for approximately 6 percent of the residential electricity consumption in the
United States, which is equivalent to 60 TWh of electricity, 40 MMt of CO2, and US$9 billion of annual energy
bills.3 Potential savings could be had by switching to the highly efficient heat pump dryers, which use only
40–50 percent as much energy as conventional dryers.

•	 Dishwashers
Dishwashers consumed 26.4 TWh of electricity in the United States in 2014, equivalent to approximately 2
percent of the U.S. residential electricity consumption.4 It has been estimated that the U.S. dishwasher energy
efficiency standard could save 2.6 TWh of electricity and reduce 1.7 MMt CO2 emissions annually by 2025.5

1
 	 Barthel, Claus, and Thomas Götz. 2012a. “The Overall Worldwide Saving Potential from Domestic Refrigerators and Freezers.” retrieved on July 10th 2016
    from http://www.bigee.net/media/filer_public/2012/12/04/bigee_doc_2_refrigerators_freezers_worldwide_potential_20121130.pdf
2
 	 Barthel, Claus, and Thomas Götz. 2012b. “The Overall Worldwide Saving Potential from Domestic Washing Machines.” retrieved on July 10th 2016 from
3
  	 Denkenberger, Dave, Chris Calwell, Nathan Beck, et al. 2013. Analysis of Potential Energy Savings from Heat Pump Clothes Dryers in North America. http://
    clasp.ngo/~/media/Files/SLDocuments/2013/2013_Analysis-of-Potential-Energy-Savings-from-Heat-Pump-Clothes-Dryers-in-North-America.pdf
4
  	 U.S. Energy Information Administration. How is electricity used in U.S. homes? Accessed November. 24, 2015. https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.
    cfm?id=96&t=3
5
  	 ASAP. 2012. ASAP Fact Sheet: Dishwashers. Roslindale, MA: ASAP. Accessed November 24, 2015. http://www.appliance-standards.org/sites/default/files/
    Dishwasher_Fact_Sheet_May16.pdf.



104
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




GLOBAL OVERVIEW OF CURRENT S&L HOME APPLIANCE POLICY

S&L policies have been in use for nearly 40 years to reduce energy use in the residential sector. S&L
policies include voluntary labels, mandatory labels, and MEPS, complemented by tax incentives and state
or utility rebate programs. When a new S&L program is developed, the home refrigerator is generally one
of the first products to be regulated, because it is used continuously and is found in a large proportion of
households in most countries. The refrigerator is often cited as an example of how effective standards
can raise efficiency even as purchase prices fall. Other commonly regulated home appliances are those
used for laundry, cooking, and dishwashing.

Figure 2.24 shows that 40 countries have 301 S&L policies (195 for refrigerators, 79 for laundry
machines, and 27 dishwashers).

                Figure 2.24 The Uptake of Home Appliance S&L Policies

                       45                                                                                                         350

                       40
                                                                                                                                  300
                       35
                                                                                                                                  250
                       30
 Number of countries




                                                                                                                                        Number of policies
                       25                                                                                                         200
                                                        Countries with
                       20                               Home Appliance
                                                        Policies                                 Cumulative Home                  150
                       15                                                                        Appliance Policies
                                                                                                                                  100
                       10

                       5                                                                                                          50


    Years                   1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014

   Source: CLASP S&L Database 2015.


Usage patterns and household penetration for different home appliances varies greatly across
economies. The divergence can be explained largely by differences in household income, but cultural
preferences also have a strong relationship to the household penetration and usage of appliances. Figure
2.25 shows the projected growth for household ownership of refrigerator-freezers in China, Indonesia,
and the United States. The figure demonstrates the importance of putting standards in place for
home refrigeration appliances in emerging economies such as Indonesia, where the level of household
penetration currently is relatively low, to avoid locking in high energy consumption over products’
lifetimes.




                                                                                                                                        105
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




    Figure 2.25 Household Ownership of Refrigerator-Freezers in Three Countries


        United States                China              Indonesia

    120%


    100%


    80%


    60%


    40%


    20%




                         2009                                             2014                                                2019




HISTORICAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSUMER PRICE TRENDS

Various technological innovations have improved the efficiency of home appliances in recent years, due
to consumer preferences, competitive manufacturers, and energy efficiency standards. Refrigerators
can better regulate temperature because of electronic controls. Insulation has improved, including the
use of vacuum insulated panels, which improve efficiency while reducing the space needed for insulation,
leaving more room for food storage while keeping the refrigerator size. Variable speed compressors have
improved efficiency and reduced refrigerator noise.1 New dishwashers have soil sensors that adjust the
wash cycle to optimize the use of water and energy. More efficient jets use less energy, and improved
rack designs maximize cleaning.2 Moisture sensors in clothes dryers are becoming more common and
save energy by shutting the dryer off once it senses that the clothes are dry. The heat source for electric
dryers can be resistance or heat pump. The latter doubles efficiency but raises purchase price and
lengthens drying time.3 Most high-end clothes washers on the market are now front loading. These are
more energy and water efficient than top loaders while also having superior cleaning ability and being
gentler on clothes. Improved moisture removal features-for example, higher spin speeds-have also
reduced drying times.

Energy efficiencies of home appliances have improved dramatically over the past several decades. Figure
2.26 charts the improved efficiencies of major home appliances in the U.S. market. Average prices of
refrigerators declined while efficiency increased. When comparing the prices of two typical refrigerators
in 1979 and 2008 using average hourly salary rates as the basis for comparison, it was found that the
price of a typical 2008 model was only approximately one-third of a 1979 model, despite the fact that
the refrigerator in 2008 was almost three times more efficient than the refrigerator in 1981.




1
 	 Dols, Jeff, Brian Fortenbery, Micah Sweeney, and Frank Sharp. 2014. “Efficient Motor-Driven Appliances Using Embedded Adjustable-Speed Drives.” 2014
    ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings. Washington, DC: American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE).
2
 	 Energy Star. Product webpage for dishwashers. Accessed November 24, 2015. https://www.energystar.gov/products/appliances/dishwashers
3
  	 CLASP. 2013. Improving Global Comparability.



106
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                                      Figure 2.26 Increase in Household Appliance Energy Efficiency, 1980–2008


                                                     200%
                                                     180%
 Increase in household appliance



                                                     160%
                                                     140%
       energy efficiency (%)




                                                     120%
                                                     100%
                                                     80%
                                                     60%
                                                     40%
                                                     20%

                                                                 Room AC                   Freezer            Clothes Washer    Dishwasher            Refrigerator

      Source: Perry 2009.


A 2013 study showed that, over the past two decades in the United States, the energy consumption of
refrigerators decreased and the average adjusted volume (refrigerator volume + 1.63 times the freezer
volume) increased. At the same time, the average retail price dropped (Figure 2.27). The average energy
use of refrigerators decreased by more than 50 percent from 1987 to 2010. The average price of
refrigerators in 2010 was about $850, which is 35 percent lower than the price in 1987.

                                              Figure 2.27 Refrigerator Energy Use, Volume, and Retail Price, 1987–2010


                                                          Adjusted Volume (cu. ft.)                  Retail Price (2011$)      Energy Use (KWh/year)
 Energy Use (kWh/year) and Retail Price (2011$)




                                                  1,400                                                                                                               24




                                                                                                                                                                           Adjusted Volume (cu. ft.)
                                                  1,200
                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                     Price            Volume
                                                  1,000
                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                   800
                                                                  1990 Standard                                                          Energy Use                   12
                                                   600
                                                                           1993 Standard                                                                              8
                                                   400
                                                                                                          2001 Standard
                                                   200                                                                                                                 4

                                                     0                                                                                                                0

                                                          1985               1990                1995            2000          2005            2010            2015
      Source: Mauer et al. 2013.



Similar trends for refrigerators are observed in other countries. Figure 2.28 shows the rate of decline of
energy use for refrigerators in 11 European countries. On average the energy use declined at 5 percent
per year since the energy efficiency policies were enacted. Swedish trends generally followed the average
trend in Europe but had a faster decline rate at approximately 8 percent per year in 2011.




                                                                                                                                                                            107
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                             Figure 2.28 Annual Rate of Decline of Median, Feature-Adjusted Refrigerator Energy Use


                                        0.0%                                                                                                 Average

                                       -1.0%                                                                                                 Sweden
                                                                                                                                             Austria
                                       -2.0%
                                                                                                                                             Belgium
                                       -3.0%                                                                                                 France
    Annual Rate of Decline (%/year)




                                                                                                                                             Germany
                                       -4.0%
                                                                                                                                             Italy
                                       -5.0%                                                                                                 Netherlands

                                       -6.0%                                                                                                 Portugal
                                                                                                                                             Spain
                                       -7.0%
                                                                                                                                             Switzerland
                                      -8.0%                                                                                                  UK

                                      -9.0%

                                      -10.0%

                                               1995   1997   1999   2001     2003      2005      2007     2009        2011        2013

        Source: Enervee 2014.



In Australia the energy consumption of refrigerators declined at about 3 percent per annum from 1993 to
2008.1 Energy efficiency improved at approximately the same rate, resulting an overall 40 percent energy
reduction in parallel with a 20–50 percent price reduction. This demonstrates again that technology
improvements can deliver lower energy usage along with reduced purchase prices, with both parameters
falling rapidly over time.

Manufacturer Impacts
This section features three case studies related to home appliances. The first describes a tax credit policy
in the United States that stimulated domestic production of high-efficiency appliances. The second
describes how public policy in Switzerland created a market for high-efficiency clothes dryers, to the
benefit of European households and appliance manufactures alike. The third explores how efficiency
standards alignment leads to the export growth of refrigerators in Mexico.

THE UNITED STATES - MANUFACTURERS’ TAX CREDITS

S&L programs are often coupled with financial incentives to accelerate the uptake of high-efficiency
products. Financial incentives can be used to target various market actors, such as manufacturers,
distributors, or consumers. One of the best examples is the production tax credit in the United States,
which rewarded manufacturers for producing qualified high-efficiency appliances. It has been considered
one of the most successful incentive programs for spurring the adoption of high-efficiency appliances
that meet or exceed Energy Star requirements.2

The policy provided manufacturers per-unit tax credits to produce high-efficiency dishwashers, clothes
washers, and refrigerators. The products must be manufactured in the United States and must meet or
exceed the Energy Star requirements in order to qualify. The amount of the tax credit varied by efficiency
level. Another feature of this tax credit program is that it does not reward stagnation. For example, the
Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2010 limited the eligible production to only the excess of the average
number of appliances produced by the manufacturer during the preceding two-calendar-year period.3 If a
manufacturer wants to apply for tax credits, it must scale up its production of high-efficiency appliances
from the previous years, and only the increased portion of the production are eligible for the tax credit.


1
 	 Energy Efficient Strategies. 2010. Evaluation of Energy Efficiency Policy Measures for Household Refrigeration in Australia: An Assessment of Energy
   Savings since 1986. Equipment Energy Efficiency (E3 ) Report No. 2010/10.
2
 	 Nadel, S. 2012. “Energy Efficiency Tax Incentives in the Context of Tax Reform.” ACEEE Working Paper, Washington, DC: ACEEE.
3
 	 IRS (Internal Revenue Service). 2016. “Manufacturers' Energy Efficient Appliance Credit.” Page last updated February 9, 2016. https://www.irs.gov/
   Businesses/Corporations/Manufacturers'-Energy-Efficient-Appliance-Credit.



108
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




This incentive policy was first introduced in the Energy Policy Act of 2005. Only appliances manufactured
in the United States in the calendar years of 2006 and 2007 were eligible for the incentive. It was
extended as a part of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 and extended again by the Tax
Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2011. The latest extension
of the manufacturer’s tax credit incentive was from the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012. The tax
incentive covered the entire period of 2006 to 2013 through different phases. See Table 2.7.

     Table 2.7 Summary of U.S. Manufacturer’s Tax Credits



                                                                                        Tax Relief,
                                                                                        Unemployment
                                                       The Emergency                                               American
                        Energy Policy Act of                                            Insurance
                                                       Economic Stabilization                                      Taxpayer Relief
                        2005a                                                           Reauthorization,
                                                       Act of 2008b                                                Act of 2012d
                                                                                        and Job Creation
                                                                                        Act of 2010c
                                                                                                                   2011, 2012, or
     Eligible year      2006 or 2007                   2008, 2009, or 2010              2011
                                                                                                                   2013
                                                       • $75: Residential,
                                                       top-loading, MEF>1.72,
                                                       WF<8.0                           • $175: Top-loading,
                        • $100: Meets the
                                                       • $125: Residential, top-        MEF>2.2, WF<4.5
                        requirements of the
                                                       loading, MEF> 1.8; WF< 7.5       • $225: Top-loading,
     Clothes            Energy Star program
                                                       • $150: Residential or           MEF>2.4, WF<4.2            Same
     washers            which are in effect
                                                       commercial, MEF>2.0;             • $225: Front-
                        for clothes washers in
                                                       WF<6.0;                          loading, MEF>2.8,
                        2007.e
                                                       • $250: Residential or           WF<3.5
                                                       commercial, MEF>2.2;
                                                       WF<4.5
                        • $75: Consumes at             • $50: Consumes at least
                                                                                        • $150: Consumes at
                        least 15% less energy          20% less energy than the
                                                                                        least 30% less energy
                        than the 2001 energy           2001 energy conservation
                                                                                        than the 2001
                        conservation standards.        standards.
                                                                                        energy conservation
                        • $125: Consumes at            • $75: Consumes at least
                                                                                        standards.
                        least 20% less energy          35% less energy than the
     Refrigerators                                                                      • $200: Consumes      Same
                        than the 2001 energy           2001 energy conservation
                                                                                        at least 35% less
                        conservation standards         standards.
                                                                                        energy than the
                        $175: Consumes at              • $200: Consumes at
                                                                                        2001 energy
                        least 25% less energy          least 30% less energy
                                                                                        conservation
                        than the 2001 energy           than the 2001 energy
                                                                                        standards.
                        conservation standards.        conservation standards.
                                                                                • $25: <307 kWh per
                                                                                year and 5.0 gallons
                        • Meets the                                             per cycle
                                                       • $45: <324 kwh/year and
                        requirements of the                                     • $50: <295 kWh per
                                                       <5.8 gallons per cycle
     Dishwashers        Energy Star program                                     year and 4.25 gallons Same
                                                       • $75: <307 kwh/year and
                        which are in effect for                                 per cycle
                                                       <5.0 gallons per cycle
                        dishwashers in 2007.f                                   • $75: <280 kWh per
                                                                                year and 4 gallons
                                                                                per cycle




a.
   	 SEC. 1334. CREDIT FOR ENERGY EFFICIENT APPLIANCES. https://www.congress.gov/bill/109th-congress/house-bill/6/text;
b.
   	 SEC. 305. MODIFICATIONS OF ENERGY EFFICIENT APPLIANCE CREDIT FOR APPLIANCES PRODUCED AFTER 2007. https://www.congress.gov/
     bill/110th-congress/house-bill/1424/text;
c.	
     SEC. 709. ENERGY EFFICIENT APPLIANCE CREDIT. https://www.congress.gov/bill/111th-congress/house-bill/4853/text;
d.
   	 SEC. 409. EXTENSION OF CREDIT FOR ENERGY-EFFICIENT APPLIANCES. https://www.congress.gov/bill/112th-congress/house-bill/8/text;
e.
  	 Modified Energy Factor (MEF)>1.72, Water Consumption Factor (WF)<8.0; f. Energy factor 0.67.



                                                                                                                                      109
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Market Impact
The most direct market impact of the tax incentive was that market penetration of high-efficiency
appliances increased because the manufacturers were encouraged to produce more of them. After the
tax credit was extended in 2008, market data from the Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers
showed that the tax credit’s eligible products increased dramatically for all three product categories,
whereas the ineligible products decreased (Figure 2.29).

            Figure 2.29 Units Eligible for Appliance Manufacturers’ Tax Credit, 2008–9

                                Year 2008   Year 2009


                                  80.0%
 Percent of products eligible
       for tax credits




                                  60.0%



                                  40.0%



                                  20.0%




                                            Dishwashers            Clothes Washers         Refrigerators
   Source: Graph created with data from Gold and Nadel 2011.



The tax credits also helped increase Energy Star efficiency levels. At the beginning, when the market
shares of high-efficiency appliances were low, the tax incentive encouraged manufacturers to produce
more high-efficiency appliances and increase their market penetration. As efficient appliances market
share, new and more stringent requirements were employed for the new phase of the incentive program,
and consequently Energy Star efficiency requirements also improved.

Clothes washers demonstrate the effect of tax credits on the improvement of Energy Star efficiency
requirements. Before the introduction of the tax credits, it has been reported that only 153 out of
258 (59 percent) Energy Star clothes washer models available in 2005 could meet the tax incentive
requirement of 1.72 MEF. As the tax credits were introduced, 100 percent of the Energy Star clothes
washers could meet 1.72 MEF in 2007. Subsequently, this efficiency level became the minimum Energy
Star efficiency level in 2007.

Figure 2.30 illustrates how the energy efficiency levels of refrigerators and clothes washers improved over
time. From the improvement of Energy Star levels over time, it can be inferred that the average efficiency
on the market increased as well, largely due to the positive contribution from the tax incentives.




110
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




           Figure 2.30 Market Transformation of Refrigerators and Clothes Washers, 2000–15

           Refrigerator Energy Efficiency 2000-2015                                          Clothes Washer Energy Efficiency 2000-2015
             Standard     Energy Star     Minimum Tax Credit          Maximum Tax Credit                                       Standard-Top Loading    Standart-Front Loading      Energy Star
                                                                                                                               Minimum Tax Credit      Maximum Tax Credit
           800.0




                                                                                           Modifed Energy Factor (MEF)
           700.0                                                                                                         3

           600.0                                                                                                         2.5
kWh/year




           500.0
                                                                                                                         2
           400.0
                                                                                                                         1.5
           300.0

           200.0                                                                                                         1

           100.0                                                                                                         0.5


                   2000   2002     2004    2006    2008        2010      2012    2014                                            2000   2002   2004   2006   2008   2010    2012    2014   2016   2018


    Source: Gold and Nadel 2011.



This tax incentive program significantly shifted the U.S. appliance market toward higher efficiency
by encouraging the manufacturers to produce high-efficiency appliances. At the same time, the tax
incentive program helped the Energy Star program improve its energy efficiency requirements.

High cost is considered a major barrier for the market transformation of high-efficiency appliances.
Manufacturers are reluctant to produce high-efficiency products because these products are more
expensive and normally have a lower market share. Manufacturers may potentially lose their competitive
edge if they introduce high-efficiency products to the market when the market is not ready for them. It is
sometimes not economically beneficial for manufacturers to adopt energy efficiency measures.

The manufacturer tax credits successfully addressed the barrier of high cost by rewarding manufacturers
to produce high-efficiency products. Manufacturers reported that tax credit availability allowed them to
increase production of high-efficiency products earlier than they would have otherwise.1 In response to
this incentive, manufacturers have to plan and expand production lines for high-efficiency products, but
they do not have to bear high risks for production expansion. Once the production lines of high-efficiency
products are assembled or expanded, manufacturers are extremely resistant to backward reversions,
thus creating long-lasting energy saving effects.

The manufacturer tax credits also positively impacted the competitiveness of U.S. appliance
manufacturers by encouraging innovation. In order for manufacturers to meet the continuously tightened
requirements for the incentives, they needed to invest in innovations for high-efficiency products. The
availability of the tax credits can also offset some of the R&D investments.

Most important, the tax credits can translate into direct or indirect jobs for domestic manufacturers.
ACEEE estimated that over 40,000 were created due to manufacturer’s tax credits, including 19,000
direct jobs and 27,000 indirect jobs from supply chain and support service.2

Manufacturers improved energy efficiency by engaging in a combination of policies, including voluntary
labels (ENERGYSTAR), mandatory standards (MEPS), and tax incentives. The success of the tax credit
program was highlighted by a joint agreement entered by major appliance manufacturers and energy
efficiency advocates in 2010, in which all parties jointly proposed that the U.S. government extend
the manufacturer’s tax credits and improve energy efficiency standards. In response, the government
extended the incentive for another three years as a part of the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012. This
agreement is testimony to the success of the program, not only for its impacts on energy savings and
environmental benefits, but also for its positive influence on the competitiveness of the U.S. appliance
manufacturing industry.




	 Calabrese, David B. 2006. “Appliance Manufacturer’s Tax Credit.” PowerPoint presentation. Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers, Washington, DC.
1

  Accessed November 1, 2015. https://www.energystar.gov/ia/partners/downloads/meetings/EnergyBillPresentation_Calabrese_APM2006.pdf?442a-1e83.

	 ACEEE. 2010. “Major Home Appliance Efficiency Gains to Deliver Huge National Energy and Water Savings and Help to Jump Start the Smart Grid.”
2

  Washington, DC: ACEEE. Accessed November 1, 2015.
	http://aceee.org/press/2010/08/major-home-appliance-efficiency-gains-deliver-huge-national-energy-and-water-savings.


                                                                                                                                                                                                         111
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products



Tax Credits and Whirlpool
Whirlpool is one of the largest U.S. manufacturers for home appliances and one of the major beneficiaries
of the tax credits. The most direct impact of the credit on Whirlpool is financial. For example, in 2011
Whirlpool accumulated over $379 million in tax credits, which accounted for a significant source of
income (Figure 2.31).

            Figure 2.31 Whirlpool Yearly Tax Credits


                   Earnings before income tax (United States)             US government tax incentives including Energy Tax Credits

                  600

                  500

                  400

                  300
    USD Million




                  200

                  100

                   0
                        2003   2004   2005     2006       2007       2008         2009        2010        2011       2012       2013         2014
            -100

            -200

            -300

            -400

            -500



     Source: Graph created from Whirlpool SEC filings 10-K from 2003 to 2015.



Other direct or indirect benefits from the tax credits for Whirlpool were multifaceted. Bloomberg
reported in 2011 that Whirlpool’s profit was raised by the help of tax credits for making energy-efficient
appliances1. The same report also highlighted that Whirlpool planned to expand its business in emerging
markets such as Brazil, invest more than $600 million on research and development, and open a plant
and distribution center in Tennessee and a new headquarters in Michigan with a $1 billion investment.
Although the tax credit may not directly result in these major strategic investment plans, it definitely
made significant contributions to Whirlpool’s decisions.

Conclusion
The manufacturer tax credits successfully improved the market penetration of high-efficiency appliances
in the US while helping manufacturers to keep their competitive advantages by providing direct financial
incentives. The tax credits directly or indirectly helped manufacturers to expand their production of
high-efficiency appliances, spur innovation, increase R&D investment, and create or retain jobs in the US.
Moreover, the program was welcomed by energy efficiency advocates and appliance manufacturers alike.
It can be observed from this case study that financial incentives such as tax credits can be an effective
tool to complement standard and labeling policies, as it speeds up the market transformation towards
higher efficiency products.




	 Lauren Coleman-Lochner and Richard Rubin. 2011. Whirlpool’s First-Quarter Profit Rises, Aided by Tax Credits. Accessed November 1, 2015.
1

	http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2011-04-27/whirlpool-s-first-quarter-profit-rises-helped-by-u-s-energy-tax-credits



112
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products



SWITZERLAND - HEAT PUMP CLOTHES DRYER

The European residential clothes dryer market is undergoing a transformation driven by highly efficient
heat pump dryer technology. Incentivized by government technology procurement programs, the
first heat pump dryer hit the market in 1997. Its energy efficiency level is a drastic improvement over
conventional tumble dryers.

The then new product was commercialized, facilitated by the Swiss rebate program and the Top ten
program.1 The effects of these programs have been felt not only in Switzerland; they have played a pivotal
role in pushing the wider European clothes dryer market towards high efficiency.

Background
The tumble dryer is one of the largest energy-consuming home appliances, accounting for 12 percent
of the total electricity consumed in a Swiss household. Currently, the major markets for tumble dryers
are distributed across North America and the EU, while data shows the demand from Asia and other
developing countries is rising.

In spite of the high-efficiency performances, the market share of heat pump dryers was less than 2
percent in Switzerland in 2004 due to appliance’s comparatively high cost and the low awareness among
the consumers about its energy-saving capability.

In the 1990s the use of tumble dryers was on the rise in Europe. Replacing line drying with tumble drying
increased electricity demand. Switzerland knew that it would be difficult to meet this demand if all those
new dryers used conventional resistance heating technology.

Recognizing the market growth potential, as well as the country’s need to greatly expand power-
generating capacity should more dryers be installed, the Swiss government put in place a comprehensive
energy-saving scheme to encourage the adoption of the super-efficient heat pump dryer model. The
energy efficiency initiated is sustaining, is well coordinated among stakeholders, and was implemented
in a timely manner. In addition, the stringency of the S&L has increased over time, sending clear signals
to the manufacturers of their need for R&D engagement and creating a transparent, stable, and secure
market environment that favors high-quality (and high-efficiency) products.

Policy Interventions
An ambitious labeling program for dryers was implemented by the European Commission as early as
1995. The label categories ranged from “A” through “G,” with “A” class representing the most efficient
clothes dryers.2 However, no dryer models qualified for class “A” during the first few years of the program,
manufacturers were motivated to invest in bringing such products to the market to fill the efficiency gap.

The high risk during product development and the initial commercialization is one of the primary
reasons cited for inadequate investments of financial and intellectual capital in R&D. To overcome this,
the government of Switzerland launched the Sustainable Public (technology) Procurement program
in 2005, which encouraged manufacturers to engage in research and innovation for super-efficient
model development.3 The market demand side is warrantied and well-coordinated by the program,
and it helps the manufacturers focus the work within the company. The program brings together
product development and marketing functions on how an optimal product should be designed, given an
assumed price and market potential. It thus drastically reduces risks of manufacturers during product
commercialization.

As part of the market upgrade scheme, starting in 2003 the city of Zurich initiated laboratory tests of all
dryer models available on the Swiss market. Consumer satisfaction with the product in the everyday life
was analyzed. The consistently positive experiences with heat pump driers convinced the city to officially
favor heat pump driers. In 2005 Zurich instituted a rebate program promoting them. These products had
a wide national market introduction because of Zurich’s policy.



1
  	 The Top ten program, established in 2000 in Switzerland, is a consumer-oriented online search tool that integrates information disclosure, stakeholder
    engagement, and education to inform consumers of the best appliances in terms of efficiency in various categories of products.
2
 	 Eco-design and labeling, retrieved on Sept 10th, 2016 from http://www.eceee.org/Eco_design/Energy_labeling_directive
3
  	 UNEP. “Sustainable Public Procurement Programme.” Retrieved on November 11, 2015. http://www.unep.org/10yfp/Programmes/
    ProgrammeConsultationandCurrentStatus/Sustainablepublicprocurement/tabid/106267/Default.aspx.



                                                                                                                                                         113
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Taking advantage of the favorable situation, the Swiss government and its Federal Office of Energy
moved forward. They set labeling class “A” as the MEPS for laundry dryers from 2012 onward. As a result,
only heat pump tumble dryers and nonconventional dryers have been sold in Switzerland since that time.

In addition, the Top ten program was launched in 2000 to better disperse product information and
facilitate consumer education. The program certifies and labels the most efficient models on the market.
It helps improve their public visibility in coalition with manufacturers, the government, utilities, NGOs,
and energy agencies on both the national and international levels. It also provides technical expertise to
stakeholders in order to promote standards, subsidies, and procurement schemes.1 Since its inception, it
has been instrumental in all phases of Europe’s dryer market evolution through today.

Results
The European residential clothes dryer market is now undergoing a transformation driven by highly
efficient heat pump dryer technology. The market share of heat pump driers in Switzerland jumped from
1.7 percent in 2004 to 100 percent in 2012. The energy saved reached 11.5 TWh by 2030, compared the
scenario in which conventional dryers would have dominated in the market.2

The long-term efficiency scheme also benefits utilities, as large investment for extra capacity buildup is
avoided because of controlled demand.

The profound market transformation of dryers in the Swiss market is attributable to Swiss government’s
consistent and sustainable support, through technology procurement, information distribution, and
consumer education via the Top ten program,3 enhanced by the timely and stringent S&L polices.

The consistency and credibility of the government’s efforts can be a model for other efforts to bring
improved efficiency of products to market. See Figure 2.32.

      Figure 2.32 Clothes Dryer Sales in Switzerland by Energy Label Category


         A (old label)         B          C          D                                            Sales share of dries in Switzerland 2004-2012

      100%
                     1.7            4.4
                                                                                                                                                  Heat pump driers: Sales share 100%
                                                  5.9            7.4
                                                                                15.6
                                                                                              24.5
                                                                                                             31.9
      80%                                        26.6
                                                                                                                            47.4

                                                                 50
      60%
                                                                               52.9

                    94.2           90.4                                                        48                                           100
                                                                                                             48.4
      40%
                                                 66.8
                                                                                                                            44.2

      20%                                                        42

                                                                                31.1
                                                                                               27.1
                                                                                                             19.3
                                                                                                                             8.4
                    3.6             4.8           0.7            0.8
                  2004             2005         2006           2007           2008           2009           2010           2011           2012
    Source: Top ten.                                                                                      Swiss Energy Regulation for driers:
                                                                    Since January 2012, only heat pump driers allowed on the Swiss market
                                                               • Non – Efficient tumble driers are completely banned from the Swiss market
                                                                                                                 • Market share rose to 100%




1
  	 Top ten program, established in 2000 in Switzerland, is a consumer-oriented online search tool that integrates info disclosure, stakeholder engagement
    and education to inform consumers of the best appliances in terms of efficiency in various categories of products.
2
 	 Mylan, J., 2015. Understanding the diffusion of sustainable product-service systems: insights from the sociology of consumption and practice theory.
    Journal of Cleaner Production, 97, pp.13-20.
3
 	 Michel, A., Attali, S. and Bush, E., 2015. Energy efficiency of White Goods in Europe: monitoring the market with sales data.



114
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




A major appliance manufacturer in Europe, Electrolux, which won the heat pump dryer technology
procurement program, certainly benefited from this market transformation. Electrolux reports that
the company increased its production capacity with lower product costs as barriers during the initial
commercialization stage were overcome. Since entering the European market, heat pump dryers have
experienced steady market growth, continued efficiency improvements, and decreased costs.1

MEXICO - REGIONAL HARMONIZATION OF REFRIGERATOR STANDARDS

Mexico and the United States share a common market for many types of appliances, including domestic
refrigerators and air conditioners. The countries have a long history of standards alignment, and such
alignment on MEPS and test protocols for products has facilitated trade between the two countries.
Standards alignment also helped minimize manufacturers’ compliance costs.

In Mexico, refrigerators and air conditioners were among the first three products for which MEPS were
established. Since the beginning of the MEPS program, standards for refrigerators and air conditioners
were explicitly harmonized with the U.S. standards. A 2006 study conducted by LBNL found that
between 1995 and 2005 the harmonized refrigerator standard produced more GHG emissions reductions
than standards for other products in Mexico, about 20 Mt CO2e.2 The value of refrigerator exports from
Mexico has gone up nine fold, from US$401 million to about US$3.7 billion, between 2000 and 2014.3

This section evaluates the impacts of standard alignment with U.S. DOE’s standard on refrigerator
manufacturers and their market size in Mexico. Standards for refrigerators have been revised since first
implementation, so the analysis considers effects of both the original standard and the subsequent
revisions through 2012.




    Refrigerator Compressor


In 1989, Mexico founded the National Commission on Energy Savings (CONAE) and established a
program of MEPS (in Spanish, Normas Oficiales Mexicanas, or NOMs). In 1994, CONAE published
standards for three products: domestic refrigerators, air conditioners, and three-phase electric motors.

This first set of NOMs, NOM-072-SCFI-1994, for refrigerators was based on already implemented
U.S. DOE standard for refrigerators. The standard was aligned for both the energy consumption test
procedure and the energy efficiency tiers (energy consumption thresholds for rating the products). The
first revision to this standard happened in 1997, NOM-015-ENER-1997, and the second revision, NOM-
015-ENER-2002, took place in 2002. The standards and update schedule is shown in Table 2.8.

1
 	 EEDAL. 2015. “Heat Pump Tumble Dryers: Market Development in Europe and MEPS in Switzerland.” Retrieved on July 11th from http://www.topten.eu/
    uploads/File/EEDAL15_Eric_Bush_Heat_Pump_Tumble_Driers.pdf
2
 	 Sanchez, I., H. Pulido, M. A. McNeil, I. Turiel, and M. della Cava. 2007. “Assessment of the Impacts of Standards and Labeling Programs in Mexico (four
    products),” LBNL-62813. Berkeley, CA: LBNL.
3
  	 Impacts Evaluation of Appliance Energy Efficiency Standards in Mexico since 2000. http://www.superefficient.org/Research/PublicationLibrary/2015/
    Impacts%20Evaluation%20of%20Appliance%20Energy%20Efficiency%20Standards%20in%20Mexico%20since%202000



                                                                                                                                                             115
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




       Table 2.8 Mexican MEPS (NOMs) Schedule for Refrigerators and Freezers


         Standard                             Version                              Publication date                     Effective date
         NOM-072-SCFI-1994
         Energy efficiency
         of refrigerators and                 Original                             September 8, 1994                    January 1, 1995
         freezers: Limits, test
         methods, and labeling
         NOM-015-ENER-1997                    First revision                       July 11, 1997                        August 1, 1997
         NOM-015-ENER-2002 Second revision                                         January 13, 2003                     March 14, 2003

     Source: Sanchez et al. 2007.



In every revision, Mexico’s National Commission for the Efficient Use of Energy, CONUEE, explicitly
harmonized with the US DOE’s standard for refrigerators.

Achievements
The standards alignment minimized barriers to the import and export of domestic refrigerators between
the United States and Mexico. As noted, a study commissioned by Super-efficient Equipment and
Appliance Deployment (SEAD) initiative found that the trade value of refrigerator exports from Mexico
has risen nine fold, from US$401 million to about US$ 3.7 billion between 2000 and 2014. The SEAD
study also suggested that the standard alignment reduced energy consumption of the major refrigerator
product class by 27 percent and reduced GHG emissions by nearly 30 Mt over a period of 12 years.1

Mexico is one of the most competitive countries in the world in terms of manufacturing costs, which are
approximately 25 percent lower than in the United States.2 Mexico’s NOMs for refrigerators and their
subsequent alignment with the US standards enabled industry to make investments in energy efficiency
to upgrade technology and product manufacturing processes.

To understand the impact of refrigerator NOMs on Mexico’s export to the United States, the export-
import data from the UN COMTRADE database was analyzed for the period 2002–14. The data shows
a significant increase in refrigerators export from Mexico to the United States between 2002 and 2007.
There could be many factors that triggered this increase in exports, including the comparative advantage
that Mexico has because of its lower manufacturing costs. However, experts believe that the refrigerator
energy efficiency NOMs and their alignment with U.S. standards may have contributed. The import of
refrigerators from Mexico to the United States grew from 12 percent in 2002 to close to 46 percent of
the U.S. market in 2014, as shown in Figure 2.33.




1
    	 Abel Hernandez, director general, Asociacion Nacional de Normalizacion y Certificacion del Sector Electric (ANCE) (National Association for Standardization
      and Certification of Electrical Sector), in SEAD 2015.
2
    	 SEAD (Super-efficient Equipment and Appliance Deployment). 2015. Impacts Evaluation of Appliance Energy Efficiency Standards in Mexico since 2000.
      http://www.superefficient.org/Research/PublicationLibrary/2015/Impacts%20Evaluation%20of%20Appliance%20Energy%20Efficiency%20Standards%20
      in%20Mexico%20since%202000



116
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




              Figure 2.33 The Import of Refrigerators from Mexico to the United States, 2002–14


                        Rest of the US market    US import from Mexico

                    12


                    10


                    8
    Million units




                    6


                    4


                    2



                           2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009                      2010      2011   2012   2013   2014




The introduction of NOMs and their harmonization with the U.S. standard is also seen as positive for
encouraging innovations in manufacturing by those interviewed in the SEAD study. The certification
body in Mexico, National Association for Standardization and Certification of Electric Sector (ANCE),
noted, “Standards and regulations are essential for innovation, as they provide a solid base for product
improvement without sacrificing performance and with consideration of efficiency parameters that are
especially important in the current context.”1 Without aligned NOMs for refrigerators, the manufacturers
in Mexico may not have invested in the newer and energy efficient technologies for their domestic
market. The delay in adoption of energy efficient technologies for products would have resulted in loss of
energy savings that the country has achieved otherwise.

To conclude, the aligned NOMs in Mexico created a level playing field where manufacturers can compete
under similar conditions. This gave a clear signal to industry that investments to upgrade technology and
product manufacturing processes for energy efficiency are worthwhile. Such a policy signal may result in
technology changes, as manufacturers tend to improve products by including new components or more
efficient parts.




	 http://embamex.sre.gob.mx/kenia/images/stories/pdf/household_appliances.pdf
1




                                                                                                                              117
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT

The industrial sector is one of the most energy-demanding sectors in the world. It is a key setting for
global energy consumption reduction and GHG reduction. It has been reported that nearly a third of
the world’s energy consumption and 36 percent of CO2 emissions are attributable to manufacturing
industries.1 The U.S. Energy Information Administration has estimated that the industrial sector
accounted for 52 percent of the overall world energy consumption in 2010 and is expected to grow by an
average of 1.4 percent from 2010 to 2040.2 Among various types of industrial equipment, motors and
transformers play important roles in energy consumption and savings potential.

Motors are the single largest electricity-consuming equipment in the world. It is estimated that motors
in all sectors accounted for 43 to 46 percent of all global electricity consumption, accounting for 6,040
MMt of CO2 emissions.3 Fortunately, the huge electricity consumption of motors presents a significant
savings opportunity. Estimates show that by adopting the best practice MEPS for industrial electric
motors, 322 TWh of electricity can be saved annually by 2030, resulting in over 206 MMt of CO2
emission reduction.

Distribution transformers are a crucial part in the modern electricity delivery system. They convert
high voltage currents to low voltage for end use. The installed power capacity of the world’s distribution
transformer stock is estimated to reach 13,848 gigavolt-ampere (GVA) in 2014. It is projected to rise to
22,400 GVA by 2030.4 During the process of converting electricity from one voltage to another, a portion
of the electricity is lost by transformers. It is estimated that 657 TWh of electrical energy per annum is
attributable to distribution transformer losses. By adopting the available high-efficiency technologies,
a total savings of 402 TWh per annum could be achieved by 2030, resulting in over 201 MMt of CO2
emissions per annum.




    Electric Motors




1
 	 IEA-4E. 2007. Tracking Industrial Energy Efficiency and CO2 Emissions.
2
 	 U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2013 “International Energy Outlook 2013.” Washington, DC: EIA.
3
  	 Waide, Paul, and Conrad U. Brunner. 2011. “Energy-Efficiency Policy Opportunities for Electric Motor-Driven Systems.” International Energy Agency working
    paper
4
 	 Waide, Paul, and Michael Scholand. 2014. “PROPHET II: The Potential for Global Energy Savings from High-Efficiency Distribution Transformers.” Prepared
    for the European Copper Institute.



118
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




GLOBAL OVERVIEW OF CURRENT S&L INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT POLICY

The ways in which energy is used vary widely across the industrial sector. Thus the opportunities
for energy and GHG emissions savings and the strategies employed for finding and exploiting those
opportunities vary widely. Energy management systems are helpful tools across many industries, and
some governments have created policies and programs customized to specific industries. S&L policies
are a useful tool for equipment that is standardized and manufactured rather than custom designed and
built. Perhaps the two best examples are electric motors and distribution transformers. Electric motors
convert electrical energy to rotating mechanical energy to drive devices such as fans, pumps, blowers,
compressors, and conveyors. They are used in many types of facilities throughout the industrial sector.
Distribution transformers (or simply “transformers”) provide the final voltage transformation in the
electric power distribution system, stepping down the voltage used in distribution lines to the level used
by the customer.1

The first MEPS were introduced in Chinese Taipei in 1981 for motors and in 1997 in Mexico for
transformers. There are now about 80 policies in place in at least 25 economies for these electric
motors and transformers (Figure 2.34). For motors, most regulations target small or medium three-
phase motors, as these constitute a large portion of the global market. Motor efficiency has improved
significantly in the past 15 years through the use of more conductive materials, improved designs, and
effective policies. However, there are a lot of savings that remain on the table for motor system efficiency
(for example, for pumps, fan compressors, and other auxiliary components).

                   Figure 2.34 S&L Policies for Motors and Transformers

                           Motors     Transformers

                          60


                          50
    Cumulative Policies




                          40


                          30


                          20


                          10



                               1981 1983 1985 1987   1989   1991   1993   1995   1997   1999   2001   2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015

      Source: CLASP S&L Database 2015.


The international IEC 60034-30 standard for single-speed, three-phase induction motors establishes
efficiency classes (or tiers) that can be adopted to meet the needs of an economy. Prior to the
development of IEC 60034-30, there were effectively three test methods for electric motors used
around the world. These standards were promulgated by the International Electro-technical Commission
(IEC), National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA, in North America), and Japanese Industrial
Standards. The IEC decided to revise its standard to bring it into line with the approach used in North
America, which was generally regarded as technically superior but somewhat more expensive. With
significant international collaboration, the revised IEC test procedure was published in 2007. As part of
the standards development process, the IEC also created efficiency classes or tiers that can be used as
a ladder to help economies easily raise the stringency of standards. Tiers also make it easier to compare
stringency across economies.2



	 Waide, Paul, and Michael Scholand. 2014. “PROPHET II: The Potential for Global Energy Savings from High-Efficiency Distribution Transformers.” Prepared
1

  for the European Copper Institute.
	 Jenny Corry Smith, Debbie Karpay Weyl and Ari Reeves. 2015. “How and When to Increase Alignment of Appliance Policies.” EEDAL. Lucerne-Horw,
2

  Switzerland. August 2015



                                                                                                                                                      119
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




To further reduce trade barriers and help motor manufacturers to comply with different regulatory
schemes NEMA and IEC System of Conformity Assessment Schemes for Electro-technical Equipment
and Components (IECEE) are collaborating to create the Global Motor Labeling Program. This program
would develop a global MEPS registration process that would allow manufacturers to test products at a
globally recognized lab and obtain a test certificate accepted in all participating economies.

Most economies reference the IEC 60076 standard for power transformers for their regulatory programs.
The two major economies that deviate from this are the United States and Canada. Their standards are
consistent and are largely based on the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) standard,
which is similar to the IEC standard. There are differences in load points and ambient temperature for
tests, which could be aligned.1

HISTORICAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSUMER PRICE TRENDS

As they did for household appliances, energy efficiency policies helped industrial equipment such as
motors and transformers improve their efficiencies. Since 1998 when MEPS for motors were enforced
in the United States, the energy efficient motors started to gain market share (Figure 2.35). It can be
observed that the more efficient NEMA Premium (equivalent to IE3) motors steadily gaining market
share between 2001 and 2006 while the market share of less efficient Epact motors (equivalent to IE2)
declined over the same period.

                Figure 2.35 Market Share of Efficiency Classes in the United States, 2001–6


                            NEMA Premium           Epact             Other

                       70

                       60
    Percent of units




                       50

                       40

                       30

                       20

                       10


                               2001           2002                2003               2004     2005   2006
      Note: NEMA Premium equivalent to IE3; EPAct equivalent to IE2.
      Source: Boteler 2007.



The motor efficiency improvement was also observed in Europe. Under a voluntary agreement between
the European Committee of Manufacturers of Electrical Machines and Power Electronics (CEMEP) and
the European Union, the market share of more efficient of motors between 1.1 kW and 90 kW steadily
increased (Figure 2.36). The market share of less efficient Eff3 class motors decreased from 68 percent
in 1998 to 2 percent in 2007 while the combined market share of the more efficient Eff2 (equivalent to
IE1) and Eff1 (equivalent to IE2) motors increased from 32 percent in 1998 to 98 percent in 2007.




	 CLASP. 2013. Improving Global Comparability.
1




120
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




     Figure 2.36 Market Share of Efficiency Classes in Europe under the CEMEP Voluntary Agreement


         Eff3          Eff2=IE1           Eff1=IE2

      100%
                                                                                                           4            3             2
                                                                    16           10           8
      90%                                              16

      80%                                 43
                              53
      70%
                 68

      60%

                                                                    83                                     87          85            86
      50%                                                                        84           85
                                                       80
      40%

      30%                                 54

                              44
      20%
                 30
      10%
                                                                                               7           9            12           12
                 2            3            3            4           5             6
                1998        1999         2000         2001         2002        2003         2004         2005         2006         2007
    Source: Waide, Paul, and Conrad U. Brunner 2011.


The motor purchase price was very inelastic and would not affect the uptake of high-efficiency motors.
Hence the purchase price was less relevant for motors than energy efficiency. The initial purchase price
typically represented just 1 percent of the total cost of ownership, considering a 20th year service life.

Manufacturer Impacts
This section features two case studies related to industrial equipment. The first describes how the U.S.
DOE used a special process called negotiated rulemaking to develop new more stringent standards for
distribution transformers. The second explains how a major manufacturer leveraged a newly defined high-
efficiency level for electric motors to successfully differentiate its products from others on the market.

THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY AND NEGOTIATED RULEMAKING

Negotiated Rulemaking Process: Distribution Transformers in the United States
Policy makers have to ensure that S&L policies are ambitious enough so that energy saving objectives
and other related benefits can be maximized, but also realistic enough to enable the industry to meet the
policy requirements without being disadvantaged in the market. Stakeholder engagement is extremely
important in setting well-informed, ambitious, and balanced S&L policies. The importance of stakeholder
engagement in setting energy efficiency policies was long recognized by the U.S. DOE-seeking early input
from stakeholders is listed as the first objective in developing new or revising standards.1 The emphasis
on engagement and support from stakeholders was further highlighted when DOE introduced the
“negotiated rulemaking” process for the first time in setting the standards for distribution transformers.
This study examines how the negotiated rulemaking process was used by the US DOE in setting energy
efficiency standards.




	 U.S. DOE. 1996. “Energy Conservation Program for Consumer Products: Procedures for Consideration of New or Revised Energy Conservation Standards
1

  for Consumer Products.” Federal Register 61 (136): 36974.



                                                                                                                                                121
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Traditional versus Negotiated Rulemaking Processes
In a typical rulemaking process, DOE develops a proposed rule, using DOE staff and consultant resources.
DOE will publish the notice of the proposed rule, which will be open for public comments. Parties may
respond with information and data supporting their positions. DOE will then publish the final rule, taking
all viewpoints and arguments into consideration.

In recent years, negotiated rulemaking was used more and more regularly by DOE for setting energy
efficiency standards. Negotiated rulemaking was preferred was because stakeholders strongly
support the rulemaking effort while DOE believed that the negotiated rulemaking process would be
less adversarial and better suited to resolving complex technical issues. One of the key advantages of
negotiated rulemaking is that it encouraged dialogue and debate among stakeholders with different
viewpoints.

Unlike the traditional rulemaking process led by DOE, the negotiated rulemaking process was led
by an advisory committee comprising representation from different interested parties, including
manufacturers, raw material suppliers, utility companies, power companies, industry associations, energy
efficiency advocates, and so forth. The advisory committee engages in discussions and debate on the
key issues surrounding the energy efficiency standards. The goal of the negotiated rulemaking process is
for different interest parties to reach a consensus, and the advisory committee presents the proposed
rule to DOE for approval.

Negotiated Rulemaking for Distribution Transformers
Distribution transformers are one of the most important and widely used types of industrial equipment.
They reduce high voltage electric current from power lines to lower voltages for end-use equipment,
such as lighting, appliances, or other electricity-driven equipment. In early 2013, DOE published a final
rule amending the standards for liquid-immersed, medium-voltage dry-type and low-voltage dry-type
distribution transformers1. Suppliers must comply with these amended standards beginning January
1, 2016. This is the first time that negotiated rulemaking process was used by DOE in setting energy
efficiency standards.

A subcommittee of stakeholders was established to negotiate the rules for transformers. More than
10 subcommittee meetings were held during the rulemaking process. The high degree of involvement
of stakeholders allowed constructive argument, an exchange of viewpoints, and sharing of technical
data. However, due to the vast difference in opinions surrounding several key issues, including the use of
amorphous core steel and the impact on small manufacturers, the subcommittee was unable to reach
consensus. Subsequently, DOE had to revert to its traditional rulemaking process. Despite the fact that
no consensus was reached, data and arguments from the negotiation were extremely valuable and all
participants came to understand the diverse viewpoints2.

Although stakeholders were unable to agree on the distribution transformers standards, the negotiated
rulemaking process was still used more regularly by DOE in setting energy efficiency standards. It allowed
more thorough and effective discussion on complex technical issues among different parties. A good
example was the recent negotiated rulemaking for package air conditioning and heating equipment
and commercial warm air furnaces. Seventeen stakeholders, including representatives of individual
manufacturers, installers, utilities, environmental groups, and efficiency organizations, were able to reach
to a consensus on efficiency standards. The end result was a massive saving of 1.7 trillion kWh over 30
years, representing the largest energy and pollution savings of any rule ever issued by DOE3.

Conclusion
As demonstrated in this case, the stakeholder-led negotiated rulemaking process enables more debates
and discussions surrounding key issues of the policy in comparison to the traditional government-led
rulemaking process. The final policies developed using this process will likely receive support from all
parties, as consensus has already been reached. Although in the case of distribution transformers
consensus could not be reached, the arguments and technical data presented during the negotiation
process were still extremely valuable for policy makers to develop well-informed and balanced energy
efficiency policies.
1
 	 Energy Conservation Program: Energy Conservation Standards for Distribution Transformers; Final Rule. Federal Register 78 FR 23335.
2
 	 Scholand, Michael. 2013. “US Department of Energy Adopts Higher Efficiency Standards for Distribution Transformers.” Presentation at International
   Energy Efficient Transformers Workshop, Bangkok, 13 November 2013.
3
 	 ASAP. 2015a. “Manufacturers, Efficiency Groups Praise Largest Energy-Savings Standards Ever Issued.” Roslindale, MA: ASAP. Accessed April 4, 2016.
   http://www.appliance-standards.org/documents/asap-press-releases/manufacturers-efficiency-groups-praise-largest-energy-savings-standard.



122
                 A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




                                                                                                            123




Electric Motor
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




SIEMENS AND NEW ELECTRIC MOTORS

In the most recent IEC standards for motors, IEC 60034-30-1:2014, a new efficiency class-IE4 Super
Premium Efficiency-was introduced. The IE4 class is more efficient that the previous most efficient
class of IE3. Siemens, which held the second largest global low-voltage electric motor market share
of 9.5 percent (by revenue) in 2013,1 quickly responded to the change in standards by leveraging its
existing research and development capacity and quickly developed super-efficient products that meet
IE4 requirements, despite the fact that IE4 efficiency is not required by the current EU regulation. At the
moment, IE4 efficiency products are already available in many of Siemens’ product lines. For example, IE4
models have been introduced to Siemens’ general purpose motors family (SIMOTICS GP) and severe duty
motors (SIMOTICS SD) family-two of Siemens’ flagship motor product lines.

By investing in the development of the IE4 products that exceed requirements of current EU regulations,
Siemens was well-prepared for any future S&L policy updates and at the same time maintained its
position as the leader of high-quality and high-efficiency motor manufacturers.

Moreover, an emerging market for IE4 motors is being created in light of the newly introduced IE4
class. The global market for IE4 motors is expanding at double-digit rates and is expected to increase
from US$115 million in 2013 to almost US$300 million in 2018-almost tripling its size in five-years. By
investing in IE4 development at early stages, Siemens aims to take a leadership position in this new
market.

Standard and labeling policies allow product differentiation by efficiency levels, which allows
manufacturers to use efficiency and cost savings as a primary selling point when marketing their
products. Many manufacturers, including Siemens, took such opportunities to reeducate the market
about the misconceptions of energy efficiency and to help clients focus on the real challenge behind
motors: lifecycle costs versus procurement costs. Energy efficiency and energy cost are highlighted as
key messages and selling points in Siemens’ marketing materials (Figure 2.37).1

      Figure 2.37 Marketing Materials from Siemens Presenting New, Efficient Motors




    Contrary to common misconceptions, Siemens has proven that manufacturers can benefit from S&L policies if they are adaptive, innovative, and
    well-prepared for the policy change.




	 Mark Meza. 2014. “Industrial LV Motors & Drives: A Global Market Update.” Presentation at Motor and Drive Systems 2014.
1




124
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PROMOTING COMPETITIVENESS WITH S&L

Governments and the private sector have numerous opportunities to collaborate and drive down the
emissions of manufactured goods. Standards and labeling policies are drivers of energy efficiency
improvement, and they have been adopted by governments around the world. These policies are typically
designed to achieve energy savings, peak demand reductions, GHG emissions reductions, and energy
cost savings, or some combination of these.

Energy efficiency policies can benefit manufacturers as well as consumers. Part 2 of this study
presented cases in which S&L regulations, sometimes in combination with complementary policies, not
only achieved reductions in energy use and GHG emissions but strengthened domestic manufacturing
industries.

The following recommendations will help policy makers design S&L policies and help manufacturers
respond to or engage with those policies. The goal is to achieve energy and climate objectives and
enhance industrial competitiveness. Readers seeking detailed guidance will find the S&L Guidebook
helpful,1 with thorough information on developing, implementing, enforcing, and monitoring energy
efficiency labeling and standards programs.

Engage manufacturers in the S&L policy setting process so that better decisions can be made.
Governments can realize the dual benefits of energy savings and industrial competitiveness, but they
cannot do it alone. To succeed, governments must engage industry in the standards-development
process and help manufacturers thrive in the new environment. The highly participatory rulemaking
processes used in the United States can serve as models. Through dialogue, policy makers can learn
what manufacturers need to succeed-access to technical assistance, test laboratories, or loan facilities,
for example. Similarly, manufacturers can better understand what policy makers are trying to achieve
and how quickly and then use this knowledge to plan accordingly. Although in some cases consensus
cannot be reached by all stakeholders, the data and arguments used during the negotiation process are
still valuable for policy makers as they make balanced decisions that can achieve energy savings and
preserve the competitiveness of the industry at the same time.

Design market-sensitive incentive polices that allow the manufacturers to adjust and adapt to the
new S&Ls. S&L policy designs should include incentive policies. They are effective in creating demand for
high-efficiency products, and they help manufacturers adapt to new S&L policies. The U.S. production
tax credit program was used to complement the U.S. Energy Star labeling program. The program helped
move the U.S. appliance market toward higher efficiency and it improved domestic manufacturers’
competitiveness by rewarding them with tax credits for their investment in producing high-efficiency
products. Similarly, by using a wide range of incentive policies such as a government procurement
program and a rebate program, the Swiss government helped appliances manufacturers in Switzerland
create a new market for the highly efficient heat pump clothes dryers.

Make S&L part of the national strategy to lower trade barriers and strengthen the competitiveness
of industries in foreign markets. Alignment of S&L policies can lead to export growth. Mexico’s
refrigerator programs and China’s lighting policies highlight this. In both cases, S&L policies were
strengthened to align with those in major foreign markets. Domestic manufacturers’ incentives meshed
with energy efficiency goals.

Conduct ex ante and ex post analyses of appliance S&L policies. Policy makers should consider
impacts on manufacturers among the various impacts examined when considering a policy for adoption.
They should also seek to determine what impacts actually result from the policies they implement.
Doing so can help build political support for S&L policies and improve the accuracy and credibility of the
forecasts used to justify future policies.

Part 2 of the publication presents a number of cases in which manufacturers and governments have
successfully progressed down a greener path to competitiveness. They have used public policy to
improve the energy efficiency of some of the most common products found in homes and businesses
and strengthen industrial competitiveness at the same time. There are no guarantees that these results
will be replicated in any given situation. However, by following the recommendations presented herein,
policy makers can improve their chances of obtaining favorable results.
	 Wiel. S., J. E. McMahon, et al. 2005. S&L Guidebook. CLASP. Available at http://clasp.ngo/en/Resources/Resources/StandardsLabelsGuidebook.
1




                                                                                                                                               125
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




REFERENCES

ACEEE. 2010. Major Home Appliance Efficiency Gains to Deliver Huge National Energy and Water Savings
and Help to Jump Start the Smart Grid. Washington, DC: ACEEE. http://aceee.org/press/2010/08/major-
home-appliance-efficiency-gains-deliver-huge-national-energy-and-water-savings.

Aluminium Leader. 2015. “All about Aluminium.” http://www.aluminiumleader.com/about_aluminium/.

Ambec, S., and P. Barla. 2006. “Can Environmental Regulations Be Good for Business? An Assessment of
the Porter Hypothesis.” Energy Studies Review 14 (2): 42.

Arens, M., E. Worrell, E., and J. Schleich., J., 2012. “Energy Intensity Development of the German Iron and
Steel Industry between 1991 and 2007.” Energy 45 (1): 786–797. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0360544212005427http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544212005427.

Arouri, M. E. H., G. M. Caporale, C. Rault, R. Sova, and A. Sova. 2012. “Environmental regulation and
competitiveness: Evidence from Romania.” Ecological Economics 81: 130–139.

ASAP (Appliance Standards Awareness Program). 2012. ASAP Fact Sheet: Dishwashers. Roslindale, MA:
ASAP. http://www.appliance-standards.org/sites/default/files/Dishwasher_Fact_Sheet_May16.pdf.

---. 2013. Better Appliances: An Analysis of Performance Features and Price as Efficiency has Improved.
Roslindale, MA: ASAP. http://www.appliance-standards.org/sites/default/files/Better_Appliances_Report.
pdf.

---. 2015a. Manufacturers, Efficiency Groups Praise Largest Energy-Savings Standards Ever Issued.
Roslindale, MA: ASAP. http://www.appliance-standards.org/documents/asap-press-releases/
manufacturers-efficiency-groups-praise-largest-energy-savings-standard.

---. 2015b. Progress toward 3 Billion MT CO2 Reduction. Roslindale, MA: ASAP. http://www.appliance-
standards.org/sites/default/files/Progress_toward_3_billion_CO2_reduction_1.pdf.

Barthel, Claus, and Thomas Götz. 2012a. The Overall Worldwide Saving Potential from Domestic
Refrigerators and Freezers. Wuppertal, Germany: BigEE. http://www.bigee.net/media/filer_
public/2012/12/04/bigee_doc_2_refrigerators_freezers_worldwide_potential_20121130.pdf.

---. 2012b. The Overall Worldwide Saving Potential from Domestic Washing Machines. Wuppertal,
Germany: BigEE. http://www.bigee.net/media/filer_public/2013/03/28/bigee_domestic_washing_
machines_worldwide_potential_20130328.pdf.

BEE (Indian Bureau of Energy Efficiency). 2013. “Schedule – 3: Room Air Conditioners.” Rev. May 20, 2013.
http://beestarlabel.com/Content/Files/Schedule3A-RAC9jun.pdf.

Bernauer, T., S. Engel, D. Kammerer, and J. Sejas Nogareda. 2007. “Explaining Green Innovation: Ten Years
after Porter’s Win-Win Proposition: How to Study the Effects of Regulation on Corporate Environmental
Innovation?” Politische Vierteljahresschrift 39: 323–341.

Boteler, R. 2007, “NEMA Premium Update.” Presentation at EEMODS 2007, June 10–15 June, Beijing,
cited in Waide and Brunner. 2011. “Energy-Efficiency Policy Opportunities for Electric Motor-Driven
Systems.”




126
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Bradburd, R. M., and D. R. Ross. 1989. “Can Small Firms Find and Defend Strategic Niches? A Test of the
Porter Hypothesis.” Review of Economics and Statistics 71(2): 258–262.

Brännlund, R. 2008. “Productivity and Environmental Regulations: A long run analysis of the Swedish
industry.” Umeå Economic Studies. No. 728. Sweden: Umeå University. http://www.jus.umu.se/
digitalAssets/8/8214_ues728.pdf.

Broberg, T., P. O. Marklund, E. Samakovlis, and H. Hammar. 2013. “Testing the Porter hypothesis: The
Effects of Environmental Investments on Efficiency in Swedish Industry.” Journal of Productivity Analysis
40 (1): 43–56.

Calabrese, David B. 2006. “Appliance Manufacturer’s Tax Credit.” PowerPoint presentation. Association of
Home Appliance Manufacturers, Washington, DC. https://www.energystar.gov/ia/partners/downloads/
meetings/EnergyBillPresentation_Calabrese_APM2006.pdf?442a-1e83.

Calel, R., and A. Dechezleprêtre. 2016. “Environmental Policy and Directed Technological Change: Evidence
from the European Carbon Market.” Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (1): 173–191.

Carayannis, E., and E. Grigoroudis. 2014. “Linking Innovation, Productivity, and Competitiveness:
Implications for Policy and Practice.” Journal of Technology Transfer 39 (2): 199–218.

Carbon Trust. 2010. “Tackling Carbon Leakage: Sector-specific solutions for a world of unequal carbon
prices.” https://www.carbontrust.com/media/84908/ctc767-tackling-carbon-leakage.pdf.

Cefic. 2014. “The European Chemical Industry: Facts and Figures 2014.” http://www.cefic.org/Documents/
FactsAndFigures/2014/Facts%20and%20Figures%202014%20-%20The%20Brochure.pdf.

---. 2015a. “Competitiveness of the European Chemical Industry.” http://www.cefic.org/Documents/
PolicyCentre/Reports-and-Brochure/Competitiveness-of-the-European-chemical-industry-2014.pdf.

---. 2015b. “Energy and Climate Change.” 2015. http://www.cefic.org/Policy-Centre/Energy--Climate-
Change/http://www.cefic.org/Policy-Centre/Energy--Climate-Change/.

Cefic and European Environmental Agency. 2014. “The European Chemical Industry: Facts and Figures
2014.”http://www.cefic.org/Documents/FactsAndFigures/2014/Facts%20and%20Figures%202014%20
-%20The%20Brochure.pdf.

Cembureau. 2014. “Activity Report, 2014”. Brussels: Cembureau. http://www.cembureau.eu/sites/default/
files/Activity%20Report%202014_website_1.pdfhttp://www.cembureau.eu/sites/default/files/Activity%20
Report%202014_website_1.pdf.

CFR (Code of Federal Regulations), Title 10, Part 202, Section 21. https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/granule/
CFR-2009-title10-vol3/CFR-2009-title10-vol3-sec202-21

Chalermthanakom, A., and K. Ueta. 2011. “Impact of Environmental Regulation on Productivity: Case
Studies of Three Industries in Japan.” Kyoto Economic Review 80 (2): 167–187.

CLASP. 2013. Improving Global Comparability. Washington, DC: CLASP. http://clasp.ngo/~/media/
Files/SLDocuments/2014/2014-09_Improving-Global-Comparability/Improving-Global-Comparability.
pdf?la=en




                                                                                                        127
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




CLASP S&L Database. http://www.clasp.ngo/Tools/Tools/SL_Search.

Climate Strategies. 2014. “Carbon Control and Competiveness Post 2020: The Cement Report. London:
Climate Strategies.” http://climatestrategies.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/climate-strategies-
cement-report-final.pdf.

ClimateTechWiki. 2015. “Energy Efficiency and Saving in the Cement Industry.” http://www.
climatetechwiki.org/technology/energy-saving-cement.

Costantini, V., and M. Mazzanti. 2012. “On the Green and Innovative Side of Trade Competitiveness? The
Impact of Environmental Policies and Innovation on EU Exports.” Research Policy 41 (1): 132–153.

De Backer, Koren, and Norihiko Yamano. 2012. International Comparative Evidence on Global Value
Chains. OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers, OECD, Paris. http://www.oecd-ilibrary.
org/science-and-technology/international-comparative-evidence-on-global-value-chains_5k9bb2vcwv5j-
en?crawler=true.

DECC and BIS (Department for Business, Innovation and Skills). 2015a. “Industrial Decarbonisation and
Energy Efficiency Roadmaps to 2050: Iron and Steel.” London: DECC and BIS.

---.2015b. “Industrial Decarbonisation & Energy Efficiency Roadmaps to 2050: Chemicals”. London: DECC
and BIS.

Dechezleprêtre, Antoine, and Misato Sato. 2014. The Impacts of Environmental Regulations on
Competitiveness. Policy brief, Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change, London, and Global
Green Growth Institute, Seoul. http://personal.lse.ac.uk/dechezle/Impacts_of_Environmental_Regulations.
pdf.

Delchet-Cochet, K., L.C. Vo, and H. Akeb. 2015. “From Compliance with Environmental Regulations to
Pursuit of Environmental-Based Competitive Advantages: Mediators of the Relationship in an SME
Context.” Journal of Applied Business Research 31 (3): 987–1004.

Deloitte Global.2016. “Highlights from the 2016 Global Manufacturing Competitiveness Index.”

Denkenberger, Dave, Chris Calwell, Nathan Beck, et al. 2013. Analysis of Potential Energy Savings from
Heat Pump Clothes Dryers in North America. Spokane, WA: Ecova, and Washington, DC: CLASP. http://
clasp.ngo/~/media/Files/SLDocuments/2013/2013_Analysis-of-Potential-Energy-Savings-from-Heat-
Pump-Clothes-Dryers-in-North-America.pdf.

Dols, Jeff, Brian Fortenbery, Micah Sweeney, and Frank Sharp. 2014. “Efficient Motor-Driven Appliances
Using Embedded Adjustable-Speed Drives.” Paper prepared for the 2014 ACEEE Summer Study on
Energy Efficiency in Buildings. Pacific Grove, CA. August 17- 22. http://aceee.org/files/proceedings/2014/
data/papers/9-886.pdf.

Doran, J., and G. Ryan. 2012. “Regulation and Firm Perception, Eco-Innovation and Firm Performance.”
European Journal of Innovation Management 15 (4): 421–441.

Dröge, Susanne, Harro van Asselt, Thomas Brewer, Michael Grubb, Roland Ismer, Yasuko Kameyama,
Michael Mehling et al. “Tackling leakage in a world of unequal carbon prices.” Climate strategies 1 (2009):
2-16.




128
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




EC (European Commission). 2014. “EU ETS Handbook”. Brussels: European Commission. http://ec.europa.
eu/clima/publications/docs/ets_handbook_en.pdf.

---. 2016. “Carbon Leakage.” http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets/cap/leakage/index_en.htm.

---. 2015. Savings and Benefits of Global Regulations for Energy Efficient Products: A ‘Cost of non-World’
Study. Brussels: European Commission. https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/Cost%20
of%20Non-World%20-%20Exec%20Summary.pdf.

Bush, Eric, Anette Michel, Francisco R. Zuloaga, Chris Granda, and Christopher Wold. 2015. “Heat Pump
Tumble Dryers: Market Development in Europe and MEPS in Switzerland.” Paper prepared for the 8th
International Conference on Energy Efficiency in Domestic Appliances and Lighting. Lucerne-Horw,
Switzerland, August 26-28. http://iet.jrc.ec.europa.eu/energyefficiency/sites/energyefficiency/files/
events/EEDAL15/S10_Standards3/eedal15_submission_58.pdf

E3 (Equipment Energy Efficiency Committee). 2005. Compact Fluorescent Lamps Assessment of
Minimum Energy Performance and Labelling Options. Canberra, Australia. Report No. 2005/12. http://
www.energyrating.gov.au/file/1317/download?token=Wwy-mrgK.

---. 2010. Evaluation of Energy Efficiency Policy Measures for Household Refrigeration in Australia: An
Assessment of Energy Savings since 1986. Canberra, Australia. E3 Report No. 2010/10.

---. 2014. Impacts of the E3 Program: Projected Energy, Cost and Emission Savings. Canberra, Australia.
http://www.energyrating.gov.au/file/1373/download?token=LCq4YJZr.

Energy Star. Dishwasher product website. https://www.energystar.gov/products/appliances/dishwashers

Ernst & Young. 2013. Global Steel 2013: A New World, a New Strategy. London: Ernst & Young. http://
www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/Global-Steel-Report-2013/$FILE/Global-Steel-Report-2013_
ER0046.pdf.

Euromonitor Database. https://www.euromonitor.com

Euromonitor. 2015. “Consumer Appliances 2015: New Insights and System Refresh.” http://www.portal.
euromonitor.com/portal/?NFjoyB299%2f%2ftRK3MlcDiBg%3d%3d

Fagerberg. 1996. “Technology and competitiveness”. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 12(3): 39-51.

Fridley, D., Nathaniel Aden, Nan Zhou, and Jiang Lin. 2007. Impacts of China’s Current Appliance
Standards and Labeling Program to 2020. Berkeley, CA: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. https://
eaei.lbl.gov/sites/all/files/lbl-62802-appliance-esl-2020march2007.pdf.

Ghisetti, C., and K. Rennings. 2013. “Environmental Innovations and Profitability: How Does It Pay to Be
Green? An Empirical Analysis on the German Innovation Survey.” ZEW-Centre for European Economic
Research Discussion Paper, 13-073.

Gold, Rachel, and Steven Nadel. 2011. Energy Efficiency Tax Incentives, 2005–2011: How Have They
Performed? ACEEE White Paper. Washington, DC: American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy.

Hasanbeigi, Ali, Lynn Price, and Nathaniel Aden. 2011. “A Comparison of Iron and Steel Production Energy
Use and Energy Intensity in China at the US.” Berkeley, CA: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
https://china.lbl.gov/sites/all/files/lbl-4836e-us-china-steeljune-2011.pdf.




                                                                                                          129
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Hong, Liu, Adam Hinge, and Stuart Jeffcott. 2002. “China Green Lights: A National Programme with
Global Repercussions.” Paper prepared for The Right Light 5 Conference. Nice, France, May 29-31. http://
www.eceee.org/library/conference_proceedings/RL5/session_10/liuhong.

ICCA (International Council of Chemical Associations (ICCA). 2013. “Chemical Industry Contributions to
Energy Efficiency and Mitigating Climate Change.” Brussels: ICCA. http://www.icca-chem.org/ICCADocs/
ICCA%20Roadmap%20Summary.pdf

IEA (International Energy Agency). 2012a. “CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion Highlights: Beyond 2020
Documentation.” IEA, Paris.

---. 2012b. “Energy Statistics of Non-OECD Countries.” IEA, Paris.

---. 2014. “Capturing the Multiple Benefits of Energy Efficiency.” IEA, Paris. http://www.iea.org/
publications/freepublications/publication/Captur_the_MultiplBenef_ofEnergyEficiency.pdf.

---.2014. “Energy Technology Perspectives 2014. ” http://www.iea.org/etp/etp2014/

---. 2015a. Energy Efficiency Market Report 2015. IEA, Paris.
https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/
MediumTermEnergyefficiencyMarketReport2015.pdf.

---. 2015b. “Energy Technology Perspectives 2015.” OECD Publishing, Paris.

---. 2016. “Decoupling of Global Emissions and Economic Growth Confirmed,” IEA, Paris. https://www.iea.
org/newsroomandevents/pressreleases/2016/march/decoupling-of-global-emissions-and-economic-
growth-confirmed.html.

IEA-4E (IEA Technology Collaboration Programme on Energy Efficient End-Use Equipment). 2007.
Tracking Industrial Energy Efficiency and CO2 Emissions. Paris: IEA. https://www.iea.org/publications/
freepublications/publication/tracking_emissions.pdf.

---. 2015. Achievements of Appliance Energy Efficiency Standards and Labelling Programs: A Global
Assessment. Paris: IEA-4E https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/4E_S_L_
Report_180915.pdf.

IETD (Industrial Efficiency Technology Database (IETD). 2015: “Iron and Steel.” http://ietd.iipnetwork.org/
content/iron-and-steelhttp://ietd.iipnetwork.org/content/iron-and-steel.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2015. “Commodity Special Feature from World Economic Outlook,
IMF.” Washington, DC. http://www.imf.org/external/np/res/commod/pdf/WEOSpecialOCT15.pdf.

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2005. IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide
Capture and Storage, Prepared by Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Metz, B., O. Davidson, H. C. de Coninck, M. Loos, and L. A. Meyer (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press.
https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-reports/srccs/srccs_wholereport.pdf.

---.2006. 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Prepared by the National
Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme, Eggleston H.S., Buendia L., Miwa K., Ngara T. and Tanabe K.
(eds). Published: IGES, Japan.




130
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




---. 2014. Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O., R. Pichs-
Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier,
B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlömer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.IRS.

IRS (Internal Revenue Service) 2016. “Manufacturers’ Energy Efficient Appliance Credit.” https://www.irs.
gov/Businesses/Corporations/Manufacturers’-Energy-Efficient-Appliance-Credit.

Kelly, T. D., and G. R. Matos. 2013. Historical Statistics for Mineral and Material Commodities in the United
States. US Geological Survey (USGS) Data Series 140, USGS, Washington, DC. http://minerals.usgs.gov/
ds/2005/140/.

Kemna, R. 2014. Ecodesign Impact Accounting: Part 1-Status Nov. 2013. Delft, The Netherlands: Van
Holsteijn and Kemna.

Kossoy, Alexandre; Peszko, Grzegorz; Oppermann, Klaus; Prytz, Nicolai; Klein, Noemie; Blok, Kornelis;
Lam, Long; Wong, Lindee; Borkent, Bram. 2015. State and trends of carbon pricing 2015. Washington,
D.C: World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/09/25053834/state-trends-
carbon-pricing-2015

Lafarge. 2008. “Information on Lafarge,” chap. 3, 2007 annual report, Paris. http://www.lafarge.
com/04022008-Activities-Details_cement_business-en.pdf.

Lall, Sanjaya. 2001. “Competitiveness Indices and Developing Countries: An Economic Evaluation of the
Global Competitiveness Report.” World Development 29 (9): 1501–1525. http://biblioteca.fundacionicbc.
edu.ar/images/3/34/Politicas_2.pdf.

Law, S. 2001. “Competitiveness Indices and Developing Countries: An Economic Evaluation of the Global
Competitiveness Report.” World Development 29 (3): 1501-1525. http://biblioteca.fundacionicbc.edu.ar/
images/3/34/Politicas_2.pdf.

Li, Jayond, Yang Yu, and Steven Zeng. 2014. 2014 Market Analysis of China Energy Efficient Products.
Washington, DC: CLASP. http://clasp.ngo/~/media/Files/SLDocuments/2014/2014_11_Market_Analysis_
of_China_Energy_Efficient_Appliances_2014_Final.pdf.

Marcu, Andrei, Christian Egenhofer, Susanna Roth, and Wijnand Stoefs. 2016. Carbon Leakage: An
Overview. CEPS Special Report no. 79. Brussels: Centre for European Policy Studies. http://aei.pitt.
edu/46163/1/Special_Report_No_79_Carbon_Leakage.pdf.

Martin R, Muûls M, Wagner UJ. 2010. “Europe’s Emissions Trading Scheme: Tax Payers versus the
Industry Lobby”. No. 311. Centre for Economic Performance, LSE. http://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/
cp311.pdf

Mauer, Joanna, Andrew deLaski, Steven Nadel, Anthony Fryer, and Rachel Young. 2013. Better Appliances:
An Analysis of Performance, Features, and Price as Efficiency Has Improved. Report number A132.
Washington, DC: American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy. http://aceee.org/sites/default/files/
publications/researchreports/a132.pdf.




                                                                                                         131
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




McKinsey & Company. 2011. Lighting the Way: Perspectives on the Global Lighting Market. McKinsey &
Company, London.

---. 2012. Lighting the Way: Perspectives on the Global Lighting Market. Second Edition. McKinsey &
Company, London. https://www.mckinsey.de/files/Lighting_the_way_Perspectives_on_global_lighting_
market_2012.pdf.

McNeil, Michael, and Ana Maria Carreño. 2015. Impacts Evaluation of Appliance Energy Efficiency
Standards in Mexico since 2000. Washington DC: Super-efficient Equipment and Appliance Deployment
(SEAD). http://www.superefficient.org/Research/PublicationLibrary/2015/Impacts%20Evaluation%20
of%20Appliance%20Energy%20Efficiency%20Standards%20in%20Mexico%20since%202000.

Meza, Mark. 2014. “Industrial LV Motors & Drives: A Global Market Update.” Presentation at the Motor
and Drive Systems Conference. Orlando, Fla, January 29-30. http://www.e-driveonline.com/conferences/
wp-content/uploads/2014/01/IHSMMeza.pdf.

Min, G. F., E. Mills, and Q. Zhang. 1997. “Energy Efficient Lighting in China: Problems and Prospects.”
Energy Policy 25 (1): 77–83.

Ministry of Construction of the People’s Republic of China. 2006. The Implementation Guideline on City
Green Lighting Project during the 11th Five Year Plan. Beijing, China.

MPA Cement. 2013. “Novel Cements: Low Energy, Low-Carbon Cements,” MPA Cement Factsheet 12,
London. http://cement.mineralproducts.org/documents/FS_12_Novel_cements_low_energy_low_carbon_
cements.pdf.

---.2015. “Modern Cements (Bulk),” MPA Cement Fact Sheet 14b, MPA Cement, London. http://cement.
mineralproducts.org/documents/FS_14b_Modern_cements_BULK.pdf.

Mr. Reid. 2011. “Electricity Consumption in the Production of Aluminium.” Blog entry, Mr. Reid.org, July 14,
2011. http://wordpress.mrreid.org/2011/07/15/electricity-consumption-in-the-production-of-aluminium/.

Nadel, Steven. 2012. Energy Efficiency Tax Incentives in the Context of Tax Reform. ACEEE Working
Paper, Washington, DC: American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy. http://aceee.org/files/pdf/
white-paper/energy-efficiency-tax-incentives.pdf.

Nadel, S., et al. 2015. Energy Efficiency in the United States: 35 Years and Counting. Report No. E1502.
Washington, DC: American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy. http://aceee.org/sites/default/files/
publications/researchreports/e1502.pdf.

National Lighting Test Centre. 2012. Analysis Report on the Quality of Energy Saving Lamps in China.
Beijing.

Neelis et al., 2007, sourced in Patt, J., and Banholzer, W. 2009. Improving Energy Efficiency in the
Chemical Industry. Washington, DC: National Academy of Engineering. https://www.nae.edu/Publications/
Bridge/EnergyEfficiency14874/ImprovingEnergyEfficiencyintheChemicalIndustry.aspxhttps://www.nae.
edu/Publications/Bridge/EnergyEfficiency14874/ImprovingEnergyEfficiencyintheChemicalIndustry.aspx.

New Climate Economy. 2014. Better Growth, Better Climate. Washington, DC: New Climate Economy.
http://newclimateeconomy.report/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/NCE_GlobalReport.pdfhttp://
newclimateeconomy.report/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/NCE_GlobalReport.pdf.

Nipkow, Jürg, and Eric Bush Jurg. 2009. “Promotion of energy-efficient heat pump dryers.” Paper
prepared for the 5th International Conference on Energy Efficiency in Domestic Appliances and Lighting.
Berlin, Germany, June 16-18.




132
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




OECD (Organization for Economic Development and Co-operation). 2014. Excess Capacity in the Global
Steel Industry and Implications of New Investment Projects. Paris: OECD.

OECD and IEA. 2009. “Chemical and Petrochemical Sector: Potential of Best Practise Technology and
Other Measures for Improving Energy Efficiency,” IEA Information Paper, Brussels. https://www.iea.
org/publications/freepublications/publication/chemical_petrochemical_sector.pdfhttps://www.iea.org/
publications/freepublications/publication/chemical_petrochemical_sector.pdf.

Olivetti, Elsa A., Huabo Duan, and Randolph E. Kirchain. 2013. Exploration of Carbon Footprint of
Electrical Products: Guidance Document for Product Attribute to Impact Algorithm Methodology.
Arlington, VA: National Electrical Manufacturers Association and Materials Systems Laboratory, MIT.
https://www.nema.org/Policy/Environmental-Stewardship/Documents/Exploration%20of%20Carbon%20
Footprint%20of%20Electrical%20Products-June%202013.pdf.

Partnership for Market Readiness; International Carbon Action Partnership. 2016. “Emissions Trading
in Practice: A Handbook on Design and Implementation”. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/23874 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO. http://hdl.handle.
net/10986/23874

Perry, Mark J. 2009. “The Good Old Days Are Right Now.” Carpe Diem blog entry, October 2. http://
mjperry.blogspot.ca/2009/10/chart-above-shows-significant-increases.html.

Renaud, J. 2008. “Issues behind Competiveness and Carbon Leakage: Focus on Heavy Industries,” IEA
Information Paper, Paris.

Ricardo-AEA. 2013. Analysing the Opportunities for Abatement in Major Emitting Industrial Sectors.
http://ee.ricardo.com/cms/assets/Documents/Final-Report-CCC.pdf

Rusal. 2015. “Aluminium Production Costs.” http://rusal.ru/en/aluminium/energetics.aspx.

Rydge, J. 2015. “Implementing Effective Carbon Pricing,” New Climate Economy Working Paper,
Washington, DC. http://2015.newclimateeconomy.report/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Implementing-
Effective-Carbon-Pricing.pdf.

Sanchez, I., H. Pulido, M. A. McNeil, I. Turiel, and M. della Cava. 2007. “Assessment of the Impacts of
Standards and Labeling Programs in Mexico (four products),” LBNL-62813. Berkeley, CA: Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory.

Scholand, Michael. 2013. “US Department of Energy Adopts Higher Efficiency Standards for Distribution
Transformers.” Presentation at International Energy Efficient Transformers Workshop. Bangkok, Thailand,
November 13.

Shah, Nihar, and Amol Phadke. Forthcoming. Energy Efficiency and Air Conditioner Pricing Strategy.
Berkeley, CA: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.

Shah, Nihar, Amol Phadke, and Paul Waide. 2013. Cooling the Planet: Opportunities for Deployment
of Superefficient Room Air Conditioners. Washington DC: Super-efficient Equipment and Appliance
Deployment (SEAD). http://superefficient.org/~/media/Files/PublicationLibrary/2013/Cooling%20
the%20Planet%20Opportunities%20for%20Deployment%20of%20Superefficient%20Room%20Air%20
Conditioners.ashx.

Shenkar, Obed, Yadong Luo, and Tailan Chi. 2014. “Country Competitiveness.” In International Business,
3rd ed., chap. 5. Abingdon-on-Thames, UK: Taylor and Francis. http://www.sagepub.com/sites/default/
files/upm-binaries/18595_Chapter_5.pdf.




                                                                                                          133
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




Smith, Jenny Corry, Debbie Karpay Weyl, and Ari Reeves. 2015. “How and When to Increase Alignment
of Appliance Policies.” Paper prepared for the 8th International Conference on Energy Efficiency in
Domestic Appliances and Lighting. Lucerne-Horw, Switzerland, August 26-28. http://iet.jrc.ec.europa.eu/
energyefficiency/sites/energyefficiency/files/events/EEDAL15/S7_Policies7/eedal15_submission_135.pdf.

Steel Consult. 2006. “New Competitive Realities in Steel.” http://www.steelconsult.com/
ArticleSteelConsultinMillenniumSteel_English.pdf.

Tan, Q., Q. Song, and J. Li. 2015. “The environmental performance of fluorescent lamps in China, assessed
with the LCA method”. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 20(6): 807-818.

TATA. 2013. “Cooling Minds, Winning Hearts.” http://www.tata.com/company/articlesinside/
DOQREdk8wHI=/TLYVr3YPkMU=.

UNEP. 2013. “Global Chemicals Outlook: Towards Sound Management of Chemicals”. http://www.unep.
org/hazardoussubstances/Portals/9/Mainstreaming/GCO/The%20Global%20Chemical%20Outlook_
Full%20report_15Feb2013.pdf

UNEP. “Sustainable Public Procurement Programme.” http://www.unep.org/10yfp/Programmes/
ProgrammeConsultationandCurrentStatus/Sustainablepublicprocurement/tabid/106267/Default.aspx.

UNEP-GEF (United Nations Development Program–Global Environment Facility) and Government of
China. 2008. Phasing-Out of Incandescent Lamps & Energy Saving. Lamps Promotion (PILESLAMP)
Project (PIMS# 4166).

UNEP-GEF en.lighten initiative. 2014. Green Paper: Policy Options to Accelerate the Global Transition to
Advanced Lighting. Prepared for Global Efficient Lighting Forum. Beijing, China, November 10-11. http://
www.enlighten-initiative.org/Portals/0/documents/global-forum/Green_Paper_FINAL%20reduced.pdf.

UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development Organization). 2012. Tanzania Industrial Competitiveness
Report 2012. New York: UNIDO. https://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/Services/PSD/TanzaniaInd
ustrialCompetitivenessReport2012-ebook.pdf.

---. 2013. The Industrial Competitiveness of Nations: Looking back, Forging ahead-Competitive Industrial
Performance Report 2012/2013. New York: UNIDO. https://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/
Services/PSD/Competitive_Industrial_Performance_Report_UNIDO_2012_2013.PDF.

---. 2014. “Competitive Industrial Performance Report 2014,” Working Paper 12/2014, UNIDO, New York.
http://www.unido.org/fileadmin/user_media/Services/PSD/WP2014_12_CIPReport2014.pdf.

---. 2015. “SDG Goal 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure.” New York: UNIDO. https://isid.unido.org/
goal9.html.

US DOE (U.S. Department of Energy). 1996. Energy Conservation Program for Consumer Products:
Procedures for Consideration of New or Revised Energy Conservation Standards for Consumer Products.
Federal Register 61 (136): 36974.

---. 2012. Solid-State Lighting Research and Development: Multi-Year Program Plan April 2012.
Washington, DC: DOE. http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/publications/pdfs/ssl/ssl_mypp2014_web.
pdf.




134
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




US EIA (U.S. Energy Information Administration). 2013. International Energy Outlook 2013. Washington,
DC: EIA.

---. 2013. Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS). Washington, DC: EIA. https://www.eia.gov/
consumption/residential/data/2009/index.cfm?view=microdata.

---. 2015. Chemical Industry Analysis Brief. Washington, DC: EIA. https://www.eia.gov/consumption/
manufacturing/briefs/chemical/.

Wagner, M. 2006. “A Comparative Analysis of Theoretical Reasoning and Empirical Studies on the Porter
Hypothesis and the Role of Innovation.” Journal of Environmental Law and Policy 3: 349–368.

Waide, Paul, and Conrad U. Brunner. 2011. Energy-Efficiency Policy Opportunities for Electric Motor-
Driven Systems. Paris: International Energy Agency. https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/
publication/EE_for_ElectricSystems.pdf.

Waide, Paul, and Michael Scholand. 2014. PROPHET II: The Potential for Global Energy Savings from
High-Efficiency Distribution Transformers. Brussels: European Copper Institute. http://www.leonardo-
energy.org/sites/leonardo-energy/files/documents-and-links/prophet_ii_final_report_beta_version.pdf.

WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD). 2009. The Cement
Sustainability Initiative: Cement Industry Energy and C02 Performance. Geneva: WBCSD. http://www.
wbcsdcement.org/pdf/CSI%20GNR%20Report%20final%2018%206%2009.pdfhttp://www.wbcsdcement.
org/pdf/CSI%20GNR%20Report%20final%2018%206%2009.pdf.

WEC (World Energy Council). 2015. “Energy Price Volatility: The New Normal,” in 2015 World Energy Issues
Monitor. https://www.worldenergy.org/publications/2015/world-energy-issues-monitor-2015/.

---. 2015. 2015 World Energy Issues Monitor. London: WEC. http://www.worldenergy.org/wp-content/
uploads/2015/01/2015-World-Energy-Issues-Monitor.pdf.

WEF (World Economic Forum). 2014. The Global Competitiveness Index 2014–2015. Geneva: WEF. http://
www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GlobalCompetitivenessReport_2014-15.pdf.

Wiel. S., J. E. McMahon, et al. 2005. S&L Guidebook (Second Edition). Washington, DC: CLASP. http://
clasp.ngo/en/Resources/Resources/StandardsLabelsGuidebook.

Wilson, C. 2012. “Up-scaling, formative phases, and learning in the historical diffusion of energy
technologies.” Energy Policy, 50, pp.81-94.

World bank. 2016. “Pricing Carbon.” Washington, DC: World Bank. http://www.worldbank.org/en/
programs/pricing-carbon.

World Bank Group; ECOFYS. 2016. Carbon Pricing Watch 2016. Washington, DC: World Bank. https://
openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/24288; and European Commission.

World Aluminium. 2013a. “The Global Aluminium Industry: 40 years from 1972.” http://www.world-
aluminium.org/media/filer_public/2013/02/25/an_outlook_of_the_global_aluminium_industry_1972_-_
present_day.pdf.




                                                                                                       135
A Greener Path to Competitiveness Policies for Climate Action in Industries and Products




---. 2013b. “Global Aluminum Recycling: A Cornerstone of Sustainable Development.” http://www.world-
aluminium.org/media/filer_public/2013/01/15/fl0000181.pdf.

---. 2015. “Aluminium and Life Cycle Thinking: Towards Sustainable Cities.” http://www.world-aluminium.
org/media/filer_public/2015/10/05/tsc_report3_lca_100dpi_release_locked.pdf.

---. 2016. “Statistics. Primary Aluminium Smelting Power Consumption.”. http://www.world-aluminium.
org/statistics/primary-aluminium-smelting-power-consumption/.

WSA (World Steel Association). 2014. “Energy Use in the Steel Industry.” Fact sheet. WSA. Brussels.
https://www.worldsteel.org/publications/fact-sheets/content/02/text_files/file0/document/fact_
energy_2014.pdf.

---. 2015a. “Crude Steel Production.” Brussels. https://www.worldsteel.org/statistics/crude-steel-
production0.html.

---. 2015b. “Energy Use in the Steel Industry.”. https://www.worldsteel.org/media-centre/press-
releases/2015/Energy-use-in-the-steel-industry-report-available-now.html.

---. 2015c. “World Steel in Figures.” WSA. Brussels. https://www.worldsteel.org/dms/
internetDocumentList/bookshop/2015/World-Steel-in-Figures-2015/document/World%20Steel%20
in%20Figures%202015.pdf.

---. 2015d. “Steel’s Contribution to a Low-Carbon Future and Climate-Resilient Societies.” World Steel
Position Paper. WSA. Brussels.

Xu, T., T. Ma, C. Zhou, and Y. Zhou. 2014. “Characterizing Spatio-Temporal Dynamics of Urbanization in
China Using Time Series of DMSP/OLS Night Light Data.” Remote Sensing 6 (8): 7708-7731.

Yuan, Jiahai, Junjie Kang, Cong Yu, and Zhaoguang Hu. 2011. “Energy Conservation and Emissions
Reduction in China: Progress and Prospective.” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 15 (9): 4334-
4347.

Zhuo, Wang. 2011. The Lighting Industry Development in China. Beijing: China Association of Lighting
Industry.




136
Photo Credits
07	 Maciej Noskowski
20	Hramovnick
25	Acnakelsy
29	JazzIRT
33	Jordachelr
36	 Etienne Kechichian
37	 Muzaffer Akarca
89	Aniaostudio
101	 Moreno Soppelsa
115	Baloncici
118	SlobodanMilijevic
123	tvierimaa
www.worldbank.org
