Charter of the
Partnership for skills in
Applied Sciences,
Engineering and
Technology

Final: July 29, 2016
I. Introduction

1.1 This document, the Charter of the Partnership for skills in Applied Sciences, Engineering and
Technology (PASET), sets out the goals, principles, norms and governing structure of the
partnership. It is intended to promote transparency, accountability, and effective guidance for
PASET’s leadership and members.

1.2     Founded in 2013 by African governments, PASET addresses a long-standing challenge in the socio-
economic transformation of sub-Saharan Africa (SSA): the dearth of African capacity and knowledge in
Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology (ASET) fields. PASET is envisaged as a partnership of key
stakeholders, including SSA governments, African and other private sector companies operating in Africa,
education and training institutions, and new and traditional development partners. It focuses on building
a continuum of ASET skills from the technical-vocational level to the postgraduate/ research level, for
sectors that have potential for growth and employment generation, and for the structural transformation
of SSA countries. PASET also focuses on building relationships with countries from Asia and Latin America
that have successfully built their technical-scientific capacity to support their socio-economic
development, through knowledge-sharing, technical assistance and financial support.

1.3     The overall goals of PASET, which focus on fostering high quality ASET programs from the
technical vocational level to the postgraduate level, are laid out in Annex 1 of this Charter.

 1.4     PASET’s key regional initiatives include the Regional Scholarship and Innovation Fund (RSIF);
Regional Benchmarking Initiative for universities; and Regional Technical-Vocational Education and
Training (TVET) Centers of Excellence. In addition to its regional initiatives, PASET also supports SSA
countries to develop results-oriented, operational Country ASET Action Plans (CAAPs) to increase the
number and quality of technical-scientific graduates, help prioritize their interventions and mobilize and
align funding from domestic sources, private sector and new as well as traditional Partners.

1.5     Among the above initiatives, the Regional Scholarship and Innovation Fund is the flagship program
of PASET. Launched by President Macky Sall in Johannesburg in June 2015 and supported by the heads of
state of Rwanda and Ethiopia, it has been seeded through financial commitments from these three
governments. The RSIF aims to support training of 10,000 PhDs in ASET disciplines in the next 10 years by
building capacity in sub-Saharan African Universities for delivering world-class PhD programs.

1.6     PASET’s core principles are laid out in Box 1.




                                                     1
                                         Box 1: Core Principles of PASET

        1. Ownership and leadership by African governments and African private sector, reflected in
           concrete financial and organizational commitments
        2. Partner commitment to provide technical and financial assistance
        3. Undertake activities clearly linked to PASET goals
        4. Focus on results, lower transaction costs, and return on investment
        5. Efficient decision-making, combined with consensus-building
        6. Financial transparency
        7. Mutual accountability
        8. Broad consultation with stakeholders




II. JOINING PASET

2.1     Any SSA government, private sector group or development partner (or its designated agency) may
join PASET and be represented on the PASET governance structure if it:
    • Agrees with the PASET Charter
    • Contributes to PASET, i.e. financially to PASET RSIF or by financing or providing technical
        assistance to any PASET initiatives
    • Commits to participate in meetings of PASET governance bodies if nominated to serve on them
    • Agrees to mobilizing support and funds for PASET activities

2.2     SSA governments and private sector groups who wish to be PASET members are expected to make
a minimum initial contribution of $US 2 million to the flagship RSIF. New and traditional development
partners may also provide technical assistance or other relevant services for PASET in an equivalent
amount. Contributions for renewal of membership will be determined at the discretion of PASET
leadership.

2.3     Knowledge-sharing and other events, such as the PASET Regional Forum, workshops shall be open
to all SSA countries, private sector, development partners, universities, TVET institutions and other
stakeholders who show commitment to the PASET Charter, irrespective of membership.



III. IMPLEMENTATION OF PASET INITIATIVES

3.1      PASET implements its regional initiatives through various organizations that are selected for their
institutional and governance strengths and capacity for delivering the initiative. All country-specific
initiatives are implemented through the governments of participating countries using their national
mechanisms.


                                                     2
3.2   The RSIF is currently implemented by the Association of African Universities (AAU), which hosts
and manages it according to an agreement with PASET.

3.3     Technical assistance activities, facilitation of PASET meetings and events, and other interim
secretariat functions are currently implemented through the World Bank.



IV. PASET GOVERNANCE

Governance Overview

4.1     PASET adheres to the principles of good governance, drawn from international best practices.
Specifically, it abides by the highest international governance standards, ensuring transparency and
accountability for all operations, and adhering to equity and fairness in representation and risk mitigation
associated with conflicts of interest.

4.2     The PASET governance structure aims to be effective, efficient and responsive, with streamlined
decision-making and reporting. All PASET partners share the objective of minimizing the costs of
administration while ensuring appropriate financial controls, reporting and accounting in order to ensure
that the maximum proportion of the mobilized funds are utilized for the intended beneficiaries.

4.3      Membership of PASET governance bodies (Board of Directors and Executive Committee) are
restricted to members and contributors as defined in clause 2.1.

4.3     Members of the PASET governance and advisory bodies are nominated for having demonstrated
high standards of integrity in their past experience, commitment to PASET principles and goals, and
technical expertise in a designated area. They will not receive any remuneration for carrying out these
routine functions. They will however be reimbursed for travel and any special additional tasks as
requested by the concerned governance bodies.

4.4      Specialized functions that may need to be carried out from time to time, such as audit, third-party
verification or legal advice, will be contracted out as agreed by the PASET governing bodies.

4.5     The PASET governance, advisory and implementation mechanisms are laid out below.




                                                     3
                 Board of Directors
 Responsible for strategic direction, policy-making
       and oversight of PASET operations.
                    Composition                                       Third Party Verification (Ombudsman)
     Ministers of SSA countries that are PASET                             Provides independent grievance
Contributors; representatives of other Contributors;                  mechanism with investigative & mediation
   EC Executive Director; Manager of institution                       roles for transparency & accountability.
     hosting Secretariat. Chair is SSA Minister.                                   Reports to Board




     Executive Committee of Board (EC)                                       Consultative Advisory Group
Responsible for execution of PASET initiatives,                              Only advisory capacity; provides
with full delegated authority from Board.                                     scientific/other guidance with
                   Composition                                            knowledge and expertise to Board and
     5 members; Member, Institution hosting                                      EC. Constituted by Board
        Secretariat; EC Executive Director.




                    Secretariat
     Responsible for implementing technical                                     RSIF Implementation Unit
       assistance, knowledge sharing and                              Implements RSIF according to guidelines set by
   convening of Board/EC meetings. Managed                                               Board.
       by host institution. Reports to EC.                              Reports to EC and works with Secretariat.



Note: Arrows indicate direction of reporting. Dotted arrow indicates that that while the RSIF Implementation
Unit primarily reports to EC, it works closely together with the Secretariat.


Board of Directors (Board)

4.5     The Board is the supreme governing body of the PASET, responsible for strategic direction and
policy-making and oversight of the operations of PASET. As a global champion for PASET’s goals, it
mobilizes funding and support for the Partnership. Its membership is drawn from PASET Contributors.

4.6     Composition: The Board comprises of Ministers in charge of higher education of SSA governments
that have contributed to the PASET RSIF; the Ministers' alternate representatives; representatives of the
private sector or donor organizations that have contributed to the PASET; the Executive Committee (EC)
Executive Director; a senior representative/manager of the institution hosting the PASET secretariat and
his/her alternate. .

4.7     Roles and Responsibilities: The Board shall have the ultimate decision-making authority and
oversight responsibilities, including monitoring implementation to ensure that the Partnership delivers its
strategic goals. The Board shall meet twice a year, at least one of which shall be a face to face meeting,

                                                       4
and extra ordinary meetings may be called by the Chair of the Board. It will develop by-laws specifying:
criteria and nominating procedures for Board membership and Executive Committee positions; meetings
of the Board; protocols for decision-making, communication and operations; voting procedures; and other
critical Board functions such as oversight of audit/finance functions. The Board may invite specialists/
experts to attend portions of Board meetings to provide advice, including the Chair of the PASET
Consultative Advisory Group (CAG), other members of the CAG as well as eminent persons and
stakeholders who can promote the objectives of PASET.

4.8       Chair of the Board: The Board shall select a Chair drawn from the participating African Ministers.
The Chair represents the Board and the Partnership as a whole. The Chair shall act without prejudice in
fulfilling his/her responsibilities. The Chair will be selected based on demonstrated commitment to PASET
principles and goals, and display action-oriented with willingness to address upcoming tasks, particularly
to grow the Partnership. He/she will also demonstrate the ability to work closely with and be accessible
to the Executive Director of the Executive Committee. The maximum term of the Chair shall be for a period
of 2 years.

4.9     Vice-Chairs of the Board: The Board shall have two Vice-Chairs selected from participating African
Ministers. One Vice-Chair will chair Board meetings and represent the Partnership when the Chair is not
available.

Executive Committee (EC)

4.10 The EC has full delegated authority from the Board to carry out and make decisions to implement
the policies and programs decided by the Board and is responsible for overseeing the implementation of
the PASET initiatives. It meets virtually on a regular basis to carry out its functions.

4.11 Composition: The EC consists of 7 members, who are nominated and confirmed by the Board of
Directors. The EC consists of the following: Five members who have relevant expertise and proven
commitment, acting in their personal capacity; the senior representative/manager of the institution
hosting the PASET secretariat on the Board; and the Executive Director of the EC who acts in his/her
personal capacity. In order to provide stability and continuity to PASET activities, the term of the EC
members shall be for three years. .

4.12 Roles and Responsibilities: The EC has delegated authority from the Board to execute decisions.
It monitors implementation of agreements with the implementing agencies. It has specific responsibility
for oversight of the RISF and the implementation unit at the AAU. It shall also facilitate government and
donor participation and help develop key new and existing initiatives. It works in close collaboration with
the PASET Secretariat.

4.13 Executive Director of the Executive Committee: The Executive Director is a widely respected
leader with demonstrated commitment to PASET and the time and experience to lead the EC. He/she may
be a government or non-government representative and serves in a personal capacity. The Executive
Director is also an ex-officio member of the Board, and has the authority to make decisions as required in
consultation with the Chair of the Board. He/she works closely with the Deputy of the EC and the PASET
secretariat.




                                                     5
4.14 Deputy Executive Director of the Executive Committee: The EC will have a Deputy Executive
Director who will work closely with the Executive Director and represent the Executive Director when the
Executive Director is not available.

Secretariat

4.15 The institution hosting the Secretariat shall be well-established, and have the capacity and
experience to provide a governance institutional setting that is well suited to support communication and
learning. Existing operations in Africa are an essential requirement for the Secretariat.

4.16 Composition: The composition and structure of the Secretariat, as well as its oversight, will be
proposed by the host institution and agreed to by the EC.

4.17 Roles and Responsibilities: The Secretariat shall execute the technical assistance functions of
PASET and organize its Regional Forums and other workshops. It will also supervise the implementation
of RSIF by AAU in coordination with the EC. It shall house communications, recording, and monitoring and
evaluation functions to provide ongoing quality control. Working closely with the Executive Director and
Deputy Executive Director of the EC, it shall organize meetings of the Board, EC and CAG.

RSIF Implementation Unit at AAU

4.18 Composition: The RSIF is currently implemented by the Association of African Universities (AAU)
as per an agreement with PASET. The composition of the RSIF Implementation Unit at the AAU will be
approved by the EC. Its executive director function, served by AAU’s Secretary General, will provide
oversight to the Implementation unit at AAU.

4.19 Roles and responsibilities: The AAU will seek to achieve results set by the PASET Board for the
RSIF in line with terms of the Agreement between PASET and AAU, as amended from time to time. The
Executive Director of the RISF Implementation Unit shall report to the EC Executive Director. The RSIF
Implementation unit works closely in coordination with the PASET secretariat.

PASET Country Level Coordinator

4.20 The alternate of the Minister on the Board of Directors will also serve as the PASET country level
coordinator and focal point of contact. The coordinator will be responsible for in-country communication
and coordination functions and liaising with the PASET secretariat and Chair of the EC as required.

Third Party Verification

4.21     A Third Party Verification (or Ombudsman Office) offers PASET's governance structure both
internal and external protections and mechanisms to utilize best practices for good governance. These
include clear procedures for registering and addressing conflicts of interest, mismanagement of program
funds, disputes and other concerns. At the request of the Board, it shall respond to governance issues
arising in the course of implementing the RSIF and other PASET programs. Its initial focus would be on
ensuring good governance of the RSIF.



                                                   6
4.22 This function shall be contracted out on a part-time basis to an experienced, proven private
company, law firm, NGO or an individual. The Secretariat shall contract the required expertise under
Terms of Reference agreed with the EC Chair.



V. Consultative Advisory Group (CAG)
5.1      The Consultative Advisory Group (CAG) is appointed by and serves at the discretion of the Board
as a volunteer body with a balanced membership representing a spectrum of legitimate advisory
stakeholders in PASET. The EC shall have responsibility for constituting the CAG and CAG members serve
in their personal capacities.

5.2     Composition: CAG will be composed of African scientists, academics, representatives of
Technical/Vocational Education, private sector representatives, academic associations/ institutions from
international partner countries and internal agencies. The CAG may include representation from the EC
and the Secretariat in order to facilitate communication of priorities and decisions.

5.3     Roles and Responsibilities: The CAG would offer demand-driven expertise and specific advisory
services to the Board and EC based on PASET’s emerging needs, as well as offer innovative, operational
solutions for realizing PASET goals. It will provide a visible platform for sharing best practices, lessons
learned, publications and regional experiences in ASET skill development. Members of the CAG may be
requested by the Board to attend special sessions of the Board to offer advice on specific topics.

5.4    Chair of the CAG: The CAG Chair would be an eminent African academic or institutional leader.
He/she will work closely with the EC Chair and the PASET secretariat.


VI. PASET REGIONAL FORUMS

6.1     PASET’s Regional Forums will be organized periodically in order to share knowledge and
experiences in implementing PASET initiatives, and to mobilize support for PASET among SSA
governments, private sector and partner countries and agencies, including among non-members.
Decisions regarding the forums will be taken by the EC, in consultation with the Chair of the Board of
Directors.



VII. Amendment

This document may be amended as and when approved by the Board.




                                                    7
                                     Annex 1
                            Overall goals of PASET
                        (Dakar Call to Action, June 2014)

Training at least 10,000 new PhD holders in Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology
programs;

Establishing a Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) regional-wide post graduate scholarship program in ASET
fields;

Doubling the number of students in ASET programs in at least 10 SSA countries;

The emergence of at least 5 additional universities in SSA with high quality Applied Sciences,
Engineering and Technology (ASET) programs, and centers of postgraduate studies & applied
research in ASET disciplines;

At least 5 regional Technical, Vocational Education and Training (TVET) centers of excellence for
training faculty of TVET institutions, to enable resource sharing, quality assurance and specialized
training in emerging areas;

The development of a regional quality assurance mechanism for ASET programs, benchmarked to
comparable systems globally;

Establishment of high quality data systems and benchmarking of ASET programs and institutions
in at least 10 SSA countries




                                             8
