                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria




FY15 Bulgaria Country Opinion Survey Report


          THE WORLD BANK GROUP
             Public Opinion Research Group




                           1
                                                                        July 2015
                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria




Acknowledgements
The Bulgaria Country Opinion Survey is part of the County Opinion Survey Program series of
the World Bank Group. This report was prepared by the Public Opinion Research Group
(PORG) team led by Sharon Felzer (Senior Communications Officer, Head of PORG), Jessica
Cameron, Svetlana Markova, and Jing Guo. Calita Woods and Dania Mendoza provided data
support. The report was prepared under the overall guidance and supervision of Sumir Lal
(Director, ECRGP). PORG acknowledges the significant contribution from the Bulgaria country
team and the local fielding company ESTAT Agency. In particular, PORG is grateful for the
support from Ivelina Taushanova (Communications Officer) in Sofia, Bulgaria.




                                             1
                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria




Table of Contents
     I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
     II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
    III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................4
    IV. General Issues Facing Bulgaria ....................................................9
    V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group .......................14
    VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness......................................22
   VII. How the World Bank Group Operates .......................................27
   VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments .....................33
    IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bulgaria ...............38
     X. Communication and Outreach ..................................................43
    XI. Appendices ................................................................................50




                                                    2
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to assist the World Bank Group (WBG) in gaining a better
understanding of how stakeholders in Bulgaria perceive the WBG. The survey explored:
    General Issues facing Bulgaria
    Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
    World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
    The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
    Working with the World Bank Group
    The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bulgaria
    Communication and Information Sharing
    Background Information


II. Methodology
From May to June 2015, 495 stakeholders of the WBG in Bulgaria were invited to provide their
opinions on the WBG’s work in the country by participating in a Country Opinion Survey.
Participants were drawn from the office of the President/Prime Minister, office of a Minister,
office of a Parliamentarian, employees of ministries/ministerial departments/implantation
agencies, Project Management Units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of a project or
consultants working on WBG-supported projects, local governments, bilateral/multilateral
agencies, private sector organizations, private foundations, the financial sector/private banks,
NGOs/community-based organizations (CBOs), the media, independent government institutions,
trade unions, faith-based groups, youth groups, academia/research institutes/think tanks, and the
judiciary branch. A total of 183 stakeholders participated in the survey (37% response rate).

Respondents were asked to complete the questionnaire online (429 potential respondents) or
received the questionnaire via post (66 potential respondents). Respondents were asked about:
general issues facing Bulgaria; their overall attitudes toward the WBG; the WBG’s effectiveness
and results; the WBG’s knowledge work and activities; working with the WBG; the WBG’s
future role in Bulgaria; and the WBG’s communication and information sharing.

Every country that engages in the Country Opinion Survey must include specific indicator
questions that will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.
These questions are identified throughout the survey report.

The results in this year’s Country Survey were compared to the Country Survey conducted in FY
’12 (response rate was 43%, N=173). The data were weighted to reach similar stakeholder
compositions across the two survey years, allowing for more statistically reliable comparisons.
Stakeholder groups which were not present in both fiscal years were not included in these
comparisons, nor were respondents who identified themselves as “other? in the stakeholder
category options. As a result, mean ratings, percentages of respondents, and the total number of
respondents in both years are slightly different from those of the original data reported in the FY
’12 COS report and the non-weighted data presented in this report. For the weighted stakeholder
breakdown and year comparison results, please see appendix E (page 115).


                                                 3
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position
      For all further analyses, the small number of respondents from the financial sector/private
       banks were combined with those from private sector organizations. The few respondents
       from the office of a Parliamentarian, PMUs/Consultants on WBG projects, local
       government, private foundations, and trade unions were included in the “Other? category.
       Note that there were no respondents from faith-based groups, youth groups, or the
       judiciary branch.




                                                4
                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                 5
                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location
        Because of the small number of respondents from outside Sofia, statistical
         comparisons between geographic locations were not possible.




Exposure to Agencies within the World Bank Group




                                             6
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Collaboration with the WBG
     For all further analyses, respondents who indicated that they had previously collaborated
      with the WBG were combined with those who had never collaborated to make one group
      of those not currently collaborating with the WBG, and those who indicated both (that
      they currently collaborate and had collaborated in the past) were combined with those
      who currently collaborate to create one group of those currently collaborating.




Exposure to the WBG in Bulgaria




                                              7
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank Group
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had significantly lower
         ratings of familiarity with the WBG (weighted mean = 5.7) compared to respondents
         from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted mean = 6.8)1.
        Stakeholders: As shown in the chart below, respondents from government institutions
         had significantly higher ratings of familiarity with the WBG compared to respondents
         from those outside of government.
        Impact of Familiarity: Respondents’ levels of familiarity with the WBG were
         significantly, moderately correlated with their perceptions of the WBG’s overall
         effectiveness in Bulgaria, the extent to which the WBG achieves development results in
         Bulgaria, and agreement that the WBG plays a relevant role in development in Bulgaria.




1
 Please refer to Appendix E (page 115) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in the chart were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                              8
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



IV. General Issues Facing Bulgaria

Headed in the Right Direction

        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey were significantly less
         likely to indicate that Bulgaria is headed in the right direction (weighted percentage of
         respondents = 58%) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted
         percentage of respondents = 76%)2.




2
 Please refer to Appendix E (page 115) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The percentages in the chart were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                              9
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



IV. General Issues Facing Bulgaria (continued)
Development Priority
   Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey indicated that the most
    important development priority in Bulgaria was economic growth (70%), followed by
    education (41%), convergence with EU living standards (28%), business environment and
    private sector development (26%), law and justice (23%), and health (20%).
   Education sector: Respondents from the education sector were significantly more likely to
    indicate that education was the most important development priority in Bulgaria (89%)
    compared to respondents from all other sectors (46%). Respondents from all other sectors
    were more likely to indicate economic growth (54%) and law and justice (49%) as the most
    important development priorities for Bulgaria.




                                              10
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



IV. General Issues Facing Bulgaria (continued)

What Would Contribute Most to Reducing Poverty
   Education sector: Respondents from the education sector were more likely to indicate that
    education would contribute most to reducing poverty in Bulgaria (68%) compared to
    respondents from all other sectors (49%); however, this difference did not reach statistical
    significance and respondents from other sectors were still most likely to indicate education as
    contributing most to reducing poverty in Bulgaria.




                                                11
                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



IV. General Issues Facing Bulgaria (continued)

Factors Contributing to “Shared Prosperity?
   Education sector: Respondents from the education sector were significantly more likely to
    indicate that education and training that better ensure job opportunity would contribute most
    to “Shared Prosperity? in Bulgaria (71%) compared to respondents from all other sectors
    (51%). Respondents from all other sectors were more likely to indicate that consistent
    economic growth would contribute most (50%) compared to respondents from the education
    sector (36%), but this difference did not reach statistical significance.




                                                12
                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



IV. General Issues Facing Bulgaria (continued)
Assessing the Gap between the Rich and the Poor in Bulgaria




Assessing Global Climate Change




                                      13
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

Attributing Failed/Slow Reform Efforts
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey indicated that they most
       often attributed failed or slow World Bank assisted reform efforts to reforms not being
       well thought out in light of country challenges (35%), inadequate government capacity
       (32%), the government working inefficiently (32%), or an inadequate level of
       citizen/civil society participation (29%).




                                               14
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
As noted in the “Methodology? section, the indicator questions referred to throughout the survey
report are questions that are asked in every country that engages in the Country Opinion Survey.
These will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.

The World Bank Group’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)

      Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
       ratings for the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Bulgaria compared to respondents from
       the FY ’12 Country Survey.
      Stakeholders: Respondents from the office of a Minister had the highest ratings for the
       WBG’s overall effectiveness in Bulgaria whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOS and
       academia had significantly lower ratings.




Achieving Development Results (Indicator Question)

      Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
       ratings for the extent to which the WBG achieves development results in Bulgaria
       compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey.




                                               15
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Staff Preparedness
     Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had statistically similar
      ratings for the extent to which the WBG’s staff is well prepared to help Bulgaria solve its
      development challenges compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey.




World Bank and IFC Working Together
     Stakeholders: Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister were the only
      stakeholder groups to indicate that the World Bank and IFC do not work well together.
      The full breakdown of stakeholder group responding to this question can be found in
      Appendix B (see page 67).




                                               16
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions by Stakeholder Groups
      Stakeholders: Although there was a strong trend that respondents from the office of a
       Minister had the highest mean rating for the aggregated responses to the twenty-five COS
       indicator questions and respondents from academia, NGOs/CBOs, private sector/
       financial sector/private banks, and other organizations had the lowest mean ratings, this
       difference did not reach statistical significance. Responses for individual indicator
       questions by stakeholder groups can be found in Appendix G (see page 122).
      Collaboration: Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG had
       significantly higher ratings across the aggregated responses to the twenty-five COS
       indicator questions (mean rating = 7.3) compared to respondents who are not
       collaborating with the WBG (mean rating = 6.5). Responses for individual indicator
       questions by collaboration can be found in Appendix F (see page 121).




                                              17
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Greatest Value
     Year comparison: Over half of all respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated
      that the World Bank’s greatest value to Bulgaria was its knowledge and advisory services
      (52%). The Bank’s financial resources were also considered of great value (44%).




                                             18
                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Most Effective Instruments in Reducing Poverty
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that the World
      Bank’s investment lending was its most effective instrument in improving living
      standards in Bulgaria (61%).




                                           19
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Importance and Effectiveness of WBG’s Capacity Building Work




                                     20
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Greatest Weakness
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY ’12 Country Survey indicated that the World
      Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Bulgaria were not enough public disclosure of
      its work (23%), being too influenced by developed countries (23%), and imposing
      technocratic solutions without regard to political realities (22%).




                                             21
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness
Importance of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas
   Stakeholders: Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister had significantly
    lower ratings of importance for the WBG’s involvement in agricultural development, trade
    and exports, and rural development compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
   Education sector: Respondents from the education sector had higher ratings of importance
    for the WBG’s involvement in education (mean rating = 9.3) compared to respondents from
    all other sectors (mean rating = 8.6); however, this difference did not reach statistical
    significance.




                                               22
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas3
   Stakeholders: There were significant stakeholder group differences across several development
    areas. For the most part, respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies tended to have the
    highest ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness across these areas whereas respondents from the
    office of the President/Prime Minister tended to have significantly lower ratings. Comparisons
    of stakeholder groups’ effectiveness ratings by can be found in Appendix B (see page 67).
   Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG had significantly higher
    ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness in basic infrastructure/transport and water supply/
    sanitation compared to respondents who are not collaborating with the WBG. A full
    breakdown of ratings by collaboration can be found in Appendix C (see page 87).




3
 Note, primarily informed stakeholders responded to these questions. Respondents were given the option of “don’t know? if they
did not have exposure to the WBG’s work in certain development areas. See Appendix A (page 53) for details.

                                                              23
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of WBG’s Support in Sectoral Areas: Year Comparison4




4
 All means presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 115) for details.

                                                               24
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

WBG Promoting Private Public Partnerships




Helping the Poorest in Bulgaria




                                     25
                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VI. Sectoral Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness
To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall
effectiveness and ratings of its ability to help achieve development results in Bulgaria, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the twenty specific areas of
effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the Bank Group’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development
results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one
specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank Group’s overall
effectiveness or perceptions of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results.

      Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
       correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank
       Group’s overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific
       areas are drivers of perceptions of the Bank Group’s overall effectiveness in Bulgaria.
       The areas determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
              The WBG’s effectiveness at energy and energy efficiency;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at water supply and sanitation;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at basic infrastructure and transport; and
              The WBG’s effectiveness at public financial management.

      Achieving Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-
       Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the
       WBG’s ability to help achieve development results in Bulgaria, suggesting that ratings of
       effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s ability to
       help achieve development results. The areas determined to be key drivers from these
       analyses were:
              The WBG’s effectiveness at energy and energy efficiency;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at economic growth;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at social protection;
              The WBG’s effectiveness at public financial management; and
              The WBG’s effectiveness at education.




                                                 26
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates

The World Bank Group’s Work in Bulgaria

     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey and this year’s Country
      Survey had statistically similar levels of agreement regarding these aspects of the WBG’s
      work in Bulgaria.

     Stakeholders: Respondents from media had the highest levels of agreement that the
      WBG currently plays a relevant role in development work in Bulgaria whereas
      respondents from NGOs/CBOs had significantly lower levels of agreement.

     Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher
      levels of agreement across these aspects of the WBG’s work in Bulgaria compared to
      respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                              27
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey and this year’s Country
       Survey had statistically similar levels of agreement regarding these aspects of how the
       WBG operates in Bulgaria.

      Stakeholders: Respondents from media and office of a Minister had the highest levels of
       agreement that the WBG takes decisions quickly in Bulgaria whereas respondents from
       private sector/financial sector/private banks had significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                               28
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions: Collaboration




                                     29
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The WBG as an Effective Development Partner
   Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey and this year’s Country Survey
    had statistically similar ratings regarding these aspects of the WBG as an effective
    development partner in Bulgaria.
   Stakeholders: Employees of ministries and respondents from the office of a Minister and the
    media had the highest ratings for the WBG’s responsiveness whereas respondents from the
    office of the President/Prime Minister, bilateral/multilateral agencies, academia, and other
    organizations had significantly lower ratings. Employees of ministries and respondents from
    the office of a Minister and the media had the highest ratings for the WBG’s institutional
    flexibility whereas respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister, private
    sector/financial sector/private banks, and NGOs/CBOs had significantly lower ratings.




                                               30
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

The WBG as an Effective Development Partner: Collaboration




                                     31
                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Internal Measuring and Monitoring




The WBG’s Approach to Risk in Bulgaria




                                     32
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments
Frequency of Consulting WBG Knowledge Work/Activities
     Stakeholders: Respondents the office of the President/Prime Minister, the office of a
      Minister, and independent government institutions indicated the most frequent usage of the
      WBG’s knowledge work and activities whereas respondents from the media indicated
      significantly less frequent usage.
     Collaboration: Respondents who are currently collaborating with the WBG indicated
      significantly most frequent usage of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (27% weekly/
      monthly) than respondents who are not collaborating with the WBG (52% rarely/never).




    Frequency of Consulting WBG Knowledge Work/Activities: Year Comparison5




5
 All percentages presented in this chart are calculated based on weighted data. See Appendix E (page 115) for details.

                                                               33
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Bulgaria’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey and this year’s Country
       Survey had statistically similar levels of agreement that the WBG meets Bulgaria’s needs
       for knowledge services.

      Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher
       levels of agreement that the WBG meets Bulgaria’s needs for knowledge services (mean
       rating = 7.6) compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG (mean
       rating = 6.3).




RAS Value for Money




                                              34
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Contribution of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey and this year’s Country
       Survey had statistically similar ratings for the significant contribution of the WBG’s
       knowledge work and activities.




Technical Quality of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey and this year’s Country
       Survey had statistically similar ratings for technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge
       work and activities.

      Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher
       ratings for technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (mean rating =
       8.2) compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG (mean rating = 7.6).




                                               35
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey had significantly lower
         ratings for the WBG’s knowledge work being translated enough (weighted mean = 6.5)
         and leading to practical solutions (weighted mean = 6.2) compared to respondents from
         the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted means = 7.3 and 6.8, respectively) 6.
        Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave higher ratings for all of
         these aspects of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities compared to respondents who
         do not collaborate with the WBG. Those differences that reached statistical significance
         are indicated in the chart below.




6
 Please refer to Appendix E (page 115) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The means in the chart were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             36
                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



VIII. World Bank Group’s Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Bulgaria’s Needs for Financial Instruments (Indicator Question)
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey and this year’s Country
       Survey had statistically similar levels of agreement that the WBG’s financial instruments
       meet Bulgaria’s needs.




                                               37
                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bulgaria
The World Bank Group’s Local Presence in Bulgaria




Selectivity of the World Bank Group’s Support




                                      38
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Bulgaria (continued)

Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey indicated that the World
      Bank should offer more innovative knowledge services (43%) and reduce the complexity
      of obtaining Bank financing (34%) to make itself of greater value in Bulgaria.

     Stakeholders: Respondents from the office of a Minister were significantly more likely to
      indicate that the WBG should collaborate more effectively with Government clients
      compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                             39
                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Bulgaria (continued)

World Bank Group Should Collaborate More with…
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey indicated that the World
      Bank should work more with local government (47%), private sector (39%), academia
      (31%), and NGOs (28%) to ensure better development results in Bulgaria.




                                           40
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Bulgaria (continued)
Where the World Bank Group Should Focus its Resources
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey indicated that the World
      Bank should focus its resources on education (43%) and business environment and
      private sector development (37%), followed by economic growth (25%).
     Stakeholders: Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated education
      and economic growth, respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister were
      more likely to indicate that the WBG should focus its resources on governance.
     Education sector: Respondents from the education sector were significantly more likely
      to indicate that that the WBG should focus its resources on education (71%) compared to
      respondents from all other sectors (43%); however, respondents from other sectors were
      still most likely to indicate that that the WBG should focus its resources on education.




                                             41
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



IX. The Future Role of the WBG in Bulgaria (continued)

Future Combination of the WBG services
     Stakeholders: Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister were
      significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should offer more convening services
      in Bulgaria compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                             42
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



X. Communication and Outreach
When considering the World Bank Group’s future outreach with key constituencies,
please see Appendix B (page 67) for all responses by stakeholder groups.

Information Sources
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey indicated that they got
       most of their information about economic and social development issues in Bulgaria from
       the Internet (75%).




                                              43
                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Preferred Information Sources
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey indicated that they would
      prefer to receive information from World Bank website (51%), followed by direct contact
      with World Bank staff (36%) and e-Newsletters (34%).
     Stakeholders: Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister indicated that
      they would prefer to receive information from WBG publications. Respondents from the
      office of a Minister, the private sector/financial sector/private banks, the media, and
      independent government institutions indicated that they would prefer to receive
      information from the WBG website. Employees of ministries and respondents from
      bilateral/multilateral agencies and other organizations indicated that they would prefer to
      receive information from WBG seminars. Respondents from academia indicated that they
      would prefer to receive information from e-Newsletters.
     Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG were significantly
      more likely to indicate that they would prefer to receive information from WBG seminars
      (52%) compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG (35%), who were
      significantly more likely to indicate that they would prefer to receive information from e-
      Newsletters (44%) compared to respondents who are collaborating (23%).




                                              44
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Access to Information
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey were significantly less
         likely to indicate that they were aware of the WBG’s Access to Information Policy
         (weighted percentage of respondents = 22%) compared to respondents from the FY ’12
         Country Survey (weighted percentage of respondents = 32%)7.




        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey were significantly less
         likely to indicate that they had requested information from the WBG in the past year
         (weighted percentage of respondents = 13%) compared to respondents from the FY ’12
         Country Survey (weighted percentage of respondents = 23%)7.
        Collaboration: Respondents who are collaborating with the WBG were significantly
         more likely to have requested information from the WBG in the past year (23%)
         compared to respondents who are not collaborating with the WBG (8%).




7
 Please refer to Appendix E for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The percentages in the charts were calculated
based on un-weighted data.

                                                              45
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Access to Information (continued)
      Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey and this year’s Country
       Survey had statistically similar rates of obtaining information from the WBG.




Access to the Internet

          Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey, and in the FY ’12
           Country Survey, all had 100% Internet access.




                                             46
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)

WBG Website Usage and Evaluation
        Year comparison: Respondents in this year’s Country Survey were significantly less
         likely to indicate that they used the WBG’s website (weighted percentage of respondents
         = 81%) compared to respondents from the FY ’12 Country Survey (weighted percentage
         of respondents = 89%)8.




        Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey and this year’s Country
         Survey had statistically similar levels of agreement regarding the WBG’s websites.




8
 Please refer to Appendix E (page 115) for more details on weighting for year comparisons. The percentages in the chart were
calculated based on un-weighted data.

                                                             47
                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)

WBG Social Media and Evaluation




                                  48
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



X. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Information Sharing
     Year comparison: Respondents in the FY’12 Country Survey and this year’s Country
      Survey had statistically similar levels of agreement regarding the WBG’s information
      sharing.

     Stakeholders: Employees of ministries and respondents from the office of the
      President/Prime Minister and the media had the highest levels of agreement that the
      WBG is responsive to their information requests whereas respondent from academia had
      significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents from the office of the
      President/Prime Minister and the media had the highest levels of agreement that when
      they need information from the WBG they know how to find it whereas respondent from
      academia had significantly lower levels of agreement.

     Collaboration: Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher
      levels of agreement that the WBG is responsive to their information requests (mean
      rating = 8.3) compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG (mean
      rating = 7.3).




                                             49
                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria



XI. Appendices

     A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents...................... 51

     B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ...................... 65

     C. Responses to All Questions by Collaboration with the WBG ......... 85

     D. Responses to All Questions by Gender ......................................... 99

     E. Responses to All Questions by Year ............................................ 113

     F. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG ........ 119

     G. Indicator Questions by Stakeholder Groups .............................. 120

     H. WBG Country Opinion Survey FY15 – Bulgaria Questionnaire .... 121




                                           Bulgaria




                                             50
                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=183)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the number of
respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know? (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean), and the standard
deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).

A. General Issues Facing Bulgaria

                                                                                            Percentage of Respondents
1. In general would you say that Bulgaria is headed in ... ?                                         (N=175)
The right direction                                                                                   60.6%
The wrong direction                                                                                   12.6%
Not sure                                                                                              26.9%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bulgaria.
Please identify which of the following you consider the most important                      Percentage of Respondents
development priorities in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)                             (Responses Combined; N=180)
Education                                                                                               53.3%
Economic growth                                                                                         52.8%
Law and justice                                                                                         47.8%
Health                                                                                                  21.1%
Governance                                                                                              17.8%
Convergence of living standards with EU                                                                 15.6%
Job creation/employment                                                                                 13.9%
Basic infrastructure and transport                                                                      12.2%
Public financial management                                                                             11.1%
Social protection                                                                                       10.6%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                                            8.9%
Innovations                                                                                             8.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                                               7.2%
Rural development                                                                                       4.4%
Climate change and green growth                                                                         3.3%
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                                                   3.3%
Agricultural development                                                                                2.2%
Trade and exports                                                                                       1.1%
Water supply and sanitation                                                                             0.6%
Financial markets                                                                                       0.0%




                                                             51
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


A. General Issues Facing Bulgaria (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would             Percentage of Respondents
contribute most to reducing poverty in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)          (Responses Combined; N=179)
Education                                                                                        52.5%
Economic growth                                                                                  41.3%
Job creation/employment                                                                          39.1%
Law and justice                                                                                  34.1%
Foreign direct investment                                                                        17.9%
Public financial management                                                                      16.2%
Agricultural development                                                                         15.1%
Rural development                                                                                15.1%
Governance                                                                                       12.8%
Convergence of living standards with EU                                                          11.2%
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                                            7.8%
Trade and exports                                                                                7.3%
Innovations                                                                                      7.3%
Health                                                                                           5.6%
Social protection                                                                                4.5%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                                     3.9%
Basic infrastructure and transport                                                               3.4%
Climate change and green growth                                                                  2.2%
Financial markets                                                                                0.6%
Water supply and sanitation                                                                      0.0%

4. The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity? goal captures two key elements,
economic growth and equity. It will seek to foster income growth among the
bottom 40 percent of a country’s population. Improvement in the Shared
Prosperity Indicator requires growth and well-being of the less well-off. When
thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the
following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Bulgaria?                  Percentage of Respondents
(Choose no more than TWO)                                                              (Responses Combined; N=182)
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                         53.8%
Consistent economic growth                                                                        46.7%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                                                              28.6%
A growing middle class                                                                            25.8%
Better employment opportunities for young people                                                  17.6%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                           7.7%
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                               6.0%
Better quality public services                                                                    4.4%
More reliable social safety net                                                                   2.7%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability                2.2%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                   2.2%
Better employment opportunities for women                                                         0.5%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                      0.5%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                           0.0%
Other                                                                                             0.0%




                                                         52
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


A. General Issues Facing Bulgaria (continued)

5. Do you think the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem, a
   moderately big problem, a small problem or not a problem at all in Bulgaria?              Percentage of Respondents
   (Select only ONE response)                                                                          (N=181)
A very big problem                                                                                      39.2%
A moderately big problem                                                                                47.0%
A small problem                                                                                         10.5%
Not a problem at all                                                                                    2.8%
Don't know                                                                                              0.6%

6. In your view, is global climate change a very serious problem, somewhat                   Percentage of Respondents
   serious, not too serious, or not a problem? (Select only ONE response)                              (N=181)
A very serious problem                                                                                  42.5%
A somewhat serious problem                                                                              37.6%
Not too serious problem                                                                                 15.5%
Not a problem                                                                                           2.8%
Don't know                                                                                              1.7%



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

Familiarity                                                                             N        DK       Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in
                                                                                       179        0       5.73      2.29
   Bulgaria? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)

Effectiveness*                                                                          N        DK       Mean       SD
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                       150        25      6.61      1.85
    effectiveness in Bulgaria? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

Staff Preparedness                                                                      N        DK       Mean       SD
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well
     prepared (e.g., skills and knowledge) to help Bulgaria solve its most
                                                                                       140        35      7.50      1.76
     complicated development challenges?
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                               53
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact
on development results in Bulgaria, in which sectoral areas do you believe the
World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge          Percentage of Respondents
services) in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)                                    (Responses Combined; N=180)
Education                                                                                         47.2%
Economic growth                                                                                   29.4%
Governance                                                                                        26.7%
Law and justice                                                                                   23.3%
Foreign direct investment                                                                         17.8%
Health                                                                                            17.8%
Innovations                                                                                       17.2%
Public financial management                                                                       16.7%
Convergence of living standards with EU                                                           15.0%
Job creation/employment                                                                           14.4%
Agricultural development                                                                          11.7%
Rural development                                                                                 11.1%
Basic infrastructure and transport                                                                10.6%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                                      9.4%
Climate change and green growth                                                                   7.2%
Social protection                                                                                 4.4%
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                                             3.9%
Financial markets                                                                                 2.8%
Water supply and sanitation                                                                       2.2%
Trade and exports                                                                                 1.7%

5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which                 Percentage of Respondents (N=173)
                                                                                      nd
activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is       Greatest   2 Greatest
of second greatest value in Bulgaria?                                     Value          Value     Combined
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                          41.0%          18.5%        59.5%
Capacity development                                                      17.3%          24.3%        41.6%
Financial resources                                                       10.4%          13.3%        23.7%
Technical assistance                                                      8.1%           12.7%        20.8%
Convening/facilitating                                                    8.7%           6.9%         15.6%
Coordination with the European Commission and International
                                                                           5.8%            9.2%           15.0%
Financial Institutions
Data                                                                       4.0%            6.9%           11.0%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                 4.6%            5.8%           10.4%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                              0.0%            1.7%           1.7%
Other                                                                      0.0%            0.6%           0.6%

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity                 Effectiveness
building work it does in each of the following areas in Bulgaria?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                             N      DK     Mean      SD
6.   Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                    111     62     7.03     1.87
7.   Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)               88     83     5.61     1.91
8.   Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)    127     45     7.08     1.93




                                                         54
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Bulgaria to help                       Importance
ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for
the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity
building? (1-Not important all, 10-Very important)                                      N      DK     Mean      SD
9. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                      129     43     7.79     2.10
10. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)               112     55     7.67     2.08
11. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)     137     34     8.42     1.69

12. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest          Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)                       (Responses Combined; N=171)
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving                     24.0%
Don’t know                                                                                        22.2%
Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the Government                                 15.2%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                          15.2%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                      13.5%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Bulgaria                                11.1%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                                          9.9%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                          9.9%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                             9.4%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                             8.8%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow (e.g., too bureaucratic in its operational
                                                                                                    7.0%
policies and procedures)
Not aligned with country priorities                                                                 4.7%
Other                                                                                               2.9%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                              2.3%
Not aligned with other international partners’ work                                                 1.8%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                            1.2%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                               1.2%
Not client focused                                                                                  0.6%

13. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST                   Percentage of Respondents
  effective in reducing poverty in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)                 (Responses Combined; N=171)
Capacity development                                                                              36.3%
Knowledge products/services                                                                       32.2%
Technical assistance                                                                              32.2%
Investment lending                                                                                25.1%
Don’t know                                                                                        18.1%
Multi-sectoral approaches                                                                         11.7%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                                           10.5%
Trust Fund management                                                                             2.9%
Other                                                                                             0.0%

14. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support         Percentage of Respondents
  help the poorest in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)                                       (N=169)
To a fully sufficient degree                                                                      2.4%
To a somewhat sufficient degree                                                                   14.8%
To a somewhat insufficient degree                                                                 35.5%
To a very insufficient degree                                                                     14.2%
Don't know                                                                                        33.1%


                                                         55
                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

15. In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which
  TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with              Percentage of Respondents
  more in your country? (Choose no more than TWO)                                       (Responses Combined; N=172)
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                              40.7%
Local Government                                                                                      27.9%
Private Sector                                                                                        27.9%
NGOs/Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                             23.8%
Youth/University Groups                                                                               14.0%
Parliament                                                                                            11.0%
Beneficiaries                                                                                         10.5%
European Institutions and International Financial Institutions                                        9.3%
Don’t know                                                                                            9.3%
Media                                                                                                 7.0%
Foundations                                                                                           1.2%
Other                                                                                                 1.2%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World                     Level of Agreement
Bank Group’s work in Bulgaria? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                  N        DK Mean        SD
16. Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development
                                                                                        149      20      6.81   2.00
    in Bulgaria*
17. The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                        138      29      6.58   2.09
    development priorities for Bulgaria*
18. The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic for
                                                                                        141      26      6.79   1.96
    Bulgaria
19. The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Bulgaria with respect       141      26      7.96   1.81

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in                    Level of Agreement
Bulgaria, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very
significant degree)                                                                      N       DK     Mean     SD
20.   Responsiveness*                                                                   110      45     7.67    1.86
21.   Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                108      48     6.63    2.02
22.   Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                         113      44     6.47    2.04
23.   Being inclusive*                                                                  103      53     6.84    1.89
24.   Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                    131      26     7.48    2.12
25.   Staff accessibility*                                                              126      31     7.47    2.11
26.   Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                  117      39     7.46    2.02
27.   Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                        115      42      7.30   2.31
      decisions important to my work*
28.   Collaboration with civil society*                                                  97      60      6.60   2.19
29.   Collaboration with the Government*                                                116      39      8.03   1.46
30.   Collaboration with the European Commission on International Financial
                                                                                         88      68      7.93   1.48
      Institutions*
31.   Collaboration with the private sector*                                             80      76      6.18   2.21
32.   The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                     114      42      6.38   2.25
33.   Being a long-term partner*                                                        124      33      8.15   1.72




                                                          56
                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

34. To be a more effective development partner in Bulgaria, do you believe that        Percentage of Respondents
the World Bank Group should have…? (Select only ONE response)                                     (N=167)
More local presence                                                                                 55.1%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                                     28.7%
Less local presence                                                                                 0.6%
Don't know                                                                                          15.6%

35. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place,      Percentage of Respondents
which of the following would you attribute to? (Choose no more than TWO)               (Responses Combined; N=159)
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                                 40.3%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                     27.7%
The Government works inefficiently                                                                  25.8%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                   24.5%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                               23.3%
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                  16.4%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                    13.2%
ground
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                               8.2%
Poor coordination with international and European partners                                          1.9%
Other                                                                                               0.6%



C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved                Importance
in the following areas of development in Bulgaria?
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                                             N      DK     Mean      SD
1.    Convergence of living standards with EU                                          143      9     7.61     2.45
2.    Basic infrastructure and transport                                               141     11     7.20     2.36
3.    Economic growth                                                                  148      7     8.71     1.49
4.    Energy and energy efficiency                                                     135     18     7.81     1.87
5.    Water supply and sanitation                                                      130     19     6.96     2.09
6.    Public financial management                                                      140     12     7.76     2.04
7.    Social protection                                                                135     15     7.13     2.40
8.    Education                                                                        146      9     8.72     1.68
9.    Health                                                                           142     11     8.32     1.94
10.   Climate change and green growth                                                  132     19     7.05     2.62
11.   Governance                                                                       141     10     8.19     2.05
12.   Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                            134     14     6.84     2.67
13.   Job creation/employment                                                          139     10     7.88     2.09
14.   Law and justice                                                                  137     14     8.30     2.03
15.   Innovations                                                                      137     12     8.25     1.97
16.   Financial markets                                                                126     21     6.97     2.52
17.   Agricultural development                                                         133     17     7.35     2.44
18.   Trade and exports                                                                123     23     6.84     2.53
19.   Foreign direct investment                                                        129     20     7.85     2.05
20.   Rural development                                                                133     15     7.56     2.45




                                                       57
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it                         Effectiveness
does in the following areas of development in Bulgaria?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                                       N      DK     Mean      SD
1.    Convergence of living standards with EU                                                     69     82     5.68     2.45
2.    Basic infrastructure and transport                                                          77     74     6.48     2.10
3.    Economic growth                                                                             84     65     6.30     2.07
4.    Energy and energy efficiency                                                                68     79     6.28     1.94
5.    Water supply and sanitation                                                                 75     76     6.28     2.21
6.    Public financial management                                                                 79     70     6.23     1.92
7.    Social protection                                                                           80     69     5.86     2.19
8.    Education                                                                                   95     55     6.24     2.23
9.    Health                                                                                      79     69     5.84     2.31
10.   Climate change and green growth                                                             65     83     5.88     2.10
11.   Governance                                                                                  91     58     6.41     2.24
12.   Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                                       81     69     6.31     2.14
13.   Job creation/employment                                                                     77     73     5.78     2.41
14.   Law and justice                                                                             64     84     5.47     2.35
15.   Innovations                                                                                 73     75     6.16     2.25
16.   Financial markets                                                                           66     83     6.18     2.31
17.   Agricultural development                                                                    61     88     5.79     2.42
18.   Trade and exports                                                                           62     87     5.82     2.16
19.   Foreign direct investment                                                                   67     83     6.15     2.16
20.   Rural development                                                                           59     89     5.75     2.47

3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the                    Percentage of Respondents
program in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)                                                            (N=153)
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                                      31.4%
In the country                                                                                                14.4%
Don’t know                                                                                                    54.2%

Achieving Development Results*                                                                    N      DK     Mean      SD
4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development
                                                                                                 118     37      6.22    1.89
    results in Bulgaria? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank
Group in Bulgaria? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                       N      DK     Mean      SD
5. The World Bank Group’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending,
    Development Policy Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.) meet the needs                 102     52      6.25    1.96
    of Bulgaria*
6. The World Bank Group meets Bulgaria’s needs for knowledge services (e.g.,
                                                                                                 123     30      6.89    2.11
    research, analysis, data, technical assistance)*

Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)                                                              N      DK     Mean      SD
7. To what extent do you believe that Bulgaria received value for money from the
    World Bank Group’s Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)?                                     102     52      6.14    2.33
      (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

Measuring and Correcting Work                                                                     N      DK     Mean      SD
8. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its
                                                                                                  94     60      6.09    2.20
   work in real time in Bulgaria? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

                                                                 58
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and                      Percentage of Respondents
activities in the work you do?                                                                         (N=157)
Weekly                                                                                                    3.8%
Monthly                                                                                                   15.3%
A few times a year                                                                                        45.2%
Rarely                                                                                                    23.6%
Never                                                                                                     12.1%

In Bulgaria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge                       Degree
work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                N       DK Mean         SD
2. Are timely                                                                               120      31    6.62     2.13
3. Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                  115      34    6.63     2.29
4. Lead to practical solutions                                                              124      27    6.32     2.11
5. Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                     131      20    7.34     1.97
6. Are source of relevant information on global good practices                              127      25    7.77     1.77
7. Are adequately disseminated                                                              120      31    6.55     2.27
8. Are translated enough into local language                                                116      36    6.73     2.46
9. Are adaptable to Bulgaria’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                            122      29      6.43   2.01
    circumstances*

Overall Evaluations                                                                          N       DK     Mean    SD
10. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group’s
    knowledge work and activities make to development results in your country?*             128      27      6.66   1.86
     (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
11. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group’s
    knowledge work and activities?* (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical   124      32      7.88   1.61
     quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?                               Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                                     N        DK Mean        SD
1.   The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                           64       87     5.88   2.41
2.   The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                             99      51      7.35   1.90
     programs it supports
3.   The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion               94      54      7.12   1.97
4.   The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable                   59      91      7.32   2.00
5.   The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                         65      84      7.25   2.03
6.   The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Bulgaria*                               76      73      6.53   2.31
7.   Working with the World Bank Group increases Bulgaria’s institutional capacity          109      39      7.28   1.88
8.   Where country systems (e.g., procurement, financial management, etc.) are
                                                                                             66      83      7.38   1.85
     adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of them*
9.   The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support (i.e.,
                                                                                             92      58      7.58   1.86
     supervision of projects)




                                                           59
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Promoting PPP in Bulgaria                                                                    N      DK     Mean      SD
10. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find
    solutions that promote private public partnerships in Bulgaria?                              74     77       5.68   2.10
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

11. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates                 Percentage of Respondents
  in Bulgaria? (Select only one response)                                                                  (N=149)
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Bulgaria                                                         0.0%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Bulgaria                                                   33.6%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                                       35.6%
Don't know                                                                                                   30.9%

12. Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in                     Percentage of Respondents
  Bulgaria? (Select only one response)                                                                     (N=152)
The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the most important
                                                                                                             36.2%
development challenges in Bulgaria
The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Bulgaria, and it is involved in
                                                                                                             23.7%
too many areas of development
Don't know                                                                                                   40.1%



F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bulgaria

1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of                    Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)                                      (Responses Combined; N=152)
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                                           39.5%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                                32.9%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                                                     19.7%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                                            18.4%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                                 14.5%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                                 13.2%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Bulgaria’s specific challenges                          11.2%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                                         9.2%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                                   6.6%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Bulgaria’s economy                            5.9%
Work faster                                                                                              5.3%
Increase availability of Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)                                            5.3%
Other                                                                                                    3.3%

2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group
offers in Bulgaria, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which
ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of                 Percentage of Respondents
in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)                                                                 (N=156)
Knowledge products                                                                                       31.4%
The combination is appropriate for Bulgaria                                                              24.4%
Convening services                                                                                       19.2%
Financial services                                                                                       12.8%
Don't know                                                                                               11.5%
None of the above                                                                                         .6%


                                                                60
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


G. Communication and Information Sharing
1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social                   Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)                            (Responses Combined; N=155)
Internet                                                                                          81.3%
Local television                                                                                  27.1%
Periodicals                                                                                       15.5%
Other                                                                                             14.2%
Local newspapers                                                                                  13.5%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                          12.9%
International newspapers                                                                          7.7%
International television                                                                          1.9%
Local radio                                                                                       1.3%
International radio                                                                               0.0%

2. How would you prefer to obtain information from the World Bank Group?               Percentage of Respondents
(Choose no more than TWO)                                                              (Responses Combined; N=156)
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/ conferences                                                41.7%
World Bank Group’s website                                                                        35.9%
e-Newsletters                                                                                     35.3%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                                       34.0%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                                              28.8%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                          9.0%
Mobile phones                                                                                     0.0%
Other                                                                                             0.0%

3. Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under
which the WBG will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on       Percentage of Respondents
a list of exceptions?                                                                            (N=154)
Yes                                                                                               20.1%
No                                                                                                79.9%

4. Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities          Percentage of Respondents
    in the past year?                                                                            (N=156)
Yes                                                                                               14.1%
No                                                                                                85.9%

                                                                                       Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                                      (N=22)
Yes                                                                                               90.9%
No                                                                                                9.1%

                                                                                       Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                           (N=158)
Yes                                                                                              100.0%
No                                                                                                  -

                                                                                       Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                        (N=158)
Yes                                                                                               81.0%
No                                                                                                19.0%



                                                       61
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

8. Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites (e.g., blogs,      Percentage of Respondents
    Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)?                                                        (N=153)
Yes                                                                                              13.7%
No                                                                                               86.3%

9. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank           Percentage of Respondents
    Group website?                                                                              (N=155)
High speed/WiFi                                                                                  96.8%
Dial-up                                                                                          3.2%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                           Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                          N        DK      Mean     SD
10. I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate                      117       35       7.38   1.83
11. I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful             118       31       7.96   1.54
12. The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g., blogs, Facebook,
    Twitter, YouTube, Flickr) are valuable sources of information about the      43       102      6.23      2.87
    institution
13. When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to
                                                                                 121       30      7.57      2.35
    find it
14. The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                 84        65      7.90      2.03
    inquiries



H. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                        Percentage of Respondents
(Select only ONE response)                                                                      (N=124)
Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency                          27.2%
NGO/ Community-Based Organization                                                                16.1%
Bilateral/ Multilateral Agency                                                                   10.0%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                           10.0%
Media                                                                                            5.6%
Office of Minister                                                                               5.0%
Private Sector Organization                                                                      4.4%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                                    3.9%
Other                                                                                            3.9%
Office of the President/Prime Minister                                                           3.3%
Independent Government Institution                                                               3.3%
PMU overseeing implementation of project/Consultant/Contractor working on
                                                                                                  2.2%
WBG supported project/program
Local Government Office or Staff                                                                  2.2%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                         1.1%
Private Foundation                                                                                1.1%
Trade Union                                                                                       0.6%




                                                        62
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                            Percentage of Respondents
(Select only ONE response)                                                                       (N=177)
Education                                                                                         15.8%
Generalist (specialized in multiple sectors)                                                      13.0%
Finance and markets                                                                               10.7%
Transport and ICT                                                                                 10.7%
Macroeconomics and fiscal management                                                              10.2%
Governance                                                                                        6.8%
Other                                                                                             6.8%
Social protection and labor                                                                       4.5%
Trade and competitiveness                                                                         4.5%
Environment and natural resources                                                                 4.0%
Health, nutrition, and population                                                                 3.4%
Jobs                                                                                              2.3%
Urban, rural, and social development                                                              1.7%
Water                                                                                             1.1%
Public-private partnerships                                                                       1.1%
Energy and extractives                                                                            1.1%
Poverty                                                                                           1.1%
Agriculture                                                                                       0.6%
Climate Change                                                                                    0.6%

3. Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the        Percentage of Respondents
World Bank Group in your country? (Select only ONE response)                                     (N=175)
I have previously collaborated with the World Bank Group                                          32.6%
Both of the above (I currently collaborate and previously have collaborated with
                                                                                                  32.6%
the World Bank Group)
I have never collaborated with the World Bank Group                                               24.6%
I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group                                                 10.3%

4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily            Percentage of Respondents
  engage with in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)                                            (N=159)
The World Bank (IBRD)                                                                             83.6%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                       4.4%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                               1.9%
Other                                                                                             10.1%

                                                                                       Percentage of Respondents
5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?                                     (N=165)
Yes                                                                                               12.1%
No                                                                                                87.9%

6. If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in             Percentage of Respondents
  Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)                                                            (N=27)
The two institutions work well together                                                           55.6%
The way the two institutions work together needs improvement                                      0.0%
The two institutions do not work well together                                                    3.7%
Don't know                                                                                        40.7%




                                                        63
                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


H. Background Information (continued)

7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank        Percentage of Respondents
  Group in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)                                     (Responses Combined; N=169)
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                                 47.3%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                             46.7%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                            21.9%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                                21.3%
Observer                                                                                      13.6%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
8. What’s your gender?                                                                       (N=179)
Female                                                                                        44.1%
Male                                                                                          55.9%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
9. Which best represents your geographic location?                                           (N=180)
Sofia                                                                                         89.4%
Outside Sofia                                                                                 10.6%




                                                     64
                                                                                                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups9
Office of the President/Prime Minister N=6  Office of a Minister N=9  Employee of a Ministry N= 49 
Bilateral/Multilateral Agency N=18  Private Sector/Financial Sector/Private Bank N=15  NGO/CBO N=29                                                      
Media N=10  Independent Government Institution N=6  Academia N=19  Other N=22

A. General Issues facing Bulgaria

In general, would you say that Bulgaria is headed in...?
                                                                          Office of the                                  Bilateral/   Private Sector/                              Independent
                                                                           President/   Office of a      Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                             Government
Percentage of Respondents                                                Prime Minister Minister        of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO          Media       Institution   Academia   Other
The right direction                                                          80.0%          100.0%         63.8%          72.2%            53.3%           42.9%        60.0%         50.0%        52.9%     57.9%
The wrong direction                                                          20.0%             -           4.3%           11.1%            13.3%           25.0%        10.0%         33.3%        17.6%     10.5%
Not sure                                                                       -               -           31.9%          16.7%            33.3%           32.1%        30.0%         16.7%        29.4%     31.6%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bulgaria. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Bulgaria?
                                                                          Office of the                                  Bilateral/   Private Sector/                              Independent
Percentage of Respondents                                                  President/   Office of a      Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                             Government
(Responses combined)                                                     Prime Minister Minister        of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO          Media       Institution   Academia   Other
Social protection                                                            0.0%            22.2%         10.4%          16.7%            0.0%            6.9%         10.0%         33.3%        11.1%     10.0%
Basic infrastructure and transport                                           0.0%            0.0%          18.8%          5.6%             20.0%           3.4%         10.0%         16.7%        11.1%     15.0%
Economic growth                                                              40.0%           11.1%         58.3%          50.0%            40.0%           69.0%        60.0%         50.0%        44.4%     50.0%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                 0.0%            0.0%          2.1%           11.1%            13.3%           10.3%        20.0%         16.7%        5.6%      15.0%
Water supply and sanitation                                                  0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           5.6%             0.0%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
Public financial management                                                  40.0%           11.1%         8.3%           16.7%            33.3%           6.9%         0.0%          0.0%         11.1%     5.0%
Convergence of living standards with EU                                      0.0%            22.2%         14.6%          5.6%             6.7%            10.3%        40.0%         33.3%        27.8%     15.0%
Education                                                                    80.0%           44.4%         50.0%          27.8%            60.0%           72.4%        40.0%         50.0%        61.1%     50.0%
Health                                                                       0.0%            33.3%         20.8%          27.8%            33.3%           13.8%        30.0%         0.0%         27.8%     15.0%
Climate change and green growth                                              0.0%            11.1%         2.1%           0.0%             0.0%            3.4%         10.0%         0.0%         0.0%      10.0%
Governance                                                                   40.0%           22.2%         20.8%          27.8%            13.3%           10.3%        0.0%          33.3%        27.8%     5.0%
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                        0.0%            0.0%          2.1%           0.0%             6.7%            3.4%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%      15.0%
Job creation/employment                                                      0.0%            33.3%         12.5%          16.7%            0.0%            10.3%        20.0%         0.0%         5.6%      30.0%
Law and justice                                                              60.0%           55.6%         39.6%          66.7%            53.3%           44.8%        30.0%         50.0%        61.1%     45.0%
Innovations                                                                  40.0%           22.2%         10.4%          5.6%             13.3%           10.3%        0.0%          0.0%         5.6%      0.0%
Financial markets                                                            0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%             0.0%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
Agricultural development                                                     0.0%            0.0%          4.2%           0.0%             0.0%            3.4%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%      5.0%
Trade and exports                                                            0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           5.6%             0.0%            3.4%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                    0.0%            0.0%          8.3%           11.1%            6.7%            6.9%         20.0%         0.0%         0.0%      10.0%
Rural development                                                            0.0%            11.1%         8.3%           0.0%             0.0%            3.4%         0.0%          16.7%        0.0%      5.0%

9
    Only 180 respondents provided the information about their current positions. Thus, only these respondents were included in the across-stakeholder analysis presented in this appendix.
                                                                                                               65
                                                                                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


A. General Issues facing Bulgaria (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty
in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                            Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                                    President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
(Responses combined)                                       Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
Financial markets                                             0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Agricultural development                                      0.0%          11.1%          22.4%          5.6%          13.3%         10.7%      0.0%      16.7%         22.2%     10.5%
Trade and exports                                             20.0%         0.0%           6.1%           11.1%         13.3%         3.6%       10.0%     16.7%         0.0%      5.3%
Foreign direct investment                                     40.0%         11.1%          14.3%          33.3%         33.3%         21.4%      30.0%     0.0%          0.0%      10.5%
Rural development                                             0.0%          33.3%          16.3%          16.7%         6.7%          17.9%      10.0%     16.7%         11.1%     15.8%
Governance                                                    20.0%         33.3%          6.1%           27.8%         26.7%         10.7%      20.0%     0.0%          11.1%     0.0%
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                         0.0%          0.0%           4.1%           5.6%          13.3%         10.7%      10.0%     0.0%          5.6%      21.1%
Job creation/employment                                       40.0%         33.3%          38.8%          38.9%         6.7%          46.4%      30.0%     33.3%         44.4%     63.2%
Law and justice                                               20.0%         44.4%          36.7%          27.8%         53.3%         17.9%      30.0%     33.3%         38.9%     42.1%
Innovations                                                   40.0%         11.1%          6.1%           5.6%          13.3%         7.1%       0.0%      0.0%          5.6%      5.3%
Public financial management                                   40.0%         22.2%          18.4%          16.7%         13.3%         21.4%      0.0%      33.3%         16.7%     0.0%
Convergence of living standards with EU                       0.0%          0.0%           8.2%           16.7%         0.0%          14.3%      20.0%     33.3%         16.7%     10.5%
Education                                                     60.0%         66.7%          40.8%          38.9%         60.0%         53.6%      80.0%     83.3%         61.1%     47.4%
Health                                                        0.0%          11.1%          2.0%           16.7%         6.7%          3.6%       0.0%      16.7%         5.6%      5.3%
Climate change and green growth                               0.0%          11.1%          2.0%           0.0%          0.0%          3.6%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      5.3%
Social protection                                             0.0%          0.0%           8.2%           5.6%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          5.6%      10.5%
Basic infrastructure and transport                            0.0%          0.0%           8.2%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          5.6%      5.3%
Economic growth                                               20.0%         11.1%          53.1%          33.3%         40.0%         42.9%      50.0%     16.7%         38.9%     42.1%
Energy and energy efficiency                                  0.0%          0.0%           4.1%           0.0%          0.0%          10.7%      0.0%      0.0%          11.1%     0.0%
Water supply and sanitation                                   0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      0.0%




                                                                                              66
                                                                                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


A. General Issues facing Bulgaria (continued)
The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity? goal captures two key elements, economic growth and equity. It will seek to foster income growth among the bottom 40 percent of a country’s
population. Improvement in the Shared Prosperity Indicator requires growth and well-being of the less well-off. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which
of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                               Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                                       President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
(Responses combined)                                          Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens              0.0%          11.1%          2.0%           11.1%         13.3%         10.3%      0.0%      0.0%          5.6%      0.0%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                             60.0%         11.1%          28.6%          27.8%         20.0%         44.8%      40.0%     33.3%         27.8%     5.0%
A growing middle class                                           20.0%         22.2%          14.3%          33.3%         33.3%         20.7%      60.0%     33.3%         16.7%     45.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas          20.0%         0.0%           8.2%           16.7%         0.0%          6.9%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      20.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas          0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Consistent economic growth                                       20.0%         55.6%          61.2%          50.0%         46.7%         44.8%      50.0%     16.7%         38.9%     30.0%
Better employment opportunities for young people                 0.0%          55.6%          16.3%          16.7%         13.3%         13.8%      20.0%     16.7%         5.6%      20.0%
Better employment opportunities for women                        0.0%          0.0%           2.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                     0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      5.0%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure
                                                                  0.0%          0.0%          2.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%      0.0%       0.0%         5.6%      10.0%
greater accountability
More reliable social safety net                                  20.0%         0.0%           4.1%           0.0%          6.7%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      5.0%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                  0.0%          0.0%           2.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          11.1%     5.0%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity        40.0%         44.4%          55.1%          44.4%         53.3%         58.6%      20.0%     83.3%         83.3%     50.0%
Better quality public services                                   20.0%         0.0%           4.1%           0.0%          6.7%          0.0%       10.0%     16.7%         5.6%      5.0%
Other                                                            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      0.0%

Do you think the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem, a moderately big problem, a small problem or not a problem at all in Bulgaria?
                                                               Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
                                                                President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
Percentage of Respondents                                     Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
A very big problem                                               60.0%         22.2%          32.7%          50.0%         26.7%         34.5%      70.0%     16.7%         44.4%     55.0%
A moderately big problem                                         40.0%         55.6%          55.1%          50.0%         66.7%         44.8%      20.0%     83.3%         22.2%     35.0%
A small problem                                                    -           22.2%          10.2%            -             -           17.2%      10.0%       -           27.8%     5.0%
Not a problem at all                                               -             -              -              -           6.7%          3.4%         -         -           5.6%      5.0%
Don’t know                                                         -             -            2.0%             -             -             -          -         -             -         -

In your view, is global climate change a very serious problem, somewhat serious, not too serious, or not a problem?
                                                               Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
                                                                President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
Percentage of Respondents                                     Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
A very serious problem                                           60.0%         66.7%          46.9%          61.1%         26.7%         39.3%      40.0%     33.3%         22.2%     40.0%
A somewhat serious problem                                       20.0%         33.3%          36.7%          27.8%         40.0%         39.3%      20.0%     33.3%         55.6%     50.0%
Not too serious problem                                          20.0%           -            14.3%          5.6%          26.7%         17.9%      40.0%     33.3%         11.1%     5.0%
Not a problem                                                      -             -              -              -           6.7%          3.6%         -         -           11.1%       -
Don’t know                                                         -             -            2.0%           5.6%            -             -          -         -             -       5.0%

                                                                                                 67
                                                                                                                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
                                            Office of the                                                                      Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                          President/Prime                           Employee of a           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/                                             Government
                                              Minister       Office of a Minister     Ministry         Multilateral Agency      Private Bank           NGO/CBO              Media            Institution          Academia             Other
                                          N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD          N     Mean SD        N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
How familiar are you with the work of
                                          6    7.67   2.16     9    7.33    1.58    48   6.23   2.09    18    4.50   2.07     14    5.79   1.67   28    4.79   2.28    10   4.30    1.89   6   7.17   2.64   18     5.11   2.30   20   6.45    1.99
the World Bank Group in Bulgaria?*
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                            Office of the                                                                      Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                          President/Prime                           Employee of a           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/                                             Government
                                              Minister       Office of a Minister     Ministry         Multilateral Agency      Private Bank           NGO/CBO              Media            Institution          Academia             Other
                                          N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD          N     Mean SD        N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your impression of
the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in   5    6.40   0.55     9    8.11    1.27    42   6.57   1.56    11    7.18   1.66     12    6.92   1.73   23    5.83   2.42    8    7.25    1.91   5   6.40   2.70   15     5.67   1.72   18   6.78    1.48
Bulgaria.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                            Office of the                                                                      Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                          President/Prime                           Employee of a           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/                                             Government
                                              Minister       Office of a Minister     Ministry         Multilateral Agency      Private Bank           NGO/CBO              Media            Institution          Academia             Other
                                          N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD          N     Mean SD        N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the
WBG's staff is well prepared to help
                                          5    8.00   1.23     9     8.56   1.01    40   7.45   1.45    12    8.00   1.21     11    7.45   1.57   20    6.75   2.34    6     7.83   1.94   5   8.00   1.87   14     6.93   2.37   16   7.50    1.75
Bulgaria solve its most complicated
development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                             68
                                                                                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Bulgaria, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus
most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                                      President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
(Responses combined)                                         Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
Agricultural development                                         0.0%         22.2%          18.4%          0.0%          14.3%         3.6%       10.0%     16.7%         5.6%      10.0%
Trade and exports                                                0.0%         0.0%           0.0%           5.6%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          5.6%      0.0%
Foreign direct investment                                        0.0%         11.1%          14.3%          27.8%         28.6%         21.4%      10.0%     0.0%          22.2%     15.0%
Governance                                                       66.7%        33.3%          24.5%          33.3%         21.4%         28.6%      20.0%     16.7%         16.7%     30.0%
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion*                           0.0%         0.0%           2.0%           0.0%          0.0%          3.6%       0.0%      0.0%          5.6%      20.0%
Job creation/employment                                          16.7%        22.2%          6.1%           27.8%         0.0%          21.4%      10.0%     16.7%         16.7%     20.0%
Law and justice                                                  0.0%         11.1%          24.5%          27.8%         35.7%         25.0%      10.0%     16.7%         27.8%     25.0%
Innovations                                                      33.3%        11.1%          20.4%          27.8%         14.3%         17.9%      0.0%      0.0%          16.7%     15.0%
Financial markets*                                               0.0%         11.1%          2.0%           5.6%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      33.3%         0.0%      0.0%
Rural development                                                0.0%         22.2%          16.3%          0.0%          7.1%          10.7%      20.0%     16.7%         0.0%      15.0%
Convergence of living standards with EU                          0.0%         22.2%          16.3%          5.6%          0.0%          21.4%      40.0%     16.7%         11.1%     15.0%
Education                                                        16.7%        33.3%          46.9%          38.9%         42.9%         57.1%      70.0%     33.3%         61.1%     40.0%
Health                                                           16.7%        22.2%          18.4%          16.7%         28.6%         14.3%      20.0%     33.3%         16.7%     10.0%
Social protection                                                16.7%        0.0%           2.0%           5.6%          7.1%          3.6%       0.0%      16.7%         5.6%      5.0%
Basic infrastructure and transport                               16.7%        11.1%          10.2%          16.7%         21.4%         0.0%       10.0%     16.7%         11.1%     10.0%
Economic growth                                                  0.0%         33.3%          28.6%          22.2%         21.4%         35.7%      40.0%     16.7%         33.3%     35.0%
Energy and energy efficiency                                     33.3%        0.0%           4.1%           5.6%          7.1%          10.7%      0.0%      16.7%         22.2%     15.0%
Water supply and sanitation                                      0.0%         0.0%           4.1%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       10.0%     0.0%          5.6%      0.0%
Public financial management                                      33.3%        22.2%          18.4%          16.7%         28.6%         17.9%      0.0%      33.3%         11.1%     5.0%
Climate change and green growth                                  16.7%        11.1%          8.2%           5.6%          0.0%          7.1%       10.0%     0.0%          5.6%      10.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Bulgaria?
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
Greatest Value                                                 President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
Percentage of Respondents                                    Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
Convening/facilitating*                                          0.0%         0.0%           14.9%          0.0%          7.7%          7.4%       44.4%     0.0%          5.9%      0.0%
Data                                                             20.0%        0.0%           2.1%           5.6%          0.0%          7.4%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      5.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                                40.0%        66.7%          31.9%          55.6%         69.2%         33.3%      0.0%      83.3%         47.1%     35.0%
Financial resources                                              0.0%         11.1%          8.5%           11.1%         7.7%          11.1%      11.1%     0.0%          5.9%      25.0%
Capacity development                                             20.0%        22.2%          21.3%          11.1%         7.7%          22.2%      33.3%     0.0%          11.8%     10.0%
Technical assistance                                             0.0%         0.0%           12.8%          11.1%         7.7%          3.7%       0.0%      16.7%         11.8%     5.0%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                       20.0%        0.0%           2.1%           5.6%          0.0%          7.4%       11.1%     0.0%          5.9%      5.0%
Coordination with the European Commission and
                                                                 0.0%          0.0%          6.4%           0.0%           0.0%          7.4%      0.0%       0.0%         11.8%     15.0%
International Financial Institutions
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                    0.0%          0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%      0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
Other                                                            0.0%          0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%      0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                69
                                                                                                                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

                                                                                  Office of the                                          Bilateral/   Private Sector/                                    Independent
 nd
2 Greatest Value                                                                   President/   Office of a           Employee          Multilateral Financial Sector/                                   Government
Percentage of Respondents                                                        Prime Minister Minister             of a Ministry        Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO                Media       Institution     Academia          Other
Convening/facilitating                                                              20.0%             11.1%             2.1%                  16.7%           0.0%             7.4%           0.0%          0.0%               11.8%        10.0%
Data                                                                                20.0%             0.0%              10.6%                 5.6%            7.7%             3.7%           0.0%          0.0%               0.0%         10.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                    20.0%             22.2%             23.4%                 5.6%            0.0%             18.5%          33.3%         16.7%              17.6%        25.0%
Financial resources                                                                 0.0%              22.2%             17.0%                 27.8%           7.7%             7.4%           11.1%         16.7%              11.8%        0.0%
Capacity development                                                                0.0%              11.1%             25.5%                 11.1%           30.8%            33.3%          11.1%         50.0%              29.4%        25.0%
Technical assistance                                                                20.0%             11.1%             6.4%                  11.1%           23.1%            7.4%           33.3%         0.0%               23.5%        15.0%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                          0.0%              11.1%             2.1%                  0.0%            15.4%            11.1%          11.1%         0.0%               0.0%         10.0%
Coordination with the European Commission and
                                                                                    20.0%             0.0%              10.6%                 22.2%           7.7%              7.4%          0.0%          16.7%              5.9%         5.0%
International Financial Institutions
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                        0.0%             11.1%             0.0%                  0.0%            7.7%              3.7%          0.0%          0.0%               0.0%         0.0%
Other                                                                                0.0%             0.0%              2.1%                  0.0%            0.0%              0.0%          0.0%          0.0%               0.0%         0.0%

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Bulgaria? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                          Office of the                                                                         Private Sector/                                                Independent
                                        President/Prime                             Employee of a          Bilateral/          Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                            Minister       Office of a Minister       Ministry        Multilateral Agency        Private Bank              NGO/CBO             Media            Institution           Academia              Other
                                        N Mean SD            N Mean SD              N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD             N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean    SD
Project implementation (or other
                                        5    7.60   1.14     8    8.50    0.76     31   7.06   2.07     6     7.17     1.17        6   6.17    1.33   19    6.37   2.41    3   5.67    1.53   5   6.60    1.14   14     6.93    2.02   12   7.58    1.08
organizational strengthening)
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                        4    6.75   0.96     6    5.67    1.86     18   5.67   1.50     5     7.20     0.84        7   5.29    1.89   20    5.50   2.33    4   5.75    0.50   4   5.50    2.65   10     4.60    2.12   9    6.11    1.76
citizens' voices into development)
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development       5    7.00   1.58     9    8.33    0.87     37   6.89   1.79     8     7.38     1.19        9   7.11    1.76   20    7.00   2.36    4   7.50    1.29   5   7.20    2.59   14     6.29    2.27   15   7.67    1.68
goals)


When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Bulgaria to help ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved
in the following aspects of capacity building? (1-Not important all, 10-Very important)
                                          Office of the                                                                         Private Sector/                                                Independent
                                        President/Prime                             Employee of a          Bilateral/          Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                            Minister       Office of a Minister       Ministry        Multilateral Agency        Private Bank              NGO/CBO             Media            Institution           Academia              Other
                                        N Mean SD            N Mean SD              N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD             N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean    SD
Project implementation (or other
                                        4    8.00   1.41     9    8.78    1.39     34   7.12   2.64    11     8.09     1.58        7   6.43    1.27   21    8.33   1.65    5   9.20    0.84   6   8.50    1.23   15     7.73    2.28   15   7.93    2.25
organizational strengthening)
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                        4    7.00   2.71     9    8.22    2.86     24   6.92   2.43    11     7.45     2.25        8   7.25    1.91   21    8.57   1.72    4   7.00    2.00   5   7.60    2.07   13     7.54    1.39   12   8.50    1.09
citizens' voices into development)
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development       5    8.60   1.52     9    9.67    0.71     36   7.92   1.87    12     8.17     1.27    10      8.70    0.95   23    8.70   1.64    5   8.20    1.30   4   7.75    1.50   16     8.31    2.47   16   9.00    1.03
goals)




                                                                                                                              70
                                                                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                    Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                                            President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
(Responses combined)                                               Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
Arrogant in its approach                                               0.0%         0.0%           2.1%           5.9%           0.0%         0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Not client focused                                                     0.0%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%           0.0%         0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                  0.0%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%           0.0%         0.0%       12.5%     0.0%          0.0%      5.3%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                               0.0%         22.2%          6.4%           5.9%           7.1%         11.5%      0.0%      33.3%         11.8%     15.8%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in
                                                                      40.0%          0.0%          10.6%          0.0%          21.4%         11.5%      12.5%      0.0%         29.4%     15.8%
the country
Staff too inaccessible                                                 0.0%          0.0%          0.0%           5.9%          0.0%          3.8%       0.0%       0.0%         5.9%      5.3%
Not exploring alternative policy options                               0.0%          0.0%          12.8%          0.0%          21.4%         23.1%      0.0%       0.0%         5.9%      5.3%
Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the
                                                                      20.0%          0.0%          4.3%           11.8%         14.3%         26.9%      0.0%      16.7%         29.4%     31.6%
Government*
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical
                                                                      40.0%         22.2%          36.2%          5.9%          21.4%         11.5%      25.0%     33.3%         23.5%     15.8%
problem solving
Not enough public disclosure of its work                              20.0%         11.1%          4.3%           35.3%          7.1%         26.9%      0.0%      16.7%         11.8%     26.3%
Too influenced by developed countries                                 20.0%         11.1%          12.8%          5.9%           7.1%         7.7%       0.0%      0.0%          17.6%     0.0%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political
                                                                      20.0%         11.1%          10.6%          0.0%           0.0%          7.7%      12.5%     33.3%         5.9%      15.8%
realities
World Bank Group’s processes too slow*                                20.0%         22.2%          4.3%           0.0%          28.6%          3.8%      0.0%      0.0%          5.9%      5.3%
Not aligned with other international partners’ work                   0.0%          0.0%           4.3%           5.9%          0.0%           0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Not aligned with country priorities                                   0.0%          0.0%           2.1%           0.0%          7.1%           7.7%      0.0%      16.7%         17.6%     0.0%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in
                                                                      20.0%         22.2%          19.1%          0.0%           0.0%         11.5%      25.0%     16.7%         5.9%      0.0%
Bulgaria
Other                                                                  0.0%         11.1%          2.1%           5.9%          0.0%          7.7%       0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
Don’t know                                                             0.0%         33.3%          23.4%          41.2%         28.6%         11.5%      50.0%      0.0%         11.8%     21.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                    Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                                            President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
(Responses combined)                                               Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
Trust Fund management                                                 0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           6.3%          0.0%          7.4%       11.1%     0.0%          0.0%      5.3%
Knowledge products/services*                                          40.0%         44.4%          31.3%          6.3%          28.6%         37.0%      0.0%      33.3%         62.5%     36.8%
Investment lending                                                    20.0%         33.3%          22.9%          18.8%         21.4%         22.2%      22.2%     0.0%          31.3%     36.8%
Technical assistance                                                  0.0%          33.3%          39.6%          37.5%         42.9%         25.9%      0.0%      50.0%         37.5%     26.3%
Capacity development                                                  40.0%         44.4%          31.3%          31.3%         21.4%         48.1%      44.4%     50.0%         25.0%     42.1%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government               20.0%         22.2%          14.6%          6.3%          21.4%         7.4%       22.2%     0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Multi-sectoral approaches                                             40.0%         11.1%          12.5%          6.3%          7.1%          18.5%      11.1%     16.7%         6.3%      5.3%
Other                                                                 0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Don’t know                                                            20.0%         0.0%           16.7%          37.5%         28.6%         11.1%      33.3%     16.7%         18.8%     10.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                      71
                                                                                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support help the poorest in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                  Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
                                                                   President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
Percentage of Respondents                                        Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
To a fully sufficient degree                                          -             -            4.4%             -             -           3.8%         -         -           5.9%        -
To a somewhat sufficient degree                                       -           11.1%          15.6%          18.8%         7.1%          15.4%      20.0%       -           11.8%     21.1%
To a somewhat insufficient degree                                   80.0%         44.4%          26.7%          31.3%         42.9%         34.6%      40.0%     66.7%         23.5%     36.8%
To a very insufficient degree                                       20.0%         11.1%          11.1%          12.5%         14.3%         19.2%      10.0%       -           29.4%     10.5%
Don't know                                                            -           33.3%          42.2%          37.5%         35.7%         26.9%      30.0%     33.3%         29.4%     31.6%

In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country?
(Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                  Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                                          President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
(Responses combined)                                             Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
Academia/think tanks/research institutes*                           40.0%         55.6%          45.8%          11.8%         35.7%         34.6%      33.3%     33.3%         76.5%     36.8%
European Institutions and International Financial Institutions      0.0%          11.1%          8.3%           11.8%         14.3%         3.8%       0.0%      0.0%          17.6%     15.8%
Media*                                                              0.0%          0.0%           4.2%           0.0%          14.3%         11.5%      33.3%     0.0%          0.0%      5.3%
Local Government*                                                   0.0%          44.4%          33.3%          29.4%         14.3%         23.1%      11.1%     66.7%         0.0%      47.4%
Private Sector*                                                     60.0%         33.3%          14.6%          29.4%         50.0%         23.1%      55.6%     66.7%         29.4%     15.8%
Parliament                                                          0.0%          22.2%          14.6%          11.8%         28.6%         0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          11.8%     10.5%
NGOs/Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)*                          40.0%         0.0%           14.6%          11.8%         14.3%         69.2%      11.1%     16.7%         11.8%     26.3%
Youth/University Groups                                             40.0%         11.1%          6.3%           17.6%         14.3%         15.4%      22.2%     16.7%         29.4%     5.3%
Beneficiaries                                                       20.0%         11.1%          12.5%          5.9%          0.0%          0.0%       11.1%     0.0%          11.8%     31.6%
Foundations                                                         0.0%          0.0%           2.1%           0.0%          0.0%          3.8%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Other*                                                              0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           11.8%         0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Don’t know                                                          0.0%          0.0%           16.7%          17.6%         7.1%          7.7%       11.1%     0.0%          5.9%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                    72
                                                                                                                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Bulgaria? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                               Office of the                                                                     Private Sector/                                               Independent
                                             President/Prime                           Employee of a           Bilateral/       Financial Sector/                                              Government
                                                 Minister       Office of a Minister     Ministry         Multilateral Agency     Private Bank             NGO/CBO             Media            Institution          Academia             Other
                                             N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD            N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently
plays a relevant role in development in      5    7.60   1.14     9    7.56    1.33    41   7.15   1.85    12    6.75   1.66    12      7.08   1.98   24    5.58   2.39    6   8.67    1.03   6   6.17   2.48   14     6.21   1.81   18   7.06    2.04
Bulgaria*
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned
with what I consider the development         5    6.20   1.48     9    6.67    2.00    40   7.08   1.89    10    7.60   0.52    11      6.55   2.21   22    5.68   2.44    5   7.60    0.55   5   6.80   3.27   13     5.62   2.10   17   6.53    2.29
priorities for Bulgaria
The World Bank Group supports
programs and strategies that are             5    6.60   1.67     8    7.75    1.67    41   7.22   1.73    10    7.40   0.84    12      6.75   1.91   23    5.78   2.43    6   8.00    1.10   5   6.60   2.97   14     6.14   1.83   16   6.63    2.09
realistic for Bulgaria
The World Bank Group treats clients and
                                             5    7.40   2.41     9    8.56    1.74    40   8.33   1.62    10    7.20   1.75    12      7.42   1.56   24    7.88   2.15    6   9.00    1.67   6   7.33   2.81   13     7.62   1.61   15   7.93    1.49
stakeholders in Bulgaria with respect
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Bulgaria, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                               Office of the                                                                     Private Sector/                                               Independent
                                             President/Prime                           Employee of a           Bilateral/       Financial Sector/                                              Government
                                                 Minister       Office of a Minister     Ministry         Multilateral Agency     Private Bank             NGO/CBO             Media            Institution          Academia             Other
                                             N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD            N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Responsiveness*                              5    6.80   2.86     6    8.67    1.21    37   8.38   1.61     8    6.88   1.36        7   7.43   1.27   12    8.00   1.35    3   9.00    1.73   6   7.00   2.19   10     6.70   1.95   15   6.80    2.27
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s
                                             4    5.50   1.92     6    7.67    1.51    35   7.26   1.99     6    6.50   1.87    11      5.36   1.91   14    5.86   1.88    3   8.67    1.53   5   6.40   1.82   10     6.10   1.66   13   6.62    2.33
products and services)*
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                             5    6.00   1.58     7    7.14    1.68    37   7.08   2.02     6    6.33   1.86    11      5.36   2.29   15    5.67   1.99    3   8.00    1.73   6   6.50   2.07   11     5.91   1.97   11   6.73    2.20
circumstances)
Being inclusive                              4    7.00   1.41     6    7.83    1.33    31   7.42   1.71     6    6.00   1.55        9   6.44   1.33   15    6.27   1.98    3   8.33    2.08   6   6.83   2.56   10     6.00   1.89   12   6.75    2.42
Openness (sharing data and other
                                             5    7.20   1.10     7    8.71    1.80    39   8.00   1.86    11    6.45   2.58    10      7.50   1.18   19    6.79   2.46    4   9.00    1.41   6   7.17   2.23   14     7.64   1.82   15   6.67    2.64
information)
Staff accessibility                          5    7.60   2.07     7    8.57    1.40    39   8.26   1.67     9    7.11   1.97    12      7.08   1.93   18    6.56   2.23    3   8.33    2.08   6   7.50   1.64   11     6.27   2.69   15   7.00    2.59
Straightforwardness and honesty              5    6.00   1.00     6    9.50    0.84    36   7.69   2.01     6    7.00   2.10    10      7.90   1.45   18    7.28   2.02    3   8.67    2.31   6   6.67   2.50   12     6.50   2.36   14   7.36    1.87
Ease of access to the people at the
World Bank Group who are making              5    7.00   1.58     7    8.14    1.77    36   7.64   2.23     8    7.88   1.81    10      6.70   2.11   16    6.50   2.61    4   9.00    2.00   5   7.20   2.68   9      6.00   2.55   14   7.36    2.59
decisions important to my work
Collaboration with civil society             3    6.00   0.00     5    7.40    2.41    22   6.82   1.76     5    7.20   2.17    10      6.90   1.79   22    5.95   2.40    4   8.75    1.50   4   6.75   2.63   12     6.42   2.15   10   6.00    3.06
Collaboration with the Government            5    8.00   1.58     7    8.71    0.95    35   8.40   1.17     6    7.33   1.21    10      7.60   1.08   19    7.63   2.17    3   8.67    2.31   6   7.50   1.52   10     7.50   0.53   14   8.21    1.53
Collaboration with the European
Commission and International Financial       2    7.00   1.41     3    8.67    1.16    25   7.92   1.41     5    8.00   1.00        8   7.63   1.30   17    8.18   1.63    4   9.00    2.00   5   7.00   1.23   8      7.75   1.04   11   7.91    2.02
Institutions
Collaboration with the private sector        3    6.00   1.00     4    5.50    1.73    17   6.65   1.77     3    8.00   1.00    11      5.91   2.74   16    6.00   2.50    3   8.00    1.73   4   5.75   3.20   10     5.60   1.35   9    5.89    2.93
The speed in which it gets things
                                             4    5.50   2.08     6    7.50    1.52    35   6.89   2.07     5    6.40   2.30    10      5.90   1.97   19    5.47   2.55    4   8.75    1.89   5   6.40   2.61   11     5.73   1.74   14   6.07    2.62
accomplished on the ground
Being a long-term partner                    5    8.00   1.23     6    9.00    1.10    40   8.35   1.53     9    7.89   1.54        9   7.56   1.74   20    8.45   1.57    4   9.00    2.00   6   7.00   2.53   12     7.75   1.42   12   7.83    2.59
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                               73
                                                                                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To be more effective development partner in Bulgaria, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have? (Select only ONE response)
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
                                                               President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
Percentage of Respondents                                    Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
More local presence                                             80.0%         55.6%          37.5%          57.1%         38.5%         77.8%      55.6%     50.0%         52.9%     72.2%
The current level of local presence is adequate                 20.0%         33.3%          39.6%          7.1%          46.2%         11.1%      22.2%     50.0%         35.3%     22.2%
Less local presence                                               -             -              -              -             -             -          -         -           5.9%        -
Don't know                                                        -           11.1%          22.9%          35.7%         15.4%         11.1%      22.2%       -           5.9%      5.6%

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                                      President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
(Responses combined)                                         Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government             40.0%         55.6%          27.3%          38.5%         46.2%         30.8%      62.5%     66.7%         58.8%     41.2%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                                20.0%         11.1%          18.2%          38.5%         15.4%         30.8%      37.5%     33.3%         11.8%     29.4%
participation
The World Bank Group works too slowly                           0.0%          0.0%           9.1%           0.0%          23.1%         11.5%      0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      17.6%
The Government works inefficiently                              40.0%         22.2%          15.9%          46.2%         38.5%         15.4%      25.0%      0.0%         41.2%     29.4%
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                                20.0%         22.2%          11.4%          15.4%          7.7%         30.8%      0.0%      33.3%         23.5%     5.9%
through/follow-up
Poor coordination with international and European partners       0.0%          0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          3.8%      0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      11.8%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                                20.0%         11.1%          20.5%          7.7%          15.4%          7.7%      0.0%       0.0%         17.6%     11.8%
political/social realities on the ground
Political pressures and obstacles                               40.0%         22.2%          22.7%          30.8%         23.1%         23.1%      25.0%     33.3%         17.6%     29.4%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country
                                                                20.0%         22.2%          43.2%          7.7%          23.1%         26.9%      12.5%     16.7%         29.4%     17.6%
challenges
Other                                                            0.0%          0.0%          2.3%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%      0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      0.0%




                                                                                                74
                                                                                                                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Bulgaria? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                            Office of the                                                                     Private Sector/                                               Independent
                                          President/Prime                           Employee of a           Bilateral/       Financial Sector/                                              Government
                                              Minister       Office of a Minister     Ministry         Multilateral Agency     Private Bank             NGO/CBO             Media            Institution          Academia             Other
                                          N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD            N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Convergence of living standards with EU   5    7.40   3.13     7    8.57    1.62    42   7.43   2.60    12    7.83   1.59    12      6.25   2.67   23    7.35   3.02    5   8.60    1.95   5   6.80   3.27   16     7.88   2.16   15   8.87    0.92
Basic infrastructure and transport        5    6.20   3.63     6    8.33    1.63    40   7.28   2.46    13    8.31   0.95    11      6.82   2.32   21    6.00   2.68    6   8.17    2.14   5   7.20   1.64   16     6.88   1.82   16   8.00    2.03
Economic growth                           5    7.80   2.78     9    8.78    1.64    44   8.80   1.30    13    8.54   1.13    12      8.33   1.92   24    8.96   1.76    5   8.80    1.64   5   7.40   1.34   15     8.80   1.32   15   9.00    1.00
Energy and energy efficiency              5    7.80   1.30     6    7.33    2.34    38   7.53   2.18    13    8.62   1.04    12      6.75   2.14   22    7.55   1.68    5   8.00    1.87   4   8.50   1.29   14     8.43   1.74   15   8.27    1.53
Water supply and sanitation               5    7.80   1.30     6    7.67    1.51    38   6.61   2.32    12    8.42   1.00    11      6.36   2.25   20    6.05   2.31    5   6.80    2.49   4   6.50   1.00   12     7.25   1.82   16   7.81    1.72
Public financial management               5    7.60   2.61     8    7.88    2.59    41   7.41   2.00    14    8.00   0.96    12      8.25   2.01   22    8.36   1.76    6   7.33    2.50   4   7.25   1.71   13     8.69   1.55   14   7.14    2.38
Social protection                         5    5.60   3.65     6    7.17    3.43    42   7.12   2.54    13    7.62   1.19    11      6.64   2.29   22    7.00   2.62    5   8.80    1.64   4   6.50   1.73   12     7.42   2.02   14   7.57    1.87
Education                                 5    8.20   3.03     9    9.00    1.80    40   8.50   1.92    14    8.64   1.22    11      8.27   2.05   24    9.13   1.60    5   9.20    1.10   5   8.40   1.52   16     8.75   1.73   16   8.88    0.89
Health                                    5    6.20   3.96     8    9.25    1.75    42   8.12   2.04    13    8.46   1.33    11      7.45   2.88   22    8.36   1.59    6   8.67    1.51   4   8.50   1.73   14     8.86   1.61   16   8.75    0.93
Climate change and green growth           5    6.60   3.29     7    7.57    3.41    37   7.62   2.07    11    8.09   1.51    12      5.75   3.25   21    6.57   2.73    6   7.00    2.76   4   6.25   3.59   14     6.50   2.90   14   7.64    2.13
Governance                                5    8.60   1.34     7    8.43    2.70    43   7.84   2.21    13    8.69   1.18    12      8.75   1.60   24    8.67   1.66    6   8.33    2.07   4   8.00   2.16   13     8.08   1.66   13   7.85    2.64
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion     5    5.60   2.88     6    6.67    3.88    41   6.76   2.86    13    8.23   1.30    10      5.90   2.81   22    6.95   3.02    5   7.00    2.12   4   6.50   1.29   13     6.38   2.43   14   7.36    2.56
Job creation/employment                   5    6.80   2.95     8    7.75    2.55    40   7.78   2.13    13    8.46   1.20    11      6.45   2.46   23    7.61   2.15    5   7.60    2.88   4   7.50   2.38   13     8.54   1.39   16   9.00    1.37
Law and justice                           5    5.40   4.04     7    7.43    2.70    40   8.20   2.13    13    8.92   1.12    10      9.00   0.82   21    8.57   1.81    6   8.50    1.64   4   7.50   1.92   15     8.73   1.53   15   8.40    2.10
Innovations                               5    8.80   1.30     7    9.14    1.57    40   8.50   1.47    11    8.09   1.45    11      7.36   2.06   22    7.73   2.83    5   7.80    2.95   4   6.75   4.03   15     8.27   1.75   16   8.88    1.09
Financial markets                         5    5.40   3.78     6    7.33    3.20    36   7.39   2.33    12    7.33   2.19    11      6.09   2.98   21    6.57   2.80    5   7.40    1.82   4   7.00   4.08   11     7.27   1.62   14   6.93    2.30
Agricultural development*                 5    3.80   2.95     7    7.57    3.21    37   7.92   2.01    13    7.85   1.95    11      5.82   2.68   21    6.62   2.48    6   8.33    1.63   4   6.00   3.74   13     7.85   2.12   15   8.13    1.81
Trade and exports*                        5    4.20   3.56     6    7.33    3.27    36   7.28   2.15    12    7.42   2.07        9   4.67   2.83   21    7.10   2.45    5   7.60    1.52   4   5.25   3.10   12     7.33   2.31   12   6.75    2.70
Foreign direct investment                 5    7.80   2.95     7    8.71    1.98    37   8.11   1.58    11    7.55   2.12    10      5.80   2.66   22    8.09   1.85    4   8.75    1.50   5   6.40   3.13   12     7.75   2.01   15   8.27    1.87
Rural development*                        5    4.60   3.36     7    8.00    3.61    37   7.92   2.11    14    7.93   2.09    10      6.40   2.63   22    6.68   2.59    5   9.00    1.41   4   6.50   3.87   13     7.62   2.06   15   8.73    1.16
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                            75
                                                                                                                                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Bulgaria? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                           Office of the                                                                         Private Sector/                                                Independent
                                         President/Prime                             Employee of a          Bilateral/          Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                             Minister       Office of a Minister       Ministry        Multilateral Agency        Private Bank              NGO/CBO             Media            Institution           Academia              Other
                                         N Mean SD            N Mean SD              N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD             N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean    SD
Convergence of living standards with
                                         3    2.00   1.73     3    6.67    1.53     23   6.26   2.07     5     8.00     1.41        4   6.75    1.50   9     4.44   2.70    3   5.00    2.65   3   4.67    3.22   7      5.29    2.29   9    5.44    2.74
EU*
Basic infrastructure and transport       3    7.67   1.16     4    7.50    1.73     21   6.95   1.66     6     7.67     1.03        8   6.88    2.53   11    4.82   2.64    3   7.67    1.16   3   6.00    1.73   8      5.75    1.83   9    6.00    2.50
Economic growth                          3    6.00   2.00     5    8.00    1.87     23   6.61   2.11     6     7.83     1.17        8   5.50    2.33   14    5.64   2.10    3   7.67    0.58   3   5.67    2.31   9      5.67    1.50   10   5.80    2.35
Energy and energy efficiency*            3    6.33   2.08     4    8.00    1.41     19   6.37   1.61     5     7.40     1.34        6   7.00    2.61   11    4.73   1.95    3   7.67    0.58   2   5.00    2.83   9      5.67    1.58   6    6.67    2.07
Water supply and sanitation              3    7.00   2.65     3    7.67    0.58     22   6.73   2.07     6     7.83     1.33        7   5.71    2.56   12    4.50   2.43    3   7.67    1.16   2   6.50    0.71   7      5.57    1.72   9    6.44    2.35
Public financial management              3    5.67   1.53     3    8.00    1.73     21   6.10   1.81     6     7.17     1.33        8   5.63    2.56   13    6.23   2.39    3   7.67    0.58   4   7.25    2.99   9      5.56    1.51   9    5.78    0.97
Social protection*                       3    2.00   1.73     2    6.00    2.83     25   6.28   2.07     6     7.33     1.21        6   5.00    2.28   14    5.29   2.61    3   7.67    0.58   3   6.67    1.16   9      5.33    1.50   9    6.11    1.97
Education*                               3    4.00   3.00     7    7.43    2.15     28   6.71   1.98     6     8.00     1.41        7   4.86    2.55   17    5.71   2.39    3   6.33    0.58   3   5.33    2.89   11     5.09    1.87   10   7.10    1.79
Health*                                  3    2.33   2.31     4    7.75    2.63     24   6.29   2.12     6     7.83     1.33        7   5.00    2.71   12    5.00   2.13    4   6.50    0.58   3   5.00    2.65   8      5.00    1.93   8    6.13    2.17
Climate change and green growth*         2    1.50   0.71     3    6.67    2.31     15   6.20   2.04     5     7.20     1.30        4   5.00    2.16   14    5.57   2.28    3   6.33    0.58   3   8.00    1.00   7      5.14    1.57   9    5.89    2.09
Governance                               3    7.33   3.06     5    7.40    2.97     29   6.31   2.39     6     8.00     1.27        8   6.25    1.98   14    6.21   2.08    2   6.50    0.71   4   7.50    3.11   10     5.20    1.32   10   6.10    2.47
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion*   3    2.33   1.53     3    5.33    2.52     26   6.96   2.13     6     7.33     1.51        4   5.00    0.82   17    6.29   2.37    2   7.50    0.71   3   7.00    1.73   7      5.00    1.63   9    6.67    1.41
Job creation/employment                  3    2.67   1.16     3    7.00    3.00     22   6.18   2.46     6     7.83     1.47        7   5.43    2.99   13    5.23   2.42    3   6.33    0.58   3   5.00    3.61   8      4.88    1.46   9    6.00    2.24
Law and justice                          3    2.33   1.53     4    6.75    2.75     15   5.33   2.02     6     7.67     1.63        6   4.83    2.71   11    5.91   2.74    3   5.67    1.53   3   4.67    3.22   8      4.75    1.67   5    5.40    2.07
Innovations                              3    6.67   1.53     4    6.50    1.73     22   6.27   2.05     6     7.33     1.21        6   5.67    2.88   13    5.31   2.90    3   6.00    1.73   3   5.67    4.04   6      5.83    1.84   7    7.00    2.31
Financial markets                        2    3.00   2.83     3    7.33    2.52     15   6.47   2.13     6     6.83     0.98        8   5.75    2.96   13    6.31   2.72    3   7.33    1.53   4   5.75    3.20   7      5.71    2.22   5    5.80    1.10
Agricultural development*                2    1.00   0.00     5    6.20    2.39     16   6.56   2.50     6     7.50     0.84        4   5.75    1.50   10    4.50   2.37    2   5.50    2.12   3   5.00    3.46   7      5.14    1.86   6    6.67    2.25
Trade and exports                        3    5.33   4.51     3    5.33    2.52     15   5.93   2.09     4     7.75     1.26        6   6.33    2.34   12    5.00   1.95    2   5.50    2.12   3   5.33    3.79   8      5.63    1.77   6    6.50    1.52
Foreign direct investment                3    6.00   3.61     3    6.67    3.51     16   6.63   1.75     5     8.00     1.00        7   5.71    3.20   12    5.50   1.73    3   6.67    2.52   3   5.00    3.46   8      5.63    1.69   7    6.00    1.83
Rural development*                       2    1.00   0.00     5    6.80    2.39     13   6.38   2.26     5     8.20     1.10        5   5.00    2.55   11    4.82   2.36    2   5.50    2.12   3   5.33    3.79   7      5.00    1.63   6    6.50    2.35
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                                   Office of the                                          Bilateral/   Private Sector/                                    Independent
                                                                                    President/   Office of a           Employee          Multilateral Financial Sector/                                   Government
Percentage of Respondents                                                         Prime Minister Minister             of a Ministry        Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO                Media       Institution     Academia          Other
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                             50.0%             11.1%             27.9%                 28.6%           33.3%            36.0%          42.9%         83.3%              37.5%        6.3%
In the country                                                                       25.0%             66.7%             9.3%                    -             16.7%            24.0%            -             -                  -          18.8%
Don’t know                                                                           25.0%             22.2%             62.8%                 71.4%           50.0%            40.0%          57.1%         16.7%              62.5%        75.0%

                                           Office of the                                                                         Private Sector/                                                Independent
                                         President/Prime                             Employee of a          Bilateral/          Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                             Minister       Office of a Minister       Ministry        Multilateral Agency        Private Bank              NGO/CBO             Media            Institution           Academia              Other
                                         N Mean SD            N Mean SD              N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD             N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean    SD
To what extent does the World Bank
Group’s work help to achieve             4    6.50   0.58     7    7.86    1.68     30   6.67   1.52     9     6.44     1.59    10      6.00    2.00   21    5.38   2.44    5   6.40    2.19   5   6.40    1.95   12     5.67    1.67   14   6.21    1.72
development results in Bulgaria?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


                                                                                                                               76
                                                                                                                                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Bulgaria? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                            Office of the                                                                         Private Sector/                                                Independent
                                          President/Prime                             Employee of a          Bilateral/          Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                              Minister       Office of a Minister       Ministry        Multilateral Agency        Private Bank              NGO/CBO             Media            Institution           Academia              Other
                                          N Mean SD            N Mean SD              N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD             N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group’s financial
                                          4    5.25   0.96     6    8.00    1.41     28   6.18   1.83     4     5.50     2.08        9   6.00    2.29   18    6.06   2.26    5   6.00    2.35   5   8.00    1.58   11     5.91    2.02   11   6.45    1.64
instruments meet the needs of Bulgaria
The World Bank Group meets Bulgaria’s
                                          4    7.00   1.41     8    8.38    1.41     36   7.08   2.38     6     7.67     0.52    10      6.20    1.99   22    6.45   2.24    4   7.00    0.82   5   7.20    1.30   13     6.31    2.25   14   6.93    2.34
needs for knowledge services


                                            Office of the                                                                         Private Sector/                                                Independent
                                          President/Prime                             Employee of a          Bilateral/          Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                              Minister       Office of a Minister       Ministry        Multilateral Agency        Private Bank              NGO/CBO             Media            Institution           Academia              Other
                                          N Mean SD            N Mean SD              N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD             N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe that
Bulgaria received value for money from
                                          3    6.00   0.00     7    7.86    1.35     32   6.16   2.58     5     7.20     1.30        9   5.78    2.28   18    5.78   2.32    4   5.75    2.50   3   6.67    3.22   9      5.44    2.40   11   6.27    2.41
the World Bank Group’s Reimbursable
Advisory Services (RAS)?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

                                            Office of the                                                                         Private Sector/                                                Independent
                                          President/Prime                             Employee of a          Bilateral/          Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                              Minister       Office of a Minister       Ministry        Multilateral Agency        Private Bank              NGO/CBO             Media            Institution           Academia              Other
                                          N Mean SD            N Mean SD              N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD             N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the World
Bank Group measures and corrects its      4    6.00   0.82     5     8.60   1.34     25   6.64   2.18     3     7.67     1.53        9   5.11    2.89   18    5.33   2.17    4   6.25    1.50   4   6.00    2.45   9      5.11    1.97   12   6.00    2.00
work in real time in Bulgaria?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                                                    Office of the                                          Bilateral/   Private Sector/                                    Independent
                                                                                     President/   Office of a           Employee          Multilateral Financial Sector/                                   Government
Percentage of Respondents                                                          Prime Minister Minister             of a Ministry        Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO                Media       Institution     Academia          Other
Weekly                                                                                  -                 -               4.5%                    -               -                -              -             -                  -          17.6%
Monthly                                                                               50.0%             33.3%             13.6%                 21.4%           16.7%              -              -           33.3%              18.8%        17.6%
A few times a year                                                                    25.0%             66.7%             52.3%                 21.4%           50.0%            57.7%          25.0%         66.7%              43.8%        23.5%
Rarely                                                                                25.0%               -               20.5%                 35.7%           25.0%            26.9%          50.0%           -                12.5%        35.3%
Never                                                                                   -                 -               9.1%                  21.4%           8.3%             15.4%          25.0%           -                25.0%        5.9%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                77
                                                                                                                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Bulgaria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                             Office of the                                                                     Private Sector/                                               Independent
                                           President/Prime                           Employee of a           Bilateral/       Financial Sector/                                              Government
                                               Minister       Office of a Minister     Ministry         Multilateral Agency     Private Bank             NGO/CBO             Media            Institution          Academia             Other
                                           N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD            N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Are timely                                 4    7.00   2.16     9    8.11    1.45    38   6.74   2.09     6    8.00   0.63    11      5.82   2.09   19    5.53   2.50    4   6.75    1.26   6   6.83   2.64   10     5.90   2.18   12   7.00    1.65
Include appropriate level of stakeholder
                                           4    7.75   0.96     8    8.13    1.36    37   6.78   2.12     5    7.80   1.10    10      5.60   2.84   16    5.88   2.66    4   7.25    0.50   6   7.17   2.71   10     6.30   2.67   14   5.93    2.30
involvement during preparation
Lead to practical solutions                4    6.75   2.06     8    7.88    1.64    39   6.26   2.26     6    7.83   0.98    10      5.40   2.32   20    5.75   2.47    4   7.25    0.50   6   6.83   0.75   11     5.73   1.95   15   6.13    1.81
Are accessible (well written and easy to
                                           4    7.25   1.71     9    8.56    1.24    40   7.18   2.07     7    7.86   1.07    12      7.08   2.07   21    7.10   2.59    5   6.80    1.10   6   8.33   1.03   11     7.27   1.68   15   7.07    2.05
understand)
Are source of relevant information on
                                           4    8.00   1.41     9    8.89    1.05    39   7.64   1.71     7    8.29   0.95    12      7.75   1.87   21    7.62   2.25    4   7.25    0.50   6   8.67   0.82   11     7.09   2.51   14   7.64    1.55
global good practices
Are adequately disseminated                4    6.00   2.58     9    7.44    1.94    38   6.76   2.03     6    6.67   2.16    11      6.36   2.29   18    5.44   2.57    4   6.50    2.38   6   8.17   0.98   11     6.18   2.75   12   6.50    2.51
Are translated enough into local
                                           2    7.00   4.24     7    7.71    1.89    39   7.41   2.16     5    7.00   2.35        8   5.50   2.88   19    5.58   2.61    5   6.40    2.19   6   7.17   1.84   11     6.36   2.73   13   6.46    2.70
language
Are adaptable to Bulgaria’s specific
development challenges and country         4    6.25   0.96     8    7.63    1.41    37   6.41   2.09     7    7.71   1.50    10      6.10   1.91   20    6.20   2.42    4   7.00    0.00   6   6.67   1.97   11     5.64   2.34   14   6.21    1.93
circumstances


                                             Office of the                                                                     Private Sector/                                               Independent
                                           President/Prime                           Employee of a           Bilateral/       Financial Sector/                                              Government
                                               Minister       Office of a Minister     Ministry         Multilateral Agency     Private Bank             NGO/CBO             Media            Institution          Academia             Other
                                           N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD            N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD         N      Mean SD       N    Mean    SD
Overall, how significant a contribution
do you believe the WBG's knowledge
                                           4    7.25   0.96     8    7.63    1.30    37   6.62   1.89    10    7.00   1.16    11      5.91   2.26   20    7.00   1.97    6   6.50    1.98   5   6.80   1.64   12     6.08   1.98   14   6.50    2.14
work and activities make to
development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the
technical quality of the World Bank        4    8.25   0.96     8    9.00    0.93    38   7.89   1.54    11    7.91   1.45        9   7.11   2.32   18    7.89   1.61    5   7.40    2.19   5   8.20   1.92   12     7.92   1.31   13   7.46    1.81
Group's knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                                                                             78
                                                                                                                                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                            Office of the                                                                         Private Sector/                                                Independent
                                          President/Prime                             Employee of a          Bilateral/          Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                              Minister       Office of a Minister       Ministry        Multilateral Agency        Private Bank              NGO/CBO             Media            Institution           Academia              Other
                                          N Mean SD            N Mean SD              N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD             N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds
                                          3    4.67   1.53     5    7.80    2.17     19   5.89   1.73     3     5.33     3.79        4   5.25    2.22   10    5.00   2.75    2   7.50    2.12   5   6.80    3.27   6      5.17    1.94   7    6.29    3.25
promptly
The World Bank Group effectively
monitors and evaluates the projects and   3    6.67   1.16     8    8.63    1.30     30   7.60   1.96     3     8.33     0.58        7   6.71    2.06   16    6.44   2.28    3   7.67    2.31   5   8.20    1.92   11     7.00    0.89   12   7.08    1.98
programs it supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals and
                                          4    6.25   1.50     7    8.00    1.73     32   7.59   1.74     4     7.50     1.73        5   6.00    2.55   14    6.64   2.13    2   8.50    0.71   5   8.00    1.87   9      6.44    1.59   11   6.09    2.34
reviews are done in a timely fashion
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard
                                          2    7.50   2.12     4    8.75    1.50     15   8.27   1.28     3     8.00     1.00        4   6.75    2.50   11    6.73   2.05    3   7.33    1.53   3   8.00    2.65   7      6.29    2.29   6    5.50    2.07
Policy? requirements are reasonable
The World Bank Group’s conditions on
                                          2    7.50   2.12     3    7.67    2.08     18   8.11   1.53     3     8.33     1.53        6   5.83    2.32   12    6.83   2.04    2   8.50    0.71   4   7.25    2.22   7      6.14    2.67   7    6.57    1.90
its lending are reasonable
The World Bank Group takes decisions
                                          3    6.33   1.53     6    8.17    1.60     21   7.57   1.89     2     6.00     2.83        7   4.86    2.55   13    5.31   2.21    2   8.50    0.71   4   7.50    2.52   6      5.50    1.76   11   6.27    2.65
quickly in Bulgaria*
Working with the World Bank Group
increases Bulgaria’s institutional        4    6.75   1.89     9    8.44    1.24     33   7.73   1.61     4     7.25     1.71        7   6.71    1.60   19    6.74   2.31    2   7.00    0.00   5   8.00    0.71   11     6.64    2.06   14   6.71    2.23
capacity
Where country systems are adequate,
the World Bank Group makes                2    8.00   2.83     5    8.60    1.14     17   7.94   1.35     4     7.50     1.29        4   5.25    0.96   12    7.42   2.35    1   8.00     .     4   8.25    0.50   9      6.78    1.99   7    6.57    2.30
appropriate use of them
The World Bank Group provides
                                          3    8.67   0.58     5    8.60    1.52     29   8.00   1.79     3     6.67     1.53        6   6.00    2.19   15    7.47   1.77    2   8.50    0.71   5   8.20    1.92   11     7.27    1.42   12   6.67    2.23
effective implementation support
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                            Office of the                                                                         Private Sector/                                                Independent
                                          President/Prime                             Employee of a          Bilateral/          Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                              Minister       Office of a Minister       Ministry        Multilateral Agency        Private Bank              NGO/CBO             Media            Institution           Academia              Other
                                          N Mean SD            N Mean SD              N Mean SD          N Mean SD                N Mean SD             N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe that the
World Bank Group’s work helps to find
                                          3    6.33   0.58     5    5.20    2.78     12   6.50   1.51     6     5.83     2.14        6   4.00    0.63   17    5.59   2.50    2   6.50    0.71   4   6.25    2.22   10     5.50    2.01   9    5.56    2.70
solutions that promote private public
partnerships in Bulgaria?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                                    Office of the                                          Bilateral/   Private Sector/                                    Independent
                                                                                     President/   Office of a           Employee          Multilateral Financial Sector/                                   Government
Percentage of Respondents                                                          Prime Minister Minister             of a Ministry        Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO                Media       Institution     Academia          Other
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Bulgaria                                    -                 -                 -                     -               -                -              -             -                  -            -
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Bulgaria                            75.0%             12.5%             21.4%                 25.0%           36.4%            50.0%          25.0%         16.7%              46.7%        43.8%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                25.0%             37.5%             42.9%                 25.0%           36.4%            26.9%          25.0%         66.7%              26.7%        37.5%
Don't know                                                                              -               50.0%             35.7%                 50.0%           27.3%            23.1%          50.0%         16.7%              26.7%        18.8%



                                                                                                                                79
                                                                                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                 Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
                                                                  President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
Percentage of Respondents                                       Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses
                                                                   50.0%         55.6%          46.5%          46.2%         18.2%         34.6%      25.0%     33.3%         6.3%      40.0%
on the most important development challenges in Bulgaria
The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in
Bulgaria, and it is involved in too many areas of                  25.0%            -           18.6%            -           27.3%         26.9%      12.5%     50.0%         50.0%     33.3%
development
Don't know                                                         25.0%         44.4%          34.9%          53.8%         54.5%         38.5%      62.5%     16.7%         43.8%     26.7%



F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bulgaria

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                 Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                                         President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
(Responses combined)                                            Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to
                                                                   25.0%          0.0%          9.1%           0.0%           0.0%         15.4%      37.5%     16.7%         6.3%      0.0%
markets
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                     25.0%         33.3%          27.3%          63.6%         27.3%         42.3%      62.5%     16.7%         50.0%     50.0%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures
                                                                    0.0%          0.0%          6.8%           18.2%          0.0%          7.7%      0.0%      16.7%         6.3%      0.0%
on Bulgaria’s economy
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                             0.0%          0.0%           9.1%           0.0%          18.2%         3.8%       12.5%     0.0%          0.0%      12.5%
Offer more innovative financial products                           25.0%         22.2%          18.2%          0.0%          18.2%         7.7%       0.0%      33.3%         6.3%      12.5%
Work faster                                                        25.0%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          18.2%         11.5%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      12.5%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Bulgaria’s
                                                                    0.0%         11.1%          15.9%          0.0%           0.0%          7.7%      0.0%      16.7%         18.8%     18.8%
specific challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services                           25.0%         0.0%           11.4%          27.3%         9.1%          15.4%      12.5%     16.7%         25.0%     12.5%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients*              0.0%          66.7%          18.2%          18.2%         27.3%         11.5%      0.0%      0.0%          31.3%     18.8%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country          0.0%          55.6%          34.1%          36.4%         45.5%         23.1%      37.5%     66.7%         25.0%     18.8%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group
                                                                   25.0%         11.1%          20.5%          9.1%           9.1%         23.1%      12.5%     16.7%         12.5%     31.3%
financing
Increase availability of Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)      0.0%           0.0%          6.8%           0.0%           9.1%          7.7%      0.0%       0.0%         12.5%     0.0%
Other*                                                             25.0%          0.0%          0.0%           18.2%          0.0%          3.8%      0.0%       0.0%         6.3%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                   80
                                                                                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bulgaria (continued)
When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Bulgaria, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe
the World Bank Group should offer more of in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)
                                                               Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
                                                                President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
Percentage of Respondents                                     Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
Financial services                                                 -           11.1%          15.6%          15.4%         18.2%         19.2%      12.5%       -             -       11.8%
Knowledge products                                                 -             -            22.2%          30.8%         45.5%         46.2%      37.5%     50.0%         37.5%     35.3%
Convening services*                                              75.0%         22.2%          24.4%          7.7%          9.1%          3.8%         -       16.7%         37.5%     23.5%
None of the above                                                  -             -              -              -             -             -          -         -           6.3%        -
The combination is appropriate for Bulgaria                      25.0%         55.6%          26.7%          23.1%         18.2%         23.1%      25.0%     33.3%         6.3%      17.6%
Don't know                                                         -           11.1%          11.1%          23.1%         9.1%          7.7%       25.0%       -           12.5%     11.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                               Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                                       President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
(Responses combined)                                          Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
Periodicals                                                      25.0%         25.0%          4.7%           23.1%         18.2%         11.1%      25.0%     16.7%         18.8%     23.5%
International newspapers                                          0.0%         0.0%           7.0%           0.0%          27.3%         3.7%       12.5%     16.7%         6.3%      11.8%
Local radio                                                       0.0%         0.0%           2.3%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       12.5%      0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
International radio                                               0.0%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      0.0%
Local television                                                 25.0%         37.5%          32.6%          30.8%         18.2%         18.5%      12.5%     16.7%         31.3%     29.4%
International television                                          0.0%         0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          3.7%       0.0%       0.0%         6.3%      5.9%
Local newspapers                                                 25.0%         12.5%          14.0%          38.5%         9.1%          11.1%      12.5%      0.0%         6.3%      11.8%
Internet                                                         100.0%        87.5%          79.1%          84.6%         81.8%         77.8%      62.5%     100.0%        81.3%     88.2%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)         25.0%         12.5%          7.0%           15.4%         0.0%          25.9%      37.5%     16.7%         6.3%      5.9%
Other                                                             0.0%         0.0%           20.9%          7.7%          18.2%         18.5%      12.5%     16.7%         12.5%     5.9%

How would you prefer to obtain information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                               Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                    Independent
Percentage of Respondents                                       President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                   Government
(Responses combined)                                          Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media    Institution   Academia   Other
Direct contact with World Bank Group                             25.0%         33.3%          29.5%          50.0%         18.2%         22.2%      25.0%     16.7%         25.0%     35.3%
e-Newsletters                                                    50.0%         33.3%          22.7%          33.3%         54.5%         37.0%      25.0%     50.0%         68.8%     17.6%
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/ conferences*              25.0%         44.4%          56.8%          50.0%         9.1%          37.0%      25.0%     33.3%         12.5%     70.6%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials      75.0%         33.3%          38.6%          25.0%         27.3%         29.6%      12.5%     16.7%         50.0%     35.3%
World Bank Group’s website*                                      25.0%         55.6%          31.8%          16.7%         72.7%         25.9%      37.5%     83.3%         31.3%     29.4%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)*        0.0%          0.0%           2.3%           16.7%         0.0%          25.9%      25.0%     0.0%          6.3%      5.9%
Mobile phones                                                    0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
Other                                                            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                 81
                                                                                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the WBG will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                     Independent
                                                               President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                    Government
Percentage of Respondents                                    Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media     Institution   Academia   Other
Yes                                                                -          11.1%          14.0%          30.8%         18.2%         36.0%      12.5%      50.0%         18.8%     11.8%
No                                                              100.0%        88.9%          86.0%          69.2%         81.8%         64.0%      87.5%      50.0%         81.3%     88.2%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                     Independent
                                                               President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                    Government
Percentage of Respondents                                    Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media     Institution   Academia   Other
Yes                                                                -          11.1%          11.4%          46.2%            -          14.8%      25.0%         -          6.3%      18.8%
No                                                              100.0%        88.9%          88.6%          53.8%         100.0%        85.2%      75.0%      100.0%        93.8%     81.3%

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                     Independent
                                                               President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                    Government
Percentage of Respondents                                    Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media     Institution   Academia   Other
Yes                                                                 -         100.0%        100.0%          83.3%            -          75.0%      100.0%        -         100.0%     100.0%
No                                                                  -            -             -            16.7%            -          25.0%         -          -            -          -

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                     Independent
                                                               President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                    Government
Percentage of Respondents                                    Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media     Institution   Academia   Other
Yes                                                             100.0%        100.0%        100.0%         100.0%         100.0%       100.0%      100.0%     100.0%       100.0%     100.0%
No                                                                 -             -             -              -              -            -           -          -            -          -

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                     Independent
                                                               President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                    Government
Percentage of Respondents                                    Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media     Institution   Academia   Other
Yes                                                             100.0%        62.5%          84.4%          76.9%         81.8%         81.5%      75.0%      100.0%        75.0%     76.5%
No                                                                 -          37.5%          15.6%          23.1%         18.2%         18.5%      25.0%         -          25.0%     23.5%

Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites?
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                     Independent
                                                               President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                    Government
Percentage of Respondents                                    Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media     Institution   Academia   Other
Yes                                                                -          28.6%          7.0%           30.8%         10.0%         11.5%      37.5%      16.7%         12.5%     11.8%
No                                                              100.0%        71.4%          93.0%          69.2%         90.0%         88.5%      62.5%      83.3%         87.5%     88.2%




                                                                                                82
                                                                                                                                                                                  World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
                                                                                      Office of the                                              Bilateral/   Private Sector/                                    Independent
                                                                                       President/   Office of a               Employee          Multilateral Financial Sector/                                   Government
Percentage of Respondents                                                            Prime Minister Minister                 of a Ministry        Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO                Media       Institution     Academia          Other
High speed/WiFi                                                                         100.0%                100.0%            95.5%             100.0%             100.0%            96.2%          87.5%        100.0%          100.0%           93.8%
Dial-up                                                                                    -                     -              4.5%                 -                  -              3.8%           12.5%           -               -             6.3%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                             Office of the                                                                              Private Sector/                                                Independent
                                           President/Prime                              Employee of a              Bilateral/          Financial Sector/                                               Government
                                               Minister        Office of a Minister       Ministry            Multilateral Agency        Private Bank              NGO/CBO             Media            Institution           Academia              Other
                                           N Mean SD             N Mean SD              N Mean SD              N Mean SD                N Mean SD             N     Mean SD        N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean    SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites
                                           3    7.67    1.16     5    6.60    2.51     35       7.51   2.05     10    6.90     1.29        9   7.11    2.57   19    6.95   1.47    4   7.25    0.96   6   8.33    1.03   12     7.42    2.19   12   7.83    1.47
easy to navigate.
I find the information on the World Bank
                                           3    8.00    2.00     6    8.17    1.60     35       7.97   1.69     10    7.60     1.17        9   8.00    1.50   19    7.89   1.37    4   7.50    0.58   6   8.33    1.03   12     8.42    1.68   13   7.54    1.94
Group’s websites useful.
The World Bank Group’s social media
channels are valuable sources of           3    3.33    0.58     3    9.33    1.16      6       8.00   1.55     5     5.80     2.28        3   3.00    3.46   10    6.20   3.08    2   7.00    1.41   2   5.00    5.66   5      5.40    3.21   4    7.75    0.96
information about the institution
When I need information from the World
                                           3    9.67    0.58     8    8.25    2.71     36       8.33   1.79     10    6.90     1.91        8   6.63    2.72   20    6.85   2.60    4   9.00    1.16   5   8.60    1.14   13     6.38    2.57   13   6.92    2.81
Bank Group I know how to find it*
The World Bank Group is responsive to
                                           1    10.00    .       6    8.33    3.20     26       8.73   1.12     10    7.00     1.63        4   7.75    2.87   13    7.62   1.90    4   8.75    0.96   4   8.25    1.71   5      4.40    1.34   10   7.70    2.26
my information requests and inquiries*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



H. Background Information

Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group in your country? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                                      Office of the                                              Bilateral/   Private Sector/                                    Independent
                                                                                       President/   Office of a               Employee          Multilateral Financial Sector/                                   Government
Percentage of Respondents                                                            Prime Minister Minister                 of a Ministry        Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO                Media       Institution     Academia          Other
I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group                                       50.0%                 11.1%             6.3%                  11.8%             -              3.6%           10.0%         16.7%              5.6%         30.0%
I have previously collaborated with the World Bank Group                                  -                   22.2%             39.6%                 23.5%           46.7%            42.9%          10.0%         16.7%              44.4%        15.0%
Both of the above (I currently collaborate and previously
                                                                                        50.0%                 44.4%             43.8%                 29.4%           26.7%            14.3%          30.0%         50.0%              22.2%        35.0%
have collaborated with the World Bank Group)
I have never collaborated with the World Bank Group                                         -                 22.2%             10.4%                 35.3%           26.7%            39.3%          50.0%         16.7%              27.8%        20.0%




                                                                                                                                      83
                                                                                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


H. Background Information (continued)
Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in Bulgaria?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                     Independent
                                                               President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                    Government
Percentage of Respondents                                    Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media     Institution   Academia   Other
The World Bank (IBRD)                                           66.7%         100.0%         95.5%          93.3%         50.0%         60.9%      88.9%      83.3%         80.0%     100.0%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                     16.7%            -             -              -           42.9%           -          -          -             -          -
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)               -              -             -              -           7.1%          8.7%         -          -             -          -
Other                                                           16.7%            -           4.5%           6.7%            -           30.4%      11.1%      16.7%         20.0%        -
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                     Independent
                                                               President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                    Government
Percentage of Respondents                                    Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media     Institution   Academia   Other
Yes                                                             20.0%         14.3%          11.9%          29.4%         20.0%           -           -       33.3%           -       15.0%
No                                                              80.0%         85.7%          88.1%          70.6%         80.0%        100.0%      100.0%     66.7%        100.0%     85.0%

If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                     Independent
                                                               President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                    Government
Percentage of Respondents                                    Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media     Institution   Academia   Other
The two institutions work well together                            -          100.0%         50.0%          40.0%         100.0%           -         -        100.0%          -       66.7%
The way the two institutions work together needs
                                                                   -             -              -             -              -             -         -           -            -         -
improvement
The two institutions do not work well together                  50.0%            -             -              -              -            -           -          -            -         -
Don't know                                                      50.0%            -           50.0%          60.0%            -         100.0%      100.0%        -            -       33.3%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                     Independent
                                                               President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                    Government
Percentage of Respondents                                    Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media     Institution   Academia   Other
Observer                                                        16.7%         11.1%          6.5%           17.6%         21.4%         22.2%      22.2%      0.0%          26.7%     0.0%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                               66.7%         55.6%          47.8%          47.1%         42.9%         48.1%      55.6%      33.3%         53.3%     27.8%
Engage in WBG related/sponsored events/activities               33.3%         11.1%          26.1%          11.8%         21.4%         11.1%      11.1%      0.0%          20.0%     50.0%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*                  50.0%         66.7%          63.0%          47.1%         42.9%         14.8%      11.1%      83.3%         40.0%     61.1%
Use WBG website for information, data, research, etc.*          16.7%         11.1%          8.7%           11.8%         21.4%         55.6%      33.3%      16.7%         20.0%     22.2%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

What’s your gender?*
                                                              Office of the                                Bilateral/   Private Sector/                     Independent
                                                               President/   Office of a    Employee       Multilateral Financial Sector/                    Government
Percentage of Respondents                                    Prime Minister Minister      of a Ministry     Agency       Private Bank    NGO/CBO   Media     Institution   Academia   Other
Female                                                          40.0%         22.2%          65.3%          27.8%         14.3%         55.2%      50.0%      50.0%         22.2%     40.0%
Male                                                            60.0%         77.8%          34.7%          72.2%         85.7%         44.8%      50.0%      50.0%         77.8%     60.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                84
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Level of Collaboration with the WBG10
Collaborating with the WBG N=75                     Not collaborating with the WBG N=100

A. General Issues facing Bulgaria

In general, would you say that Bulgaria is headed in...?
                                                                                   Currently collaborating             Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                              with the WBG                     with the WBG
The right direction                                                                         70.4%                           53.1%
The wrong direction                                                                         7.0%                            15.3%
Not sure                                                                                    22.5%                           31.6%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bulgaria. Please identify which of the following you consider the
most important development priorities in Bulgaria?
Percentage of Respondents                                                          Currently collaborating             Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                                   with the WBG                     with the WBG
Social protection                                                                           12.2%                           10.0%
Basic infrastructure and transport                                                          9.5%                            13.0%
Economic growth                                                                             45.9%                           57.0%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                                9.5%                            8.0%
Water supply and sanitation                                                                 0.0%                            1.0%
Public financial management                                                                 12.2%                           11.0%
Convergence of living standards with EU                                                     17.6%                           14.0%
Education                                                                                   47.3%                           57.0%
Health                                                                                      21.6%                           22.0%
Climate change and green growth*                                                            6.8%                            1.0%
Governance*                                                                                 28.4%                           11.0%
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                                       4.1%                            3.0%
Job creation/employment                                                                     16.2%                           11.0%
Law and justice                                                                             45.9%                           50.0%
Innovations                                                                                 5.4%                            12.0%
Financial markets                                                                           0.0%                            0.0%
Agricultural development                                                                    2.7%                            2.0%
Trade and exports                                                                           0.0%                            1.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                                   8.1%                            7.0%
Rural development                                                                           4.1%                            5.0%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG




10
  Only 175 respondents provided the information about their levels of collaboration with the World Bank Group (question H3 in the
questionnaire). Thus only these respondents were included in the analysis presented in this appendix. Response options “I cur rently collaborate
with the WBG? and “both of the above? were combined as “Collaborating with the WBG? for the comparisons in this appendix. “I have
previously collaborated with the WBG,? and “I have never collaborated with the WBG? were combined as “Not collaborating with the WBG?.

                                                                       85
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


A. General Issues facing Bulgaria (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                                       Currently collaborating           Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                                with the WBG                   with the WBG
Financial markets                                                                       0.0%                           0.0%
Agricultural development                                                                12.2%                          16.2%
Trade and exports                                                                       5.4%                           7.1%
Foreign direct investment                                                               18.9%                          17.2%
Rural development                                                                       14.9%                          15.2%
Governance                                                                              10.8%                          15.2%
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                                   8.1%                           8.1%
Job creation/employment                                                                 39.2%                          38.4%
Law and justice                                                                         36.5%                          33.3%
Innovations                                                                             8.1%                           7.1%
Public financial management                                                             16.2%                          16.2%
Convergence of living standards with EU                                                 9.5%                           13.1%
Education                                                                               52.7%                          53.5%
Health                                                                                  6.8%                           5.1%
Climate change and green growth                                                         4.1%                           1.0%
Social protection                                                                       6.8%                           3.0%
Basic infrastructure and transport                                                      4.1%                           3.0%
Economic growth                                                                         40.5%                          40.4%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                            1.4%                           6.1%
Water supply and sanitation                                                             0.0%                           0.0%

The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity? goal captures two key elements, economic growth and equity. It will seek to
foster income growth among the bottom 40 percent of a country’s population. Improvement in the Shared Prosperity
Indicator requires growth and well-being of the less well-off. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your
country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                       Currently collaborating           Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                                with the WBG                   with the WBG
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                     2.7%                           8.0%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                                                    26.7%                          30.0%
A growing middle class                                                                  24.0%                          28.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                 8.0%                           8.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                 0.0%                           0.0%
Consistent economic growth                                                              46.7%                          46.0%
Better employment opportunities for young people                                        18.7%                          15.0%
Better employment opportunities for women                                               0.0%                           1.0%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                            0.0%                           1.0%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater
                                                                                         4.0%                           1.0%
accountability
More reliable social safety net*                                                        6.7%                           0.0%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                         2.7%                           2.0%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                               52.0%                          57.0%
Better quality public services                                                          8.0%                           2.0%
Other                                                                                   0.0%                           0.0%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG




                                                                    86
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


A. General Issues facing Bulgaria (continued)
Do you think the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem, a moderately big problem, a small problem or not
a problem at all in Bulgaria?
                                                                                     Currently collaborating           Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                                with the WBG                   with the WBG
A very big problem                                                                           38.7%                            40.0%
A moderately big problem                                                                     52.0%                            43.0%
A small problem                                                                              9.3%                             12.0%
Not a problem at all                                                                           -                              4.0%
Don’t know                                                                                     -                              1.0%

In your view, is global climate change a very serious problem, somewhat serious, not too serious, or not a problem?
                                                                                     Currently collaborating           Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                                with the WBG                   with the WBG
A very serious problem                                                                       42.7%                            42.4%
A somewhat serious problem                                                                   38.7%                            38.4%
Not too serious problem                                                                      16.0%                            15.2%
Not a problem                                                                                  -                              4.0%
Don’t know                                                                                   2.7%                               -



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                             Currently collaborating     Not collaborating
                                                                                                 with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                                               N      Mean      SD       N     Mean      SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Bulgaria?*                      75      6.69     1.83      97      5.03      2.28
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

                                                                                             Currently collaborating     Not collaborating
                                                                                                 with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                                               N      Mean      SD       N     Mean      SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Bulgaria.*    70      6.89     1.74      76      6.28      1.88
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

                                                                                             Currently collaborating     Not collaborating
                                                                                                 with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                                               N      Mean      SD       N     Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe the WBG's staff is well prepared to help Bulgaria solve its
                                                                                              69      7.64     1.73      66      7.29      1.81
most complicated development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                         87
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Bulgaria, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in
Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                                       Currently collaborating           Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                                with the WBG                   with the WBG
Agricultural development                                                                12.0%                          10.2%
Trade and exports                                                                       0.0%                           1.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                               13.3%                          21.4%
Governance                                                                              25.3%                          27.6%
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                                   4.0%                           4.1%
Job creation/employment                                                                 12.0%                          15.3%
Law and justice*                                                                        13.3%                          32.7%
Innovations                                                                             13.3%                          20.4%
Financial markets                                                                       4.0%                           2.0%
Rural development                                                                       14.7%                          8.2%
Convergence of living standards with EU                                                 17.3%                          13.3%
Education                                                                               46.7%                          49.0%
Health                                                                                  17.3%                          17.3%
Social protection                                                                       6.7%                           3.1%
Basic infrastructure and transport                                                      9.3%                           12.2%
Economic growth                                                                         32.0%                          27.6%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                            10.7%                          8.2%
Water supply and sanitation                                                             2.7%                           2.0%
Public financial management                                                             21.3%                          14.3%
Climate change and green growth                                                         12.0%                          4.1%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
  second greatest value in Bulgaria?
Greatest Value                                                       Currently collaborating        Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                            with the WBG                   with the WBG
Convening/facilitating                                                                  11.1%                          7.4%
Data                                                                                    2.8%                           3.2%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                                                       52.8%                          34.7%
Financial resources*                                                                    2.8%                           15.8%
Capacity development*                                                                   9.7%                           21.1%
Technical assistance                                                                    11.1%                          6.3%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                              4.2%                           5.3%
Coordination with the European Commission and International
                                                                                         5.6%                           6.3%
Financial Institutions
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                            0.0%                           0.0%
Other                                                                                    0.0%                           0.0%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG




                                                                    88
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
 nd
2 Greatest Value                                                                 Currently collaborating           Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                            with the WBG                   with the WBG
Convening/facilitating                                                                   9.7%                             5.3%
Data*                                                                                    11.1%                            2.1%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                         18.1%                            17.9%
Financial resources*                                                                     6.9%                             17.9%
Capacity development                                                                     22.2%                            27.4%
Technical assistance                                                                     13.9%                            12.6%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                               4.2%                             6.3%
Coordination with the European Commission and International
                                                                                         11.1%                            8.4%
Financial Institutions
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                            1.4%                             2.1%
Other                                                                                    1.4%                             0.0%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
  following areas in Bulgaria? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                         Currently collaborating     Not collaborating
                                                                                             with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                                           N      Mean      SD       N     Mean      SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)*                           45      7.47     1.50      62      6.63      2.03
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)                      35      5.77     1.86      51      5.55      1.91
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)*             61     7.51     1.63      63       6.71  2.04
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Bulgaria to help ensure better development results, looking
forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
(1-Not important all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                         Currently collaborating     Not collaborating
                                                                                             with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                                           N      Mean      SD       N     Mean      SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                            52      7.98     1.85      73      7.68      2.27
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)                      44      7.66     2.00      66      7.70      2.14
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)            59      8.47     1.36      75      8.40      1.90




                                                                         89
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Bulgaria?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                       Currently collaborating           Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                                with the WBG                   with the WBG
Arrogant in its approach                                                                1.4%                           1.1%
Not client focused                                                                      0.0%                           0.0%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                   2.9%                           0.0%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                                10.0%                          10.6%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the
                                                                                        12.9%                          13.8%
country
Staff too inaccessible                                                                  1.4%                            3.2%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                12.9%                           7.4%
Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the
                                                                                        10.0%                          20.2%
Government
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical
                                                                                        31.4%                          18.1%
problem solving*
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                11.4%                          19.1%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                   8.6%                           8.5%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities*                  14.3%                          5.3%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow (e.g., too bureaucratic in its
                                                                                        10.0%                           5.3%
operational policies and procedures)
Not aligned with other international partners’ work                                     1.4%                           2.1%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                     2.9%                           5.3%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Bulgaria                      8.6%                           13.8%
Other                                                                                   4.3%                           2.1%
Don’t know                                                                              20.0%                          23.4%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Bulgaria?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                       Currently collaborating           Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                                with the WBG                   with the WBG
Trust Fund management                                                                   2.8%                           3.2%
Knowledge products/services                                                             35.2%                          30.9%
Investment lending                                                                      19.7%                          27.7%
Technical assistance                                                                    36.6%                          29.8%
Capacity development                                                                    33.8%                          38.3%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                                 11.3%                          9.6%
Multi-sectoral approaches                                                               16.9%                          8.5%
Other                                                                                   0.0%                           0.0%
Don’t know                                                                              16.9%                          19.1%

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support help the poorest in Bulgaria?
  (Select only ONE response)
                                                                                Currently collaborating           Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                           with the WBG                   with the WBG
To a fully sufficient degree                                                              -                            3.2%
To a somewhat sufficient degree                                                         17.4%                          11.7%
To a somewhat insufficient degree                                                       39.1%                          34.0%
To a very insufficient degree                                                           13.0%                          13.8%
Don't know                                                                              30.4%                          37.2%




                                                                    90
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
   Group collaborate with more in your country? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                             Currently collaborating           Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                                      with the WBG                   with the WBG
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                      42.3%                            42.1%
European Institutions and International Financial Institutions                                11.3%                            8.4%
Media                                                                                         4.2%                             8.4%
Local Government                                                                              25.4%                            30.5%
Private Sector                                                                                26.8%                            28.4%
Parliament                                                                                    15.5%                            8.4%
NGOs/Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                     23.9%                            23.2%
Youth/University Groups                                                                       11.3%                            14.7%
Beneficiaries                                                                                 8.5%                             10.5%
Foundations                                                                                   0.0%                             2.1%
Other                                                                                         2.8%                             0.0%
Don’t know                                                                                    9.9%                             9.5%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Bulgaria?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                              Currently collaborating     Not collaborating
                                                                                                  with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                                                N      Mean      SD       N     Mean      SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development in Bulgaria*       67      7.28     1.91      77      6.39      1.99
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for
                                                                                               65      7.22     1.92      69      6.01      2.08
Bulgaria*
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Bulgaria*         65      7.28     1.79      72      6.43      1.98
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Bulgaria with respect                  67      8.19     1.78      70      7.80      1.73
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Bulgaria, in terms of each of the following?
  (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                              Currently collaborating     Not collaborating
                                                                                                  with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                                                N      Mean      SD       N     Mean      SD
Responsiveness                                                                                 56      7.95     1.78      50      7.40      1.94
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                             53      7.04     1.87      52      6.15      2.08
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                                      56      7.04     2.03      54      5.85      1.89
Being inclusive*                                                                               49      7.47     1.71      51      6.24      1.86
Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                                 62      7.89     2.00      64      7.02      2.16
Staff accessibility*                                                                           62      7.92     1.89      60      6.88      2.22
Straightforwardness and honesty                                                                59      7.68     2.01      55      7.16      2.01
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making decisions important
                                                                                               60      7.82     1.98      50      6.58      2.49
to my work*
Collaboration with civil society*                                                              42      7.31     2.07      53      6.09      2.16
Collaboration with the Government*                                                             55      8.31     1.49      58      7.78      1.35
Collaboration with the European Commission and International Financial Institutions            45      7.98     1.52      42      7.95      1.41
Collaboration with the private sector*                                                         35      6.94     2.11      43      5.63      2.15
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                                  57      6.88     2.22      55      5.76      2.14
Being a long-term partner*                                                                     60      8.53     1.44      61      7.72      1.88
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG




                                                                        91
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To be more effective development partner in Bulgaria, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have?
(Select only ONE response)
                                                                          Currently collaborating           Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                     with the WBG                   with the WBG
More local presence                                                               46.5%                            61.5%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                   42.3%                            18.7%
Less local presence                                                                 -                              1.1%
Don't know                                                                        11.3%                            18.7%

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                 Currently collaborating           Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                          with the WBG                   with the WBG
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                               38.2%                            43.0%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation             22.1%                            24.4%
The World Bank Group works too slowly*                                            2.9%                             12.8%
The Government works inefficiently                                                30.9%                            18.6%
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                                                  14.7%                            18.6%
through/follow-up
Poor coordination with international and European partners                        2.9%                             1.2%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social
                                                                                  19.1%                            9.3%
realities on the ground
Political pressures and obstacles                                                 27.9%                            23.3%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                   23.5%                            29.1%
Other                                                                             1.5%                             0.0%


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Bulgaria? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                  Currently collaborating     Not collaborating
                                                                                      with the WBG              with the WBG
                                                                                    N      Mean      SD       N     Mean      SD
Convergence of living standards with EU                                            56      7.70     2.33      82      7.57      2.55
Basic infrastructure and transport                                                 54      6.78     2.58      81      7.47      2.09
Economic growth                                                                    60      8.48     1.50      83      8.86      1.44
Energy and energy efficiency                                                       51      7.84     1.75      79      7.71      1.96
Water supply and sanitation                                                        49      7.00     1.97      76      6.92      2.16
Public financial management                                                        57      7.39     1.93      78      8.09      1.98
Social protection                                                                  52      7.02     2.11      78      7.23      2.51
Education                                                                          58      8.81     1.49      83      8.65      1.80
Health                                                                             56      8.25     1.91      81      8.35      1.96
Climate change and green growth                                                    53      7.21     2.36      75      6.97      2.75
Governance                                                                         58      8.24     2.04      78      8.23      1.95
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                              54      6.78     2.60      76      6.83      2.78
Job creation/employment                                                            54      7.76     2.13      80      7.94      2.06
Law and justice                                                                    55      7.96     2.38      77      8.56      1.74
Innovations                                                                        55      8.02     2.05      77      8.39      1.90
Financial markets                                                                  47      6.74     2.63      74      7.03      2.49
Agricultural development                                                           51      7.18     2.54      77      7.44      2.40
Trade and exports                                                                  45      6.51     2.62      73      6.96      2.53
Foreign direct investment                                                          49      7.67     2.15      76      7.91      2.01
Rural development                                                                  51      7.49     2.56      77      7.56      2.40


                                                                  92
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Bulgaria? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                          Currently collaborating       Not collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG                with the WBG
                                                                                            N      Mean      SD         N     Mean      SD
Convergence of living standards with EU                                                    35      6.03     2.57       32      5.47     2.27
Basic infrastructure and transport*                                                        34      7.09     1.96       40      6.10     2.07
Economic growth                                                                            39      6.74     2.05       43      6.00     1.99
Energy and energy efficiency                                                               30      6.60     1.87       36      6.06     1.94
Water supply and sanitation*                                                               35      6.91     2.04       37      5.78     2.20
Public financial management                                                                35      6.54     1.92       42      6.02     1.93
Social protection                                                                          38      6.29     2.24       40      5.60     2.05
Education                                                                                  46      6.61     2.19       46      5.96     2.16
Health                                                                                     35      6.06     2.41       42      5.76     2.21
Climate change and green growth                                                            32      5.91     2.33       32      5.97     1.79
Governance                                                                                 41      6.56     2.39       47      6.21     2.02
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                                      38      6.47     2.23       39      6.23     2.06
Job creation/employment                                                                    37      5.89     2.66       38      5.82     2.13
Law and justice                                                                            28      5.29     2.43       34      5.76     2.27
Innovations                                                                                36      6.22     2.29       35      6.17     2.18
Financial markets                                                                          30      6.13     2.47       35      6.29     2.19
Agricultural development                                                                   29      6.03     2.61       31      5.68     2.20
Trade and exports                                                                          26      5.46     2.40       34      6.06     1.83
Foreign direct investment                                                                  28      5.96     2.32       37      6.27     1.94
Rural development                                                                           27     5.93     2.69      31       5.71  2.24
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Bulgaria?
(Select only ONE response)
                                                                                Currently collaborating             Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                           with the WBG                     with the WBG
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                 25.4%                           35.3%
In the country                                                                           19.0%                           10.6%
Don’t know                                                                               55.6%                           54.1%

                                                                                          Currently collaborating       Not collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG                with the WBG
                                                                                            N      Mean      SD         N     Mean      SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
                                                                                           53      6.72     1.71       61      5.85     1.90
Bulgaria?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Bulgaria?
                                                                                          Currently collaborating       Not collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG                with the WBG
                                                                                            N      Mean      SD         N     Mean      SD
The World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of Bulgaria                    41      6.39     2.11       58      6.22     1.89
 The World Bank Group meets Bulgaria’s needs for knowledge services*                       57      7.56     1.81      62       6.29  2.17
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG




                                                                      93
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

                                                                                             Currently collaborating       Not collaborating
                                                                                                 with the WBG                with the WBG
                                                                                               N      Mean      SD         N     Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe that Bulgaria received value for money from the World Bank
                                                                                               40     6.48      2.30       59       5.90   2.30
Group’s Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

                                                                                             Currently collaborating       Not collaborating
                                                                                                 with the WBG                with the WBG
                                                                                               N      Mean      SD         N     Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its work in real
                                                                                               41     6.54      2.22       49       5.65   2.13
time in Bulgaria?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*
(Select only ONE response)
                                                                                Currently collaborating                Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                           with the WBG                        with the WBG
Weekly                                                                                      7.6%                              -
Monthly                                                                                     19.7%                           11.6%
A few times a year                                                                          59.1%                           36.0%
Rarely                                                                                      12.1%                           31.4%
Never                                                                                       1.5%                            20.9%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

In Bulgaria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                             Currently collaborating       Not collaborating
                                                                                                 with the WBG                with the WBG
                                                                                               N      Mean      SD         N     Mean      SD
Are timely*                                                                                    56     7.04      2.02       60       6.13   2.15
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation*                       55     7.09      2.04       56       6.11   2.44
Lead to practical solutions*                                                                   57     6.95      1.96       63       5.73   2.07
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)*                                          60     7.73      1.74       67       6.93   2.11
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                    58     7.98      1.53       66       7.59   1.94
Are adequately disseminated*                                                                   55     7.05      2.13       61       5.97   2.30
Are translated enough into local language*                                                     53     7.30      2.27       60       6.13   2.49
Are adaptable to Bulgaria’s specific development challenges and country circumstances          55     6.82      1.84       63       6.13   2.11
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

                                                                                             Currently collaborating       Not collaborating
                                                                                                 with the WBG                with the WBG
                                                                                               N      Mean      SD         N     Mean      SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG's knowledge work and
                                                                                               55     6.78      1.69       69       6.49   1.97
activities make to development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge
                                                                                               58     8.17      1.56       63       7.57   1.61
work and activities?*
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG



                                                                           94
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                               Currently collaborating       Not collaborating
                                                                                                   with the WBG                with the WBG
                                                                                                 N      Mean      SD         N     Mean      SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                                   29      6.38     2.35       34      5.44     2.44
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                                43      7.79     1.74       53      6.92     1.93
supports*
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion*                      42      7.52     1.85       49      6.65     1.96
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable                           26      7.69     1.98       31      6.97     1.99
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                                 24      7.75     1.75       38      6.87     2.06
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Bulgaria*                                       32      7.50     1.81       40      5.70     2.38
Working with the World Bank Group increases Bulgaria’s institutional capacity*                  46      7.80     1.57       59      6.80     1.96
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of
                                                                                                25      7.96     1.17       38      7.03     2.10
them*
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support*                                 39      8.05     1.50       50      7.10     2.00
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

                                                                                               Currently collaborating       Not collaborating
                                                                                                   with the WBG                with the WBG
                                                                                                 N      Mean      SD         N     Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find solutions that
                                                                                                29      6.21     2.01       43      5.35     2.15
promote private public partnerships in Bulgaria?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                                  Currently collaborating                Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                             with the WBG                        with the WBG
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Bulgaria                                            -                               -
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Bulgaria                                    25.8%                           38.6%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                        46.8%                           26.5%
Don't know                                                                                    27.4%                           34.9%

Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in Bulgaria?* (Select only ONE response)
                                                                                  Currently collaborating                Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                             with the WBG                        with the WBG
The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the
                                                                                              53.1%                           23.8%
most important development challenges in Bulgaria
The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Bulgaria, and
                                                                                              15.6%                           28.6%
it is involved in too many areas of development
Don't know                                                                                    31.3%                           47.6%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG




                                                                        95
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bulgaria

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Bulgaria?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                     Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                              with the WBG                    with the WBG
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to
                                                                                      10.8%                            8.4%
markets
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                        41.5%                           37.3%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                                                                                       7.7%                            4.8%
Bulgaria’s economy
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                3.1%                            9.6%
Offer more innovative financial products                                              12.3%                           14.5%
Work faster                                                                           4.6%                            6.0%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Bulgaria’s specific
                                                                                      16.9%                            7.2%
challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                              15.4%                           14.5%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients*                                 12.3%                           25.3%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                             30.8%                           32.5%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                         12.3%                           22.9%
Increase availability of Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)                         9.2%                            2.4%
Other                                                                                 4.6%                            2.4%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Bulgaria, and taking into account its
limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in
Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                              Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                         with the WBG                    with the WBG
Financial services                                                                    7.6%                            17.4%
Knowledge products                                                                    30.3%                           31.4%
Convening services                                                                    21.2%                           18.6%
None of the above                                                                       -                             1.2%
The combination is appropriate for Bulgaria*                                          31.8%                           17.4%
Don't know                                                                            9.1%                            14.0%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG




G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Bulgaria?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                     Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                              with the WBG                    with the WBG
Periodicals                                                                           13.8%                           16.5%
International newspapers                                                              7.7%                            7.1%
Local radio                                                                           0.0%                            2.4%
International radio                                                                   0.0%                            0.0%
Local television                                                                      26.2%                           28.2%
International television                                                              0.0%                            3.5%
Local newspapers                                                                      13.8%                           12.9%
Internet                                                                              86.2%                           78.8%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)*                             4.6%                            18.8%
Other*                                                                                21.5%                           9.4%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG




                                                                    96
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

How would you prefer to obtain information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                                     Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
(Responses combined)                                                              with the WBG                    with the WBG
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                                  33.8%                           24.4%
e-Newsletters*                                                                        23.1%                           44.2%
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/ conferences*                                   52.3%                           34.9%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                           41.5%                           27.9%
World Bank Group’s website                                                            35.4%                           37.2%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                              4.6%                            12.8%
Mobile phones                                                                         0.0%                            0.0%
Other                                                                                 0.0%                            0.0%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the WBG will now disclose any
information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                                              Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                         with the WBG                    with the WBG
Yes                                                                                   23.4%                            18.8%
No                                                                                    76.6%                            81.2%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
                                                                              Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                         with the WBG                    with the WBG
Yes                                                                                   23.4%                            8.0%
No                                                                                    76.6%                            92.0%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                                              Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                         with the WBG                    with the WBG
Yes                                                                                   93.3%                            85.7%
No                                                                                    6.7%                             14.3%

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                                              Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                         with the WBG                    with the WBG
Yes                                                                                   100.0%                          100.0%
No                                                                                       -                               -

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
                                                                              Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                         with the WBG                    with the WBG
Yes                                                                                   85.1%                            76.7%
No                                                                                    14.9%                            23.3%

Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites?
                                                                              Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                         with the WBG                    with the WBG
Yes                                                                                   16.7%                            12.2%
No                                                                                    83.3%                            87.8%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?*
                                                                              Currently collaborating            Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                         with the WBG                    with the WBG
High speed/WiFi                                                                       92.4%                           100.0%
Dial-up                                                                               7.6%                               -
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG



                                                                    97
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                          Currently collaborating      Not collaborating
                                                                                              with the WBG               with the WBG
                                                                                            N      Mean      SD        N     Mean      SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                                   51      7.55     1.75       61       7.15    1.90
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                          52      8.13     1.53       62       7.74    1.54
The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of information about
                                                                                           18      6.89     2.47       24       5.88    3.10
the institution
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it                    55      7.85     2.40       62       7.19    2.30
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and inquiries*               46      8.28     1.88       35       7.29    2.12
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG




H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in Bulgaria?*
(Select only ONE response)
                                                                                Currently collaborating             Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                           with the WBG                     with the WBG
The World Bank (IBRD)                                                                    93.2%                           75.9%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                              1.4%                            6.0%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                      1.4%                            2.4%
Other                                                                                    4.1%                            15.7%
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?
                                                                                Currently collaborating             Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                           with the WBG                     with the WBG
Yes                                                                                      17.1%                           7.6%
No                                                                                       82.9%                           92.4%

If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)
                                                                                Currently collaborating             Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                           with the WBG                     with the WBG
The two institutions work well together                                                  64.3%                           44.4%
The way the two institutions work together needs improvement                               -                               -
The two institutions do not work well together                                             -                                -
Don't know                                                                               35.7%                           55.6%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                Currently collaborating             Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                           with the WBG                     with the WBG
Observer*                                                                                4.1%                            22.7%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                        50.0%                           43.2%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                           25.7%                           18.2%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*                                           70.3%                           29.5%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research,
                                                                                         10.8%                           31.8%
etc.*
*Significantly different between those who are currently collaborating with the WBG and those who are not collaborating with the WBG

What’s your gender?
                                                                                Currently collaborating             Not collaborating
Percentage of Respondents                                                           with the WBG                     with the WBG
Female                                                                                   40.5%                           46.0%
Male                                                                                     59.5%                           54.0%



                                                                      98
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


Appendix D: Responses to All Questions by Gender11

Females N=79            Males N=100

A. General Issues facing Bulgaria

In general, would you say that Bulgaria is headed in...?
Percentage of Respondents                                                              Females                         Males
The right direction                                                                     61.6%                          59.6%
The wrong direction                                                                      6.8%                          16.2%
Not sure                                                                                31.5%                          24.2%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bulgaria. Please identify which of the following you consider the
most important development priorities in Bulgaria?
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                                   Females                         Males
Social protection                                                                       12.8%                          9.0%
Basic infrastructure and transport                                                      12.8%                          11.0%
Economic growth*                                                                        62.8%                          44.0%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                             9.0%                          8.0%
Water supply and sanitation                                                              1.3%                          0.0%
Public financial management*                                                             5.1%                          16.0%
Convergence of living standards with EU                                                 10.3%                          19.0%
Education                                                                               48.7%                          58.0%
Health                                                                                  23.1%                          20.0%
Climate change and green growth                                                          5.1%                          2.0%
Governance                                                                              16.7%                          18.0%
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                                    3.8%                          3.0%
Job creation/employment                                                                 15.4%                          13.0%
Law and justice*                                                                        34.6%                          59.0%
Innovations                                                                             11.5%                          7.0%
Financial markets                                                                        0.0%                          0.0%
Agricultural development                                                                 3.8%                          1.0%
Trade and exports                                                                        2.6%                          0.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                                6.4%                          8.0%
Rural development                                                                        7.7%                          2.0%
*Significantly different between genders




11
  Only 179 respondents provided their demographic information about gender and could be included in the comparisons presented in this
appendix.

                                                                    99
                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


A. General Issues facing Bulgaria (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                          Female                     Male
Financial markets                                                              0.0%                      0.0%
Agricultural development                                                       14.1%                     15.2%
Trade and exports                                                              9.0%                      5.1%
Foreign direct investment                                                      15.4%                     20.2%
Rural development                                                              20.5%                     11.1%
Governance                                                                     12.8%                     13.1%
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                          9.0%                      7.1%
Job creation/employment                                                        43.6%                     35.4%
Law and justice*                                                               19.2%                     46.5%
Innovations                                                                    5.1%                      9.1%
Public financial management                                                    14.1%                     17.2%
Convergence of living standards with EU                                        12.8%                     10.1%
Education                                                                      51.3%                     54.5%
Health                                                                         6.4%                      5.1%
Climate change and green growth                                                2.6%                      2.0%
Social protection                                                              5.1%                      4.0%
Basic infrastructure and transport                                             2.6%                      4.0%
Economic growth                                                                48.7%                     35.4%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                   3.8%                      4.0%
Water supply and sanitation                                                    0.0%                      0.0%
*Significantly different between genders

The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity? goal captures two key elements, economic growth and equity. It will seek to
foster income growth among the bottom 40 percent of a country’s population. Improvement in the Shared Prosperity
Indicator requires growth and well-being of the less well-off. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your
country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                          Female                     Male
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                            5.1%                      6.0%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                                           34.2%                     24.0%
A growing middle class                                                         26.6%                     26.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                        8.9%                      7.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                        0.0%                      0.0%
Consistent economic growth                                                     49.4%                     45.0%
Better employment opportunities for young people                               16.5%                     18.0%
Better employment opportunities for women                                      1.3%                      0.0%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                   0.0%                      1.0%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater
                                                                               1.3%                       3.0%
accountability
More reliable social safety net                                                2.5%                      2.0%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                1.3%                      3.0%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                      51.9%                     57.0%
Better quality public services                                                 1.3%                      7.0%
Other                                                                          0.0%                      0.0%




                                                               100
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


A. General Issues facing Bulgaria (continued)
Do you think the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem, a moderately big problem, a small problem or not
a problem at all in Bulgaria?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                   Female                         Male
A very big problem                                                                           32.9%                         45.0%
A moderately big problem                                                                     51.9%                         42.0%
A small problem                                                                              10.1%                         11.0%
Not a problem at all                                                                         3.8%                          2.0%
Don’t know                                                                                   1.3%                            -

In your view, is global climate change a very serious problem, somewhat serious, not too serious, or not a problem?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                                   Female                         Male
A very serious problem                                                                       51.3%                         37.0%
A somewhat serious problem                                                                   41.0%                         35.0%
Not too serious problem                                                                      5.1%                          23.0%
Not a problem                                                                                1.3%                          3.0%
Don’t know                                                                                   1.3%                          2.0%
*Significantly different between genders




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                                     Females                  Males
                                                                                              N       Mean     SD     N       Mean    SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Bulgaria?                      79       5.39     2.13   97      6.06    2.35
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


                                                                                                     Females                  Males
                                                                                              N       Mean     SD     N       Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Bulgaria.    64       6.39     1.63   84      6.75    2.00
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


                                                                                                     Females                  Males
                                                                                              N       Mean     SD     N       Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the WBG's staff is well prepared to help Bulgaria solve its
                                                                                             58       7.33     1.68   80      7.61    1.84
most complicated development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                        101
                                                            World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Bulgaria, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in
Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                          Female                      Male
Agricultural development                                                       8.9%                       13.3%
Trade and exports                                                              1.3%                       1.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                      15.2%                      19.4%
Governance                                                                     24.1%                      29.6%
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                          2.5%                       5.1%
Job creation/employment                                                        15.2%                      13.3%
Law and justice                                                                20.3%                      26.5%
Innovations                                                                    19.0%                      16.3%
Financial markets                                                              2.5%                       3.1%
Rural development*                                                             17.7%                      6.1%
Convergence of living standards with EU                                        20.3%                      11.2%
Education                                                                      45.6%                      50.0%
Health                                                                         21.5%                      14.3%
Social protection                                                              5.1%                       4.1%
Basic infrastructure and transport*                                            5.1%                       14.3%
Economic growth                                                                31.6%                      28.6%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                   5.1%                       13.3%
Water supply and sanitation                                                    2.5%                       2.0%
Public financial management                                                    16.5%                      17.3%
Climate change and green growth                                                8.9%                       6.1%
*Significantly different between genders

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
   second greatest value in Bulgaria?
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                   Female                       Male
Convening/facilitating*                                                      13.2%                       4.2%
Data                                                                          3.9%                       3.2%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                             36.8%                       45.3%
Financial resources                                                          10.5%                       10.5%
Capacity development                                                         18.4%                       16.8%
Technical assistance                                                          5.3%                       10.5%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                    6.6%                       3.2%
Coordination with the European Commission and International
                                                                              5.3%                       6.3%
Financial Institutions
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                 0.0%                       0.0%
Other                                                                         0.0%                       0.0%
*Significantly different between genders




                                                            102
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
 nd
2 Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                              Female                         Male
Convening/facilitating                                                                  5.3%                          8.4%
Data                                                                                    6.6%                          6.3%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                        22.4%                         15.8%
Financial resources                                                                     11.8%                         14.7%
Capacity development                                                                    23.7%                         25.3%
Technical assistance                                                                    15.8%                         10.5%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                              6.6%                          4.2%
Coordination with the European Commission and International
                                                                                        5.3%                          12.6%
Financial Institutions
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                           1.3%                          2.1%
Other                                                                                   1.3%                          0.0%

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
  following areas in Bulgaria? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                Females                  Males
                                                                                         N       Mean     SD     N       Mean    SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                           45      6.93     2.10   65      7.11    1.72
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)                     37      5.84     1.82   51      5.45    1.97
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)           53      7.06     1.84   74      7.09    1.99


When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Bulgaria to help ensure better development results, looking
forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
(1-Not important all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                                Females                  Males
                                                                                         N       Mean     SD     N       Mean    SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                           56      7.68     2.24   72      7.90    1.99
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)                     48      8.00     1.86   64      7.42    2.21
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)           57      8.33     1.68   80      8.49    1.70




                                                                         103
                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Bulgaria?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                          Female                    Male
Arrogant in its approach                                                       1.3%                     1.1%
Not client focused                                                             0.0%                     0.0%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                          0.0%                     2.2%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                       10.7%                    9.7%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the
                                                                               12.0%                    15.1%
country
Staff too inaccessible                                                         2.7%                        2.2%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                       12.0%                       8.6%
Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the
                                                                               14.7%                    16.1%
Government
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical
                                                                               26.7%                    21.5%
problem solving
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                       17.3%                    14.0%
Too influenced by developed countries                                          8.0%                     9.7%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities          9.3%                     9.7%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow (e.g., too bureaucratic in its
                                                                               5.3%                        8.6%
operational policies and procedures)
Not aligned with other international partners’ work                            1.3%                     2.2%
Not aligned with country priorities                                            2.7%                     6.5%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Bulgaria             8.0%                     14.0%
Other                                                                          1.3%                     4.3%
Don’t know                                                                     22.7%                    21.5%

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Bulgaria?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                          Female                    Male
Trust Fund management                                                          4.0%                     2.1%
Knowledge products/services                                                    32.0%                    33.0%
Investment lending                                                             30.7%                    20.2%
Technical assistance*                                                          22.7%                    40.4%
Capacity development                                                           33.3%                    39.4%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                        8.0%                     12.8%
Multi-sectoral approaches                                                      14.7%                    9.6%
Other                                                                          0.0%                     0.0%
Don’t know                                                                     18.7%                    17.0%
*Significantly different between genders

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support help the poorest in Bulgaria?
  (Select only ONE response)

Percentage of Respondents                                                     Female                    Male
To a fully sufficient degree                                                   2.7%                     2.1%
To a somewhat sufficient degree                                                11.0%                    17.0%
To a somewhat insufficient degree                                              34.2%                    37.2%
To a very insufficient degree                                                  16.4%                    12.8%
Don't know                                                                     35.6%                    30.9%




                                                               104
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
   Group collaborate with more in your country? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                                         Female                         Male
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                      36.8%                         43.6%
European Institutions and International Financial Institutions                                11.8%                         7.4%
Media                                                                                         2.6%                          9.6%
Local Government                                                                              34.2%                         22.3%
Private Sector                                                                                27.6%                         28.7%
Parliament*                                                                                   5.3%                          16.0%
NGOs/Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                     19.7%                         27.7%
Youth/University Groups                                                                       18.4%                         10.6%
Beneficiaries                                                                                 10.5%                         10.6%
Foundations                                                                                   2.6%                          0.0%
Other                                                                                         0.0%                          2.1%
Don’t know                                                                                    13.2%                         6.4%
*Significantly different between genders

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Bulgaria?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                      Females                  Males
                                                                                               N       Mean     SD     N       Mean    SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development in Bulgaria       64       6.80     1.79   83      6.77    2.16
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for
                                                                                              61       6.69     2.01   76      6.46    2.15
Bulgaria
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Bulgaria         64       6.77     1.91   76      6.78    2.01
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Bulgaria with respect                 62       7.98     1.81   78      7.94    1.84


To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Bulgaria, in terms of each of the following?
  (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                                      Females                  Males
                                                                                               N       Mean     SD     N       Mean    SD
Responsiveness                                                                                52       7.79     1.84   56      7.55    1.91
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)                             44       6.59     1.73   63      6.62    2.21
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                      48       6.79     1.71   64      6.19    2.23
Being inclusive                                                                               41       7.02     1.81   61      6.69    1.95
Openness (sharing data and other information)                                                 57       7.39     2.14   73      7.53    2.12
Staff accessibility                                                                           58       7.50     1.94   67      7.42    2.27
Straightforwardness and honesty                                                               51       7.55     1.91   65      7.37    2.13
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making decisions important
                                                                                              54       7.19     2.26   60      7.38    2.38
to my work
Collaboration with civil society                                                              42       6.40     2.33   54      6.70    2.08
Collaboration with the Government                                                             55       7.93     1.43   60      8.10    1.50
Collaboration with the European Commission and International Financial Institutions           40       7.83     1.57   47      8.00    1.43
Collaboration with the private sector                                                         32       6.13     2.28   47      6.15    2.17
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground                                  51       6.51     2.22   62      6.23    2.28
Being a long-term partner                                                                     55       7.96     1.76   68      8.29    1.69




                                                                       105
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To be more effective development partner in Bulgaria, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have?
(Select only ONE response)

Percentage of Respondents                                                       Female                         Male
More local presence                                                              56.6%                         54.4%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                  22.4%                         33.3%
Less local presence                                                                -                           1.1%
Don't know                                                                       21.1%                         11.1%

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                            Female                         Male
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government*                             25.7%                         52.3%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation            27.1%                         20.5%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                            8.6%                          8.0%
The Government works inefficiently*                                              17.1%                         33.0%
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                                                 18.6%                         14.8%
through/follow-up
Poor coordination with international and European partners                       2.9%                          1.1%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social
                                                                                 11.4%                         13.6%
realities on the ground
Political pressures and obstacles                                                21.4%                         27.3%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                  35.7%                         21.6%
Other                                                                            1.4%                          0.0%


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Bulgaria? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                         Females                  Males
                                                                                  N       Mean     SD     N       Mean    SD
Convergence of living standards with EU*                                          66      8.06     2.00   76      7.20    2.74
Basic infrastructure and transport                                                66      7.33     2.12   73      7.12    2.47
Economic growth                                                                   70      8.73     1.40   77      8.69    1.59
Energy and energy efficiency                                                      63      7.95     1.68   71      7.65    2.02
Water supply and sanitation                                                       61      7.07     2.03   68      6.82    2.13
Public financial management                                                       63      7.98     1.78   76      7.58    2.24
Social protection*                                                                63      7.56     2.05   71      6.70    2.62
Education                                                                         66      8.70     1.50   79      8.72    1.84
Health                                                                            67      8.55     1.47   74      8.09    2.27
Climate change and green growth*                                                  62      8.00     2.10   69      6.14    2.75
Governance                                                                        66      8.12     2.12   74      8.23    2.00
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion*                                            61      7.38     2.48   72      6.35    2.74
Job creation/employment                                                           63      7.94     2.06   75      7.84    2.15
Law and justice                                                                   62      8.35     1.80   74      8.26    2.23
Innovations                                                                       61      8.41     1.88   75      8.12    2.05
Financial markets                                                                 56      7.43     2.17   69      6.59    2.75
Agricultural development*                                                         59      8.03     1.84   73      6.78    2.73
Trade and exports*                                                                54      7.41     2.31   68      6.38    2.64
Foreign direct investment                                                         58      8.21     1.57   70      7.57    2.37
Rural development*                                                                58      8.12     1.88   74      7.09    2.75
*Significantly different between genders


                                                                 106
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Bulgaria? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                  Females               Males
                                                                                            N      Mean     SD     N    Mean    SD
Convergence of living standards with EU                                                     28     5.64     2.54   40   5.63    2.38
Basic infrastructure and transport                                                          29     6.31     2.25   47   6.53    2.01
Economic growth                                                                             32     6.41     2.31   51   6.20    1.93
Energy and energy efficiency                                                                24     6.33     1.95   43   6.19    1.93
Water supply and sanitation                                                                 31     6.48     2.52   43   6.07    1.96
Public financial management                                                                 30     6.27     1.89   48   6.17    1.96
Social protection                                                                           35     6.11     2.34   45   5.67    2.07
Education                                                                                   39     6.67     1.98   56   5.95    2.35
Health                                                                                      32     6.22     1.91   47   5.57    2.53
Climate change and green growth*                                                            25     6.64     2.16   40   5.40    1.95
Governance                                                                                  39     6.69     2.30   52   6.19    2.19
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                                       34     6.85     2.23   47   5.91    2.00
Job creation/employment                                                                     31     6.19     2.40   46   5.50    2.40
Law and justice                                                                             21     5.76     2.34   43   5.33    2.37
Innovations                                                                                 28     6.57     2.47   45   5.91    2.10
Financial markets                                                                           22     6.68     1.99   43   5.88    2.44
Agricultural development                                                                    22     6.59     2.52   39   5.33    2.28
Trade and exports*                                                                          21     6.62     1.91   41   5.41    2.19
Foreign direct investment*                                                                  24     6.88     1.85   43   5.74    2.23
Rural development*                                                                          20     6.70     2.41   39   5.26    2.38
*Significantly different between genders

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Bulgaria?
(Select only ONE response)

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Female                     Male
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                  28.4%                     33.3%
In the country                                                                            12.2%                     16.7%
Don’t know                                                                                59.5%                     50.0%


                                                                                                  Females               Males
                                                                                            N      Mean     SD     N    Mean    SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
                                                                                            50     6.30     1.76   67   6.10    1.95
Bulgaria?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Bulgaria?
                                                                                                  Females               Males
                                                                                            N      Mean     SD     N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of Bulgaria                     44     6.32     1.83   57   6.14    2.03
 The World Bank Group meets Bulgaria’s needs for knowledge services                         55     6.96     2.05   67   6.79    2.14
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




                                                                      107
                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

                                                                                                    Females                 Males
                                                                                              N      Mean       SD     N    Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe that Bulgaria received value for money from the World Bank
                                                                                              44     6.23       2.00   57      6.00   2.53
Group’s Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


                                                                                                    Females                 Males
                                                                                              N      Mean       SD     N    Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its work in real
                                                                                              39     6.38       1.83   54      5.80   2.37
time in Bulgaria?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?
(Select only ONE response)

Percentage of Respondents                                                                  Female                      Male
Weekly                                                                                      4.1%                       3.6%
Monthly                                                                                     15.1%                      15.7%
A few times a year                                                                          39.7%                      49.4%
Rarely                                                                                      28.8%                      19.3%
Never                                                                                       12.3%                      12.0%

In Bulgaria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                                    Females                 Males
                                                                                              N      Mean       SD     N    Mean      SD
Are timely                                                                                    53     6.72       1.92   66      6.50   2.29
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                       51     6.67       2.19   63      6.56   2.37
Lead to practical solutions                                                                   57     6.21       1.92   66      6.36   2.24
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                          60     7.18       2.00   70      7.43   1.93
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                   58     7.67       1.64   68      7.82   1.88
Are adequately disseminated                                                                   53     6.62       2.10   66      6.45   2.41
Are translated enough into local language                                                     56     6.75       2.40   60      6.72   2.53
Are adaptable to Bulgaria’s specific development challenges and country circumstances         54     6.46       1.72   67      6.37   2.22
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


                                                                                                    Females                 Males
                                                                                              N      Mean       SD     N    Mean      SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG's knowledge work and
                                                                                              59     6.71       1.66   68      6.56   2.00
activities make to development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge
                                                                                              56     7.80       1.42   67      7.91   1.75
work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                          108
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                      Females                 Males
                                                                                                 N     Mean     SD     N      Mean       SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                                   32     5.69     2.58   31         6.00   2.25
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                                47     7.47     1.88   51         7.20   1.92
supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                       45     7.13     1.90   48         7.04   2.02
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable                           23     7.43     2.00   35         7.17   2.01
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                                 23     7.30     1.80   41         7.15   2.15
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Bulgaria                                        32     6.56     2.29   43         6.44   2.34
Working with the World Bank Group increases Bulgaria’s institutional capacity                   49     7.33     1.71   60         7.23   2.02
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of
                                                                                                26     7.54     1.56   40         7.28   2.04
them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                                  43     7.65     1.86   48         7.46   1.86


                                                                                                      Females                 Males
                                                                                                 N     Mean     SD     N      Mean       SD
To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find solutions that
                                                                                                28     5.71     2.07   46         5.65   2.14
promote private public partnerships in Bulgaria?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Bulgaria?* (Select only ONE response)

Percentage of Respondents                                                                 Female                        Male
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Bulgaria                                         -                            -
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Bulgaria                                 21.4%                        44.9%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                     31.4%                        38.5%
Don't know                                                                                 47.1%                        16.7%
*Significantly different between genders

Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)

Percentage of Respondents                                                                 Female                           Male
The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the
                                                                                              31.9%                     39.2%
most important development challenges in Bulgaria
The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Bulgaria, and
                                                                                              18.1%                     29.1%
it is involved in too many areas of development
Don't know                                                                                    50.0%                     31.6%




                                                                       109
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bulgaria

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Bulgaria?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                         Female                      Male
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to
                                                                              12.9%                      6.2%
markets
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                42.9%                     35.8%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                                                                               5.7%                      6.2%
Bulgaria’s economy
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                        4.3%                      8.6%
Offer more innovative financial products                                      15.7%                     11.1%
Work faster                                                                   4.3%                      6.2%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Bulgaria’s specific
                                                                               8.6%                     13.6%
challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                      15.7%                     13.6%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients*                         12.9%                     25.9%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                     30.0%                     35.8%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing*                25.7%                     12.3%
Increase availability of Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)                 4.3%                      6.2%
Other*                                                                        0.0%                      6.2%
*Significantly different between genders

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Bulgaria, and taking into account its
limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in
Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)

Percentage of Respondents                                                    Female                     Male
Financial services                                                            13.9%                     12.0%
Knowledge products                                                            26.4%                     36.1%
Convening services                                                            16.7%                     21.7%
None of the above                                                               -                       1.2%
The combination is appropriate for Bulgaria                                   27.8%                     20.5%
Don't know                                                                    15.3%                     8.4%



G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Bulgaria?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                         Female                     Male
Periodicals                                                                   14.1%                     15.9%
International newspapers                                                      4.2%                      11.0%
Local radio                                                                   0.0%                      2.4%
International radio                                                           0.0%                      0.0%
Local television                                                              26.8%                     28.0%
International television                                                      1.4%                      2.4%
Local newspapers                                                              11.3%                     15.9%
Internet                                                                      83.1%                     81.7%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                      16.9%                     9.8%
Other                                                                         15.5%                     12.2%




                                                                110
                                                              World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

How would you prefer to obtain information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                       Female                    Male
Direct contact with World Bank Group*                                       19.4%                    37.8%
e-Newsletters                                                               40.3%                    30.5%
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/ conferences                          41.7%                    42.7%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                 31.9%                    36.6%
World Bank Group’s website                                                  36.1%                    35.4%
Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                    11.1%                    7.3%
Mobile phones                                                               0.0%                     0.0%
Other                                                                       0.0%                     0.0%
*Significantly different between genders

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the WBG will now disclose any
information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?

Percentage of Respondents                                                  Female                    Male
Yes                                                                         17.1%                    22.0%
No                                                                          82.9%                    78.0%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                  Female                    Male
Yes                                                                         7.0%                     20.5%
No                                                                          93.0%                    79.5%
*Significantly different between genders

Were you able to obtain this information?

Percentage of Respondents                                                  Female                    Male
Yes                                                                         80.0%                    94.1%
No                                                                          20.0%                    5.9%

Do you have access to the Internet?

Percentage of Respondents                                                  Female                     Male
Yes                                                                        100.0%                    100.0%
No                                                                            -                         -

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?

Percentage of Respondents                                                  Female                    Male
Yes                                                                         83.8%                    78.0%
No                                                                          16.2%                    22.0%

Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites?

Percentage of Respondents                                                  Female                    Male
Yes                                                                         8.3%                     19.0%
No                                                                          91.7%                    81.0%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?

Percentage of Respondents                                                  Female                    Male
High speed/WiFi                                                             94.4%                    98.8%
Dial-up                                                                     5.6%                     1.2%



                                                              111
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                  Females                    Males
                                                                                            N      Mean     SD     N         Mean    SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                                    54     7.26     1.94   61        7.44    1.74
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                           55     7.80     1.54   62        8.06    1.52
The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of information about
                                                                                            13     6.46     2.67   30        6.13    2.99
the institution
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it                     56     7.32     2.47   64        7.75    2.25
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and inquiries                 39     7.85     1.81   44        7.91    2.22




H. Background Information

Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group in your country?
(Select only ONE response)

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Female                        Male
I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group                                         6.6%                         13.3%
I have previously collaborated with the World Bank Group                                  31.6%                        33.7%
Both of the above (I currently collaborate and previously have
                                                                                         32.9%                         31.6%
collaborated with the World Bank Group)
I have never collaborated with the World Bank Group                                      28.9%                         21.4%

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in Bulgaria?
(Select only ONE response)

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Female                        Male
The World Bank (IBRD)                                                                     89.7%                        79.8%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                 -                          6.7%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                       1.5%                         2.2%
Other                                                                                     8.8%                         11.2%

Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Female                        Male
Yes                                                                                       15.5%                        8.6%
No                                                                                        84.5%                        91.4%

If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Female                        Male
The two institutions work well together                                                   53.8%                        54.5%
The way the two institutions work together needs improvement                                -                            -
The two institutions do not work well together                                              -                            -
Don't know                                                                                46.2%                        45.5%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Female                        Male
Observer                                                                                  11.0%                        16.1%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                         49.3%                        44.1%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                            23.3%                        19.4%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                             39.7%                        53.8%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research,
                                                                                         27.4%                         18.3%
etc.


                                                                      112
                                                               World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


Appendix E: Responses to All Questions by Year
Comparing responses across Country Surveys reflect changes in attitudes over time, but also changes in
respondent samples and changes to the survey instrument itself. To reduce the influence of the latter factor, only
those questions with similar response scales/options were analyzed. Although the FY12 and FY14 samples were
fairly similar, the samples from both years were weighted to have equivalent stakeholder groups.

                                                                                 Original Distribution
Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY12                         FY15
Office of the President/Prime Minister                                       3%                           3%
Government institutions (includes Office of a Minister, Office of
a Parliamentarian, employees of ministries, independent
                                                                            34%                          39%
government institutions, the judiciary branch, and
PMU/Consultants on WBG supported projects
Local Government                                                            6%                           2%
Bilateral/multilateral agencies (includes Diplomatic Corp
                                                                            11%                          10%
respondents from FY12)
Civil society (includes NGOs/CBOS, private foundations, and
                                                                            18%                          18%
trade unions)
Private sector (includes financial sector/private banks)                    13%                           8%
Academia                                                                     7%                          10%
Media                                                                        3%                           6%
Total Number of Respondents (Un-Weighted)                                   178                          183

The weighted stakeholder breakdown is presented below:
                                                                              Weighted Distribution
Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY12                         FY15
Office of the President/Prime Minister                                       3%                           3%
Government institutions                                                     34%                          33%
Local Government                                                             6%                           6%
Bilateral/multilateral agencies                                             11%                          12%
Civil society                                                               18%                          18%
Private sector                                                              13%                          13%
Academia                                                                    10%                          10%
Media                                                                        6%                           6%
Total Number of Respondents (Weighted)                                       176                          181

All data presented in this appendix are weighted. As a result, means of the FY15 data and the total number of
respondents indicated will be slightly different from the aggregated responses in Appendix A. Similarly,
responses from FY12 respondents and the total number of respondents indicated may differ from those reported
in the FY12 COS report.


A. General Issues facing Bulgaria

In general, would you say that Bulgaria is headed in...?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                 FY12                        FY15
The right direction                                                       75.8%                      58.3%
The wrong direction                                                       10.9%                      13.0%
Not sure                                                                  13.3%                      28.8%
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12




                                                               113
                                                                       World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                                      FY12                FY15
                                                                                                N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Bulgaria?*                        174   6.79   1.95   178   5.72   2.19
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between FY15 and FY12


                                                                                                      FY12                FY15
                                                                                                N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Bulgaria.       152   6.85   1.75   150   6.58   1.82
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


                                                                                                      FY12                FY15
                                                                                                N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared to help
                                                                                                152   7.43   1.92   133   7.51   1.75
Bulgaria solve its most complicated development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Bulgaria?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                      FY12                FY15
                                                                                                N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development in Bulgaria         169   6.85   1.98   146   6.84   1.93
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for
                                                                                                165   6.52   2.00   136   6.51   2.10
Bulgaria
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Bulgaria           163   6.95   1.88   141   6.69   1.99

The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Bulgaria with respect                   160   7.75   1.92   136   7.88   1.81


To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Bulgaria in terms of each of the following?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                                      FY12                FY15
                                                                                                N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD
Responsiveness                                                                                  141   7.12   2.01   108   7.51   1.99
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)                               140   6.31   1.96   107   6.42   2.07
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                        136   5.94   2.01   110   6.30   2.13
Being inclusive                                                                                 123   6.52   1.88   102   6.66   1.98
Openness (sharing data and other information)                                                   153   7.36   1.90   129   7.35   2.20
Staff accessibility                                                                             150   7.35   2.04   124   7.29   2.17
Straightforwardness and honesty                                                                 143   7.33   2.11   113   7.47   1.98
Collaboration with civil society                                                                127   6.31   1.90   98    6.51   2.28
Collaboration with the Government                                                               142   8.06   1.57   114   8.00   1.39
Collaboration with the European Commission and International Financial Institutions             117   7.87   1.49   87    7.97   1.45




                                                                        114
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Bulgaria? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                               FY12                FY15
                                                                                         N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD
Convergence of living standards with EU                                                  116   5.52   2.17   66    5.66   2.54
Basic infrastructure and transport                                                       129   6.61   1.92   76    6.46   2.30
Economic growth                                                                          128   6.25   1.88   83    6.19   2.21
Energy and energy efficiency                                                             106   6.05   2.09   66    6.35   1.99
Water supply and sanitation                                                              105   6.26   2.11   75    6.20   2.31
Public financial management                                                              119   6.64   1.73   78    6.15   1.99
Social protection                                                                        105   5.24   2.30   78    5.76   2.24
Education*                                                                               128   5.59   2.05   93    6.23   2.27
Health*                                                                                  108   5.07   2.04   78    5.80   2.32
Climate change and green growth                                                          95    5.77   2.11   61    5.86   2.13
Governance*                                                                              116   5.77   2.19   86    6.44   2.15
Equality of opportunity and Inclusion                                                    125   5.94   2.37   77    6.31   2.13
Law and justice                                                                          96    5.03   2.25   63    5.51   2.40
Innovations                                                                              117   5.57   1.96   70    6.12   2.27
Financial markets                                                                        98    6.12   2.08   65    6.15   2.38
Agricultural development*                                                                88    5.03   1.68   57    5.73   2.40
Trade and exports                                                                        90    5.26   1.92   60    5.84   2.20
Rural development                                                                        88    5.20   2.06   56    5.68   2.49
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12


                                                                                               FY12                FY15
                                                                                         N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
                                                                                         154   6.21   1.76   117   6.29   1.85
Bulgaria?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Bulgaria?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                               FY12                FY15
                                                                                         N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD
The World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of Bulgaria                  147   6.52   1.86   100   6.25   1.96
The World Bank Group meets Bulgaria’s needs for knowledge services                       158   6.75   1.95   122   6.78   2.13




                                                                     115
                                                                          World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                 FY12                           FY15
Weekly                                                                                    3.4%                           2.8%
Monthly*                                                                                  26.2%                         14.6%
A few times a year                                                                        45.1%                         43.5%
Rarely                                                                                    21.2%                         25.6%
Never*                                                                                    4.0%                          13.4%
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12

In Bulgaria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                                          FY12                  FY15
                                                                                                  N       Mean   SD       N     Mean   SD
Are timely                                                                                       148      6.64   1.87    116    6.51   2.12
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                          149      6.59   1.90    112    6.43   2.43
Lead to practical solutions*                                                                     154      6.80   1.84    123    6.24   2.10
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                             155      7.06   2.02    130    7.18   2.06
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                      160      7.59   1.80    126    7.75   1.79
Are adequately disseminated                                                                      154      6.50   2.14    118    6.36   2.37
Are translated enough into local language*                                                       138      7.33   2.04    115    6.47   2.57
Are adaptable to Bulgaria’s specific development challenges and country circumstances            148      6.57   1.92    121    6.35   2.03
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12


                                                                                                          FY12                  FY15
                                                                                                  N       Mean   SD       N     Mean   SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group’s knowledge
                                                                                                 165      7.01   1.76    128    6.63   1.87
work and activities make to development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge
                                                                                                 161      7.80   1.57    124    7.76   1.67
work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                          FY12                  FY15
                                                                                                  N       Mean   SD       N     Mean   SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                                    113      5.71   1.89    62     5.60   2.49
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                                 141      7.26   1.87    94     7.18   1.97
supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                        128      6.96   1.90    91     6.97   2.07
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable                             94      6.91   1.95    58     7.08   2.18
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                                  113      6.94   1.90    64     7.00   2.13
Working with the World Bank Group increases Bulgaria’s institutional capacity                    157      7.55   1.94    107    7.13   1.97
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of
                                                                                                  99      6.52   2.11    64     7.17   2.04
them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                                   128      7.10   2.08    89     7.34   2.06




                                                                          116
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


G. Communication and Information Sharing

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the WBG will now disclose any
information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                       FY12                        FY15
Yes                                                                             32.2%                      21.6%
No                                                                              67.8%                      78.4%
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                       FY12                        FY15
Yes                                                                             23.2%                      13.0%
No                                                                              76.8%                      87.0%
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12

Were you able to obtain this information?

Percentage of Respondents                                                       FY12                        FY15
Yes                                                                             92.1%                      89.3%
No                                                                              7.9%                       10.7%

Do you have access to the Internet?

Percentage of Respondents                                                        FY12                       FY15
Yes                                                                             100.0%                     100.0%
No                                                                                 -                          -

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                       FY12                        FY15
Yes                                                                             89.3%                      81.0%
No                                                                              10.7%                      19.0%
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                             FY12                   FY15
                                                                                         N   Mean   SD       N      Mean   SD
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                             146     7.23   1.94     118    7.26   1.86
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                    143     7.90   1.62     121    7.85   1.58
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it              154     7.57   2.36     120    7.41   2.43
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and inquiries          112     7.65   2.20     80     7.79   2.00




                                                                      117
                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


H. Background Information

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)

Percentage of Respondents
(Responses combined)                                                     FY12                        FY15
Observer                                                                 18.1%                      14.7%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                        47.3%                      46.7%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                                         36.0%                      24.0%
events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                            39.5%                      43.8%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research,
                                                                         29.4%                      22.5%
etc.
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12

Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group in your country?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                FY12                        FY15
Currently collaborating with the WBG                                     64.5%                      38.6%
Not collaborating with the WBG                                           35.5%                      61.4%
*Significantly different between FY15 and FY12

Which best represents your geographic location?

Percentage of Respondents                                                FY12                        FY15
Sofia                                                                    88.2%                      85.5%
Outside Sofia                                                            11.8%                      14.5%




                                                            118
                                                                                                                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


Appendix F: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the World Bank Group
                                                                    Which one of the following
                                                                                                      Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                    best describes your level of
                                                                    interaction with the WBG?              Observer                Use WBG reports/data   Engage in WBG activities       Collaborate         Use WBG website
                                                                       Never        Currently
                                                                                                   No Mean       Yes Mean          No Mean     Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean     No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean    Yes Mean
Indicator Question                                                  Collaborated   Collaborating
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank
                                                                        6.28           6.89         6.77              5.74          6.51         6.79       6.62           6.69       6.33         6.93     6.82        5.90
Group’s effectiveness in Bulgaria.
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role
                                                                        6.39           7.28         6.87              6.71          6.63         7.10       6.79           7.06       6.65         7.06     7.08        6.09
in development in Bulgaria
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider
                                                                        6.01           7.22         6.77              5.63          6.49         6.80       6.62           6.66       6.32         6.96     6.73        6.22
the development priorities for Bulgaria
Responsiveness                                                          7.40           7.95         7.73              7.73          7.82         7.62       7.78           7.58       7.63         7.81     7.75        7.63
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)       6.15           7.04         6.80              5.73          6.86         6.47       6.70           6.64       6.40         6.90     6.71        6.56
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                5.85           7.04         6.61              5.93          6.62         6.41       6.48           6.65       6.12         6.84     6.71        5.56
Being inclusive                                                         6.24           7.47         7.02              5.80          6.96         6.83       6.89           6.93       6.31         7.38     7.07        6.11
Openness (sharing data and other information)                           7.02           7.89         7.55              7.25          7.34         7.72       7.59           7.27       7.24         7.77     7.65        6.92
Staff accessibility                                                     6.88           7.92         7.60              7.07          7.52         7.55       7.56           7.47       7.14         7.87     7.73        6.62
Straightforwardness and honesty                                         7.16           7.68         7.56              7.18          7.62         7.41       7.63           7.23       7.21         7.79     7.67        6.79
Ease of access to the people at the WBG who are making
                                                                        6.58           7.82         7.41              6.80          7.20         7.54       7.39           7.27       6.94         7.70     7.45        6.89
decisions important to my work
Collaboration with civil society                                        6.09           7.31         6.76              5.75          6.54         6.73       6.55           6.87       6.23         7.04     6.76        6.15
Collaboration with the Government                                       7.78           8.31         8.08              7.86          8.02         8.09       8.05           8.07       7.69         8.40     8.22        7.36
Collaboration with the European Commission and
                                                                        7.95           7.98         7.95              7.80          8.02         7.83       7.88           8.10       7.86         8.00     7.92        7.95
International Financial Institutions
Collaboration with the private sector                                   5.63           6.94         6.43              5.00          6.28         6.21       6.08           6.78       5.88         6.63     6.27        6.17
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground            5.76           6.88         6.54              5.50          6.44         6.40       6.45           6.36       6.24         6.58     6.46        6.25
Being a long-term partner                                               7.72           8.53         8.19              8.27          8.05         8.37       8.22           8.14       7.89         8.47     8.33        7.67
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to
                                                                        5.85           6.72         6.34              5.75          6.15         6.38       6.11           6.74       5.93         6.62     6.40        5.68
achieve development results in Bulgaria?
The World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the
                                                                        6.22           6.39         6.32              6.29          6.29         6.34       6.14           6.95       6.25         6.37     6.31        6.32
needs of Bulgaria
The WBG meets Bulgaria’s needs for knowledge services                   6.29           7.56         7.03              6.38          6.69         7.21       6.92           7.00       6.58         7.30     7.06        6.38
Are adaptable to Bulgaria’s specific development challenges
                                                                        6.13           6.82         6.50              6.43          6.28         6.75       6.50           6.48       6.18         6.79     6.56        6.22
and country circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the
WBG’s knowledge work and activities make to development                 6.49           6.78         6.70              6.69          6.78         6.61       6.69           6.73       6.54         6.84     6.68        6.75
results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the
                                                                        7.57           8.17         7.96              7.36          7.95         7.84       7.96           7.65       7.47         8.29     7.97        7.57
WBG's knowledge work and activities?
The WBG takes decisions quickly in Bulgaria                             5.70           7.50         6.70              4.25          6.50         6.67       6.54           6.63       5.87         7.07     6.75        5.69
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group
                                                                        7.03           7.96         7.52              7.38          7.41         7.64       7.55           7.31       7.13         7.88     7.46        7.64
makes appropriate use of them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No means.



                                                                                                                             119
                                                                                                                                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


Appendix G: Indicator Questions by Stakeholder Groups
                                                        Office of the                                                                     Private Sector/                                             Independent
                                                      President/Prime                           Employee of a           Bilateral/       Financial Sector/                                            Government
                                                          Minister       Office of a Minister     Ministry         Multilateral Agency     Private Bank           NGO/CBO              Media           Institution           Academia               Other
                                                      N   Mean    SD       N    Mean    SD      N    Mean   SD       N   Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD    N     Mean     SD     N   Mean    SD     N   Mean   SD     N     Mean      SD     N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the
                                                      5    6.40   0.55     9    8.11    1.27    42   6.57   1.56    11    7.18   1.66    12    6.92   1.73   23     5.83    2.42   8   7.25    1.91   5   6.40   2.70   15     5.67     1.72   18   6.78    1.48
World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Bulgaria.*
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
                                                      5    7.60   1.14     9    7.56    1.33    41   7.15   1.85    12    6.75   1.66    12    7.08   1.98   24     5.58    2.39   6   8.67    1.03   6   6.17   2.48   14     6.21     1.81   18   7.06    2.04
relevant role in development in Bulgaria*
The WBG’s work is aligned with what I consider
                                                      5    6.20   1.48     9    6.67    2.00    40   7.08   1.89    10    7.60   0.52    11    6.55   2.21   22     5.68    2.44   5   7.60    0.55   5   6.80   3.27   13     5.62     2.10   17   6.53    2.29
the development priorities for Bulgaria
Responsiveness*                                       5    6.80   2.86     6    8.67    1.21    37   8.38   1.61     8    6.88   1.36     7    7.43   1.27   12     8.00    1.35   3   9.00    1.73   6   7.00   2.19   10     6.70     1.95   15   6.80    2.27
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products
                                                      4    5.50   1.92     6    7.67    1.51    35   7.26   1.99     6    6.50   1.87    11    5.36   1.91   14     5.86    1.88   3   8.67    1.53   5   6.40   1.82   10     6.10     1.66   13   6.62    2.33
and services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                      5    6.00   1.58     7    7.14    1.68    37   7.08   2.02     6    6.33   1.86    11    5.36   2.29   15     5.67    1.99   3   8.00    1.73   6   6.50   2.07   11     5.91     1.97   11   6.73    2.20
circumstances)
Being inclusive                                       4    7.00   1.41     6    7.83    1.33    31   7.42   1.71     6    6.00   1.55     9    6.44   1.33   15     6.27    1.98   3   8.33    2.08   6   6.83   2.56   10     6.00     1.89   12   6.75    2.42
Openness (sharing data and other information)         5    7.20   1.10     7    8.71    1.80    39   8.00   1.86    11    6.45   2.58    10    7.50   1.18   19     6.79    2.46   4   9.00    1.41   6   7.17   2.23   14     7.64     1.82   15   6.67    2.64
Staff accessibility                                   5    7.60   2.07     7    8.57    1.40    39   8.26   1.67     9    7.11   1.97    12    7.08   1.93   18     6.56    2.23   3   8.33    2.08   6   7.50   1.64   11     6.27     2.69   15   7.00    2.59
Straightforwardness and honesty                       5    6.00   1.00     6    9.50    0.84    36   7.69   2.01     6    7.00   2.10    10    7.90   1.45   18     7.28    2.02   3   8.67    2.31   6   6.67   2.50   12     6.50     2.36   14   7.36    1.87
Ease of access to the people at the WBG who
                                                      5    7.00   1.58     7    8.14    1.77    36   7.64   2.23     8    7.88   1.81    10    6.70   2.11   16     6.50    2.61   4   9.00    2.00   5   7.20   2.68   9      6.00     2.55   14   7.36    2.59
are making decisions important to my work
Collaboration with civil society                      3    6.00   0.00     5    7.40    2.41    22   6.82   1.76     5    7.20   2.17    10    6.90   1.79   22     5.95    2.40   4   8.75    1.50   4   6.75   2.63   12     6.42     2.15   10   6.00    3.06
Collaboration with the Government                     5    8.00   1.58     7    8.71    0.95    35   8.40   1.17     6    7.33   1.21    10    7.60   1.08   19     7.63    2.17   3   8.67    2.31   6   7.50   1.52   10     7.50     0.53   14   8.21    1.53
Collaboration with the European Commission
                                                      2    7.00   1.41     3    8.67    1.16    25   7.92   1.41     5    8.00   1.00     8    7.63   1.30   17     8.18    1.63   4   9.00    2.00   5   7.00   1.23   8      7.75     1.04   11   7.91    2.02
and International Financial Institutions
Collaboration with the private sector                 3    6.00   1.00     4    5.50    1.73    17   6.65   1.77     3    8.00   1.00    11    5.91   2.74   16     6.00    2.50   3   8.00    1.73   4   5.75   3.20   10     5.60     1.35   9    5.89    2.93
The speed in which it gets things accomplished
                                                      4    5.50   2.08     6    7.50    1.52    35   6.89   2.07     5    6.40   2.30    10    5.90   1.97   19     5.47    2.55   4   8.75    1.89   5   6.40   2.61   11     5.73     1.74   14   6.07    2.62
on the ground
Being a long-term partner                             5    8.00   1.23     6    9.00    1.10    40   8.35   1.53     9    7.89   1.54     9    7.56   1.74   20     8.45    1.57   4   9.00    2.00   6   7.00   2.53   12     7.75     1.42   12   7.83    2.59
To what extent does the WBG’s work help to
                                                      4    6.50   0.58     7    7.86    1.68    30   6.67   1.52     9    6.44   1.59    10    6.00   2.00   21     5.38    2.44   5   6.40    2.19   5   6.40   1.95   12     5.67     1.67   14   6.21    1.72
achieve development results in Bulgaria?
The World Bank Group’s financial instruments
                                                      4    5.25   0.96     6    8.00    1.41    28   6.18   1.83     4    5.50   2.08     9    6.00   2.29   18     6.06    2.26   5   6.00    2.35   5   8.00   1.58   11     5.91     2.02   11   6.45    1.64
meet the needs of Bulgaria
The World Bank Group meets Bulgaria’s needs
                                                      4    7.00   1.41     8    8.38    1.41    36   7.08   2.38     6    7.67   0.52    10    6.20   1.99   22     6.45    2.24   4   7.00    0.82   5   7.20   1.30   13     6.31     2.25   14   6.93    2.34
for knowledge services
Are adaptable to Bulgaria’s specific
development challenges and country                    4    6.25   0.96     8    7.63    1.41    37   6.41   2.09     7    7.71   1.50    10    6.10   1.91   20     6.20    2.42   4   7.00    0.00   6   6.67   1.97   11     5.64     2.34   14   6.21    1.93
circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the WBG’s knowledge work and
                                                      4    7.25   0.96     8    7.63    1.30    37   6.62   1.89    10    7.00   1.16    11    5.91   2.26   20     7.00    1.97   6   6.50    1.98   5   6.80   1.64   12     6.08     1.98   14   6.50    2.14
activities make to development results in your
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge           4    8.25   0.96     8    9.00    0.93    38   7.89   1.54    11    7.91   1.45     9    7.11   2.32   18     7.89    1.61   5   7.40    2.19   5   8.20   1.92   12     7.92     1.31   13   7.46    1.81
work and activities?
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly
                                                      3    6.33   1.53     6    8.17    1.60    21   7.57   1.89     2    6.00   2.83     7    4.86   2.55   13     5.31    2.21   2   8.50    0.71   4   7.50   2.52   6      5.50     1.76   11   6.27    2.65
in Bulgaria*
Where country systems are adequate, the WBG
                                                      2    8.00   2.83     5    8.60    1.14    17   7.94   1.35     4    7.50   1.29     4    5.25   0.96   12     7.42    2.35   1   8.00     .     4   8.25   0.50   9      6.78     1.99   7    6.57    2.30
makes appropriate use of them
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                 120
                                                             World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


Appendix H: Bulgaria FY 2015 Questionnaire




                           World Bank Group Country Survey FY15 – Bulgaria


The World Bank Group is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Bulgaria or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey will give the World Bank Group’s team that works in Bulgaria, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is
perceived. This is one tool the World Bank Group uses to assess the views of its stakeholders, and to develop
more effective strategies that support development in Bulgaria.

A local independent firm has been hired to oversee the logistics of this survey. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid.

Finally, the survey relates to the World Bank Group’s work. The World Bank Group consists of IBRD, IDA, IFC,
MIGA, and ICSID. When responding to the survey, please consider the area of the World Bank Group with which
you are most familiar.

To complete the survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion.
If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank. If you feel that you do not have an
adequate amount of information on a subject, please check “Don’t know?.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING BULGARIA

 A1. In general would you say that Bulgaria is headed in ... ?
 1   The right direction
 2   The wrong direction
 3   Not sure




                                                       121
                                                                 World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bulgaria.
Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in
Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social         Governance (i.e., government effectiveness,
 1                                                         11
      assistance)                                                public administration)
      Basic infrastructure and transport (e.g., roads,           Equality of opportunity and Inclusion (e.g.,
 2                                                         12
      bridges, transportation)                                   gender, Roma inclusion)
 3    Economic growth                                      13    Job creation/employment
 4    Energy and energy efficiency                         14    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 5    Water supply and sanitation (i.e., WSS companies)    15    Innovations
      Public financial management (e.g., public                  Financial markets (e.g., banking and pension funds
 6                                                         16
      expenditure, efficiency of public spending)                management)
 7    Convergence of living standards with EU              17    Agricultural development
 8    Education                                            18    Trade and exports
 9    Health                                               19    Foreign direct investment
      Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation,
10                                                         20    Rural development
      disaster management) and green growth


A3. The World Bank Group has committed itself to twin goals: ending extreme poverty by 2030 and
boosting shared prosperity. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many
different areas.
Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
poverty in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)
      Financial markets (e.g., banking and pension funds         Public financial management (e.g., public
 1                                                         11
      management)                                                expenditure, efficiency of public spending)
 2    Agricultural development                             12    Convergence of living standards with EU
 3    Trade and exports                                    13    Education
 4    Foreign direct investment                            14    Health
                                                                 Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation,
 5    Rural development                                    15
                                                                 disaster management) and green growth
      Governance (i.e., government effectiveness,                Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 6                                                         16
      public administration)                                     assistance)
      Equality of opportunity and Inclusion (e.g.,               Basic infrastructure and transport (e.g., roads,
 7                                                         17
      gender, Roma inclusion)                                    bridges, transportation)
 8    Job creation/employment                              18    Economic growth
 9    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)              19    Energy and energy efficiency
 10   Innovations                                          20    Water supply and sanitation (i.e., WSS companies)




                                                           122
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
A4. The World Bank Group’s “Shared Prosperity? goal captures two key elements, economic growth
and equity. It will seek to foster income growth among the bottom 40 percent of a country’s
population. Improvement in the Shared Prosperity Indicator requires growth and well-being of the
less well-off. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the
following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than
TWO)
 1     Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens
 2     Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
 3     A growing middle class
 4     Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
 5     Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
 6     Consistent economic growth
 7     Better employment opportunities for young people
 8     Better employment opportunities for women
 9     Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
 10    Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
 11    More reliable social safety net
 12    Greater equity of fiscal policy
 13    Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
 14    Better quality public services
 15    Other (please specify):_____________________________________


A5. Do you think the gap between the rich and the poor is a very big problem, a moderately big
problem, a small problem or not a problem at all in Bulgaria?             (Select only ONE response)
 1    A very big problem
 2    A moderately big problem
 3    A small problem
 4    Not a problem at all
 5    Don’t know


A6. In your view, is global climate change a very serious problem, somewhat serious, not too
serious, or not a problem?        (Select only ONE response)
 1    A very serious problem
 2    A somewhat serious problem
 3    Not too serious problem
 4    Not a problem
 5    Don’t know




                                                             123
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Bulgaria?
         1            2      3      4          5       6        7                  8            9                  10

Not familiar at all                                                                                         Extremely familiar



B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Bulgaria.
        1             2      3      4      5       6       7        8          9              10                   
Not effective at
                                                                                          Very effective      Don't know
all


B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
knowledge) to help Bulgaria solve its most complicated development challenges?
        1             2      3      4      5       6       7        8          9               10                  
To no degree at                                                                                 To a very
                                                                                                              Don't know
all                                                                                    significant degree


B4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development
results in Bulgaria, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of
its resources (financial and knowledge services) in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1   Agricultural development                                  11       Convergence of living standards with EU
 2   Trade and exports                                         12       Education
 3   Foreign direct investment                                 13       Health
     Governance (i.e., government effectiveness, public                 Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 4                                                             14
     administration)                                                    assistance)
     Equality of opportunity and Inclusion (e.g., gender,               Basic infrastructure and transport (e.g., roads,
 5                                                             15
     Roma inclusion)                                                    bridges, transportation)
 6   Job creation/employment                                   16       Economic growth
 7   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                   17       Energy and energy efficiency
 8   Innovations                                               18       Water supply and sanitation (i.e., WSS companies)
     Financial markets (e.g., banking and pension funds                 Public financial management (e.g., public
 9                                                             19
     management)                                                        expenditure, efficiency of public spending)
                                                                        Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation,
10   Rural development                                         20
                                                                        disaster management) and green growth




                                                               124
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
B5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Bulgaria?
                                                                         Greatest Value           Second Greatest Value
                                                                (Choose only ONE)                 (Choose only ONE)
 1     Convening/facilitating                                                                               
 2     Data                                                                                                 
 3     Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                                     
 4     Financial resources                                                                                  
 5     Capacity development                                                                                 
 6     Technical assistance                                                                                 
 7     Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                           
       Coordination with the European Commission and
 8                                                                                                          
       International Financial Institutions
       Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 9                                                                                                          
       knowledge sharing)
10     Other (please specify): ________________________                                                     


How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in
each of the following areas in Bulgaria? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed
below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                Not effective                                     Very    Don't
                                                                at all                                        effective   know
        Project implementation (or other organizational
 B6                                                                 1      2    3    4    5   6   7   8   9        10      
        strengthening)
        Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B7                                                                 1      2    3    4    5   6   7   8   9        10      
        into development)
        Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B8                                                                 1      2    3    4    5   6   7   8   9        10      
        achieve development goals)


When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Bulgaria to help ensure better development
results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
aspects of capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed below,
please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                Not important                                 Very        Don't
                                                                at all                                    important       know
        Project implementation (or other organizational
 B9                                                                 1      2    3    4    5   6   7   8   9        10      
        strengthening)
        Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B10                                                                1      2    3    4    5   6   7   8   9        10      
        into development)
        Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B11                                                                1      2    3    4    5   6   7   8   9        10      
        achieve development goals)




                                                              125
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
B12. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
work in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1   Arrogant in its approach
 2   Not client focused
 3   The credibility of its knowledge/data
 4   World Bank Group’s processes too complex
 5   Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 6   Staff too inaccessible
 7   Not exploring alternative policy options
 8   Not collaborating enough with stakeholders outside the Government
 9   Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving
10   Not enough public disclosure of its work
11   Too influenced by developed countries
12   Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
13   World Bank Group’s processes too slow (e.g., too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures)
14   Not aligned with other international partners’ work
15   Not aligned with country priorities
16   Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Bulgaria
17   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
18   Don’t know


B13. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1   Trust Fund management
 2   Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
 3   Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 4   Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
 5   Capacity development
 6   Policy based lending / budget support to the Government
 7   Multi-sectoral approaches
 8   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 9   Don’t know


B14. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work and support help the poorest in
Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)
 1   To a fully sufficient degree
 2   To a somewhat sufficient degree
 3   To a somewhat insufficient degree
 4   To a very insufficient degree
 5   Don’t know




                                                              126
                                                                           World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
B15. In addition to the regular relations with the national government, which TWO of the following
groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country?
(Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Academia/think tanks/research institutes                   7         NGOs/Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
      European Institutions and International Financial
 2                                                               8         Youth/university groups
      Institutions
 3    Media                                                      9         Beneficiaries
 4    Local Government                                           10        Foundations
 5    Private sector                                             11        Other (please specify): _____________________
 6    Parliament                                                 12        Don’t know

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in
Bulgaria?
                                                                      Strongly                                   Strongly   Don't
                                                                      disagree                                      agree   know
       Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
B16                                                                    1      2    3   4    5   6    7   8   9       10      
       relevant role in development in Bulgaria
       The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
B17                                                                    1      2    3   4    5   6    7   8   9       10      
       consider the development priorities for Bulgaria
       The World Bank Group supports programs and
B18                                                                    1      2    3   4    5   6    7   8   9       10      
       strategies that are realistic for Bulgaria
       The World Bank Group treats clients and
B19                                                                    1      2    3   4    5   6    7   8   9       10      
       stakeholders in Bulgaria with respect

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Bulgaria, in terms of each
of the following?
                                                                      To no                                   To a very
                                                                                                                            Don't
                                                                      degree at                              significant
                                                                                                                            know
                                                                      all                                       degree
B20    Responsiveness                                                  1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      
       Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
B21                                                                    1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      
       services)
       Flexibility (in terms of changing country
B22                                                                    1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      
       circumstances)
B23    Being inclusive                                                 1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      

B24    Openness (sharing data and other information)                   1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      

B25    Staff accessibility                                             1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      
B26    Straightforwardness and honesty                                 1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      
       Ease of access to the people at the World Bank
B27    Group who are making decisions important to my                  1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      
       work
B28    Collaboration with civil society                                1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      
B29    Collaboration with the Government                               1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      
       Collaboration with the European Commission and
B30                                                                    1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      
       International Financial Institutions
B31    Collaboration with the private sector                           1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      
       The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
B32                                                                    1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      
       the ground
B33    Being a long-term partner                                       1      2    3    4   5   6    7   8   9       10      


                                                                 127
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
B34. To be a more effective development partner in Bulgaria, do you believe that the World Bank
Group should have… ? (Select only ONE response)
                                       The current level of local
     More local presence                                                     Less local presence   Don't know
                                           presence is adequate


B35. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 2     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 3     The World Bank Group works too slowly
 4     The Government works inefficiently
 5     The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 6     Poor coordination with international and European partners
 7     The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 8     Political pressures and obstacles
 9     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
10     Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                128
                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

C1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
areas of development in Bulgaria?
                                                                 Not important                                Very    Don't
                                                                 at all                                   important   know
 1    Convergence of living standards with EU                        1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
      Basic infrastructure and transport (e.g., roads,
 2                                                                   1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
      bridges, transportation)
 3    Economic growth                                                1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
 4    Energy and energy efficiency                                   1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
 5    Water supply and sanitation (i.e., WSS companies)              1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
      Public financial management (e.g., public
 6                                                                   1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
      expenditure, efficiency of public spending)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 7                                                                   1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
      assistance)
 8    Education                                                      1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
 9    Health                                                         1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
      Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation, disaster
 10                                                                  1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
      management) and green growth
      Governance (i.e., government effectiveness, public
 11                                                                  1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
      administration)
      Equality of opportunity and Inclusion (e.g., gender,
 12                                                                  1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
      Roma inclusion)
 13   Job creation/employment                                        1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
 14   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                        1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
 15   Innovations                                                    1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
      Financial markets (e.g., banking and pension funds
 16                                                                  1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
      management)
 17   Agricultural development                                       1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
 18   Trade and exports                                              1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
 19   Foreign direct investment                                      1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
 20   Rural development                                              1      2   3    4   5   6   7   8    9    10      




                                                               129
                                                                         World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

C2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following
areas of development in Bulgaria? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in working in any of the
sectors listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                 Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                 at all                                       effective   know
 1    Convergence of living standards with EU                        1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
      Basic infrastructure and transport (e.g., roads,
 2                                                                   1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
      bridges, transportation)
 3    Economic growth                                                1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 4    Energy and energy efficiency                                   1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 5    Water supply and sanitation (i.e., WSS companies)              1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
      Public financial management (e.g., public
 6                                                                   1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
      expenditure, efficiency of public spending)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 7                                                                   1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
      assistance)
 8    Education                                                      1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 9    Health                                                         1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
      Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation, disaster
 10                                                                  1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
      management) and green growth
      Governance (i.e., government effectiveness, public
 11                                                                  1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
      administration)
      Equality of opportunity and Inclusion (e.g., gender,
 12                                                                  1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
      Roma inclusion)
 13   Job creation/employment                                        1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 14   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                        1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 15   Innovations                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
      Financial markets (e.g., banking and pension funds
 16                                                                  1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
      management)
 17   Agricultural development                                       1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 18   Trade and exports                                              1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 19   Foreign direct investment                                      1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 20   Rural development                                              1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      




                                                               130
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
C3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in
Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)
 1   At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)
 2   In the country
 3   Don’t know


C4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
Bulgaria?
       1          2      3      4       5       6        7         8       9               10                   
To no degree at                                                                             To a very
                                                                                                            Don't know
all                                                                                significant degree



To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Bulgaria?
                                                     Strongly                                           Strongly     Don't
                                                     disagree                                              agree     know
     The World Bank Group’s financial instruments
     (i.e., investment lending, Development Policy
C5                                                   1        2        3   4   5       6    7     8     9     10      
     Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.)
     meet the needs of Bulgaria
     The World Bank Group meets Bulgaria’s
C6   needs for knowledge services (e.g., research,   1        2        3   4   5       6    7     8     9     10      
     analysis, data, technical assistance)


C7. To what extent do you believe that Bulgaria received value for money from the World Bank
Group’s Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)?
       1          2      3      4       5       6        7         8       9               10                   
To no degree at                                                                             To a very
                                                                                                            Don't know
all                                                                                significant degree


C8. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its work in real time
in Bulgaria?
       1          2      3      4       5       6        7         8       9               10                   
To no degree at                                                                             To a very
                                                                                                            Don't know
all                                                                                significant degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                             131
                                                                        World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work
you do?
1    Weekly
2    Monthly
3    A few times a year
4    Rarely
5    Never


In Bulgaria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                         To no                                                 To a very
                                                                                                                            Don't
                                                         degree at                                            significant
                                                                                                                            know
                                                         all                                                     degree
D2    Are timely                                          1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      Include appropriate level of stakeholder
D3                                                        1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      involvement during preparation
D4    Lead to practical solutions                         1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      Are accessible (well written and easy to
D5                                                        1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      understand)
      Are source of relevant information on global
D6                                                        1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      good practices
D7    Are adequately disseminated                         1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        

D8    Are translated enough into local language           1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      Are adaptable to Bulgaria’s specific
D9    development challenges and country                  1        2        3   4   5     6     7     8       9     10        
      circumstances


D10. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group's knowledge work
and activities make to development results in your country?
          1              2    3     4        5       6        7         8       9              10                        
Not significant at all                                                                     Very significant       Don't know


D11. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work
and activities?
          1              2    3     4        5       6        7         8       9              10                        
Very low technical                                                                      Very high technical
                                                                                                                  Don't know
quality                                                                                             quality




                                                                  132
                                                                      World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                          Strongly                                                   Strongly   Don't
                                                          disagree                                                      agree   know
      The World Bank Group disburses funds
E1                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      promptly
      The World Bank Group effectively monitors
E2    and evaluates the projects and programs it          1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      supports
      The World Bank Group’s approvals and
E3                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      reviews are done in a timely fashion
      The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy?
E4                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      requirements are reasonable
      The World Bank Group’s conditions on its
E5                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      lending are reasonable
      The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly
E6                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      in Bulgaria
      Working with the World Bank Group increases
E7                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      Bulgaria’s institutional capacity
      Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
      financial management, etc.) are adequate, the
E8                                                        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      World Bank Group makes appropriate use of
      them
      The World Bank Group provides effective
E9    implementation support (i.e., supervision of        1       2     3    4       5      6      7     8       9       10      
      projects)


E10. To what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s work helps to find solutions that
promote private public partnerships in Bulgaria?
         1             2      3      4      5         6       7        8         9               10                        
                                                                                         To a very significant
To no degree at all                                                                                                   Don't know
                                                                                                      degree


E11. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Bulgaria?
(Select only one response)
1    The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Bulgaria
2    The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Bulgaria
3    The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate
4    Don’t know


E12. Which of the following best describes the World Bank Group’s support in Bulgaria?
(Select only one response)
     The World Bank Group is sufficiently selective and focuses on the most important development challenges in
1
     Bulgaria
     The World Bank Group is not sufficiently selective in Bulgaria, and it is involved in too many areas of
2
     development
3    Don’t know




                                                              133
                                                                   World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN BULGARIA
F1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in
Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1   Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)
 2   Reach out more to groups outside of Government
 3   Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Bulgaria’s economy
 4   Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 5   Offer more innovative financial products
 6   Work faster
 7   Improve the quality of its experts as related to Bulgaria’s specific challenges
 8   Offer more innovative knowledge services
 9   Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)
10   Increase the level of capacity development in the country
11   Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing
12   Increase availability of Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)
13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


F2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Bulgaria,
and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe
the World Bank Group should offer more of in Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)
 1   Financial services
 2   Knowledge products
 3   Convening services
 4   None of the above
 5   The combination is appropriate for Bulgaria
 6   Don’t know




                                                             134
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in
Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Periodicals                                         6    International television
 2    International newspapers                            7    Local newspapers
 3    Local radio                                         8    Internet
 4    International radio                                 9    Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)
 5    Local television                                   10    Other (please specify): ___________________


G2. How would you prefer to obtain information from the World Bank Group?
(Choose no more than TWO)
     Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e., face
1                                                         5    World Bank Group’s website
     to face meetings/discussions)
2    e-Newsletters                                        6    Social media (blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)
     World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/
3                                                         7    Mobile phones
     conferences
     World Bank Group’s publications and other
4                                                         8    Other (please specify): ___________________
     written materials


      Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under which the
G3                                                                                                       Yes       No
      Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
      Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past
G4                                                                                                       Yes       No
      year? (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                          Yes       No
G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                                Yes       No
G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                             Yes       No
      Do you currently consult the World Bank Group social media sites (e.g., blogs, Facebook,
G8                                                                                                       Yes       No
      Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)?


G9. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
 1    High speed/WiFi
 2    Dial-up




                                                              135
                                                                World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                Strongly                           Strongly   Don't
                                                                disagree                              agree   know
      I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to
G10   navigate. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank       1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
      Group website)
      I find the information on the World Bank Group’s
G11   websites useful. (Only answer if you have used a World     1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
      Bank Group website)
      The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g.,
G12   blogs, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr) are valuable    1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
      sources of information about the institution
      When I need information from the World Bank Group I
G13   know how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach    1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
      them, etc.)
      The World Bank Group is responsive to my information
G14                                                              1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
      requests and inquiries




                                                          136
                                                                     World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?             (Select only ONE response)
 1   Office of the President, Prime Minister             11   NGO/Community Based Organization
 2   Office of Minister                                  12   Media (press, radio, TV, web, etc.)
                                                              Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory
 3   Office of Parliamentarian                           13
                                                              Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
     Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial
 4                                                       14   Trade Union
     Department or Implementation Agency
     Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing
     implementation of project/
 5                                                       15   Faith-Based Group
     Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank
     Group supported project/program
 6   Local Government Office or Staff                    16   Youth Group
 7   Bilateral/Multilateral Agency                       17   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 8   Private Sector Organization                         18   Judiciary Branch
 9   Private Foundation
                                                         19   Other (please specify): ________________________
10   Financial Sector/Private Bank


H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Select only ONE response)
 1   Water                                               12   Gender
 2   Social protection and labor                         13   Transport and ICT
 3   Fragility, conflict and violence                    14   Urban, rural, and social development
 4   Environment and natural resources                   15   Governance
 5   Public-private partnerships                         16   Poverty
 6   Education                                           17   Jobs
 7   Health, nutrition, and population                   18   Agriculture
 8   Energy and extractives                              19   Climate Change
 9   Macroeconomics and fiscal management                20   Generalist (specialized in multiple sectors)
10   Trade and competitiveness
                                                         21   Other (please specify): ____________________
11   Finance and markets


H3. Which one of the following best describes your level of interaction with the World Bank Group
(IBRD, IFC, or MIGA) in your country? (Select only ONE response)
1    I currently collaborate with the World Bank Group
2    I have previously collaborated with the World Bank Group
3    Both of the above (I currently collaborate and previously have collaborated with the World Bank Group)
4    I have never collaborated with the World Bank Group




                                                              137
                                                                    World Bank Group Country Opinion Survey 2015: Bulgaria


SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION
H4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in
Bulgaria? (Select only ONE response)
 1   The World Bank (IBRD)
 2   The International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
 3   The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
 4   Other (please specify):___________________________


H5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?
(If YES please go to Question H6; If NO please go to H7)
1    Yes
2    No


H6. If yes, what was your view of how the two institutions work together in Bulgaria?
(Select only ONE response)
1    The two institutions work well together
2    The way the two institutions work together needs improvement
3    The two institutions do not work well together
4    Don’t know


H7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Bulgaria?
(Choose no more than TWO)
1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
2    Use World Bank Group reports/data
3    Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities
4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
5    Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.


H8. What’s your gender?
1    Female
2    Male


H9. Which best represents your geographic location?
1    Sofia
2    Outside Sofia



                               Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                              138
