                             Investing in Africa’s Agriculture :
        Solidifying Foundation for Sustainable and Inclusive Development


                                      Guo Li and Wei Wang       


                                           (August 1, 2016)
A.      INTRODUCTION
Agriculture has been essentially the backbone of economic growth for centuries. The sector
has provided employment for the majority of the world population for generations, and has served
as a powerful force in transforming of economies towards an industry- and service- based. In
many countries, through both productivity increases and farm land expansion, agriculture
contributed to the transformation by releasing labor force for the other parts of the economy,
providing food security, keeping wage down by providing low cost food, and generating foreign
exchange. All these contributions are essential for broader social and economic development
(Bruce and Mellor, 1961).

In the 21st century, agriculture remains a fundamental instrument for sustainable
development and poverty reduction. WDR 2008, Agriculture for Development, convincingly
demonstrates the need to increase investment in agriculture and improve the effectiveness of such
investment in order to enhance the sector’s role in overall growth, poverty reduction, and
environmental sustainability. As an economic activity, agriculture can be a source of growth for
the national economy and a provider of investment opportunities for the private sector. Robust
empirical evidence from many countries consistently shows that agriculture is several times more
efficient in reducing poverty than other sectors, given majority of the world’s poor living in rural
area and relying on the sector as a major income source (World Bank, 2008). Agriculture can also
be a major provider of environmental services, through sequestering carbon, managing watersheds,
and preserving biodiversity. Therefore, agriculture offers great promise in today’s world for
growth, poverty reduction, and environmental sustainability.

China’s successful development in the past three decades exemplifies the powerful role the
agricultural sector can play in a country’s social and economic transformation. China’s
impressive development since early 1980s started with reforming agriculture policies and setting
strong incentives for stakeholders at all levels (Box 1). The results have been stunning. From
1980 to 2015, China’s average economic growth rate has been about 9 percent annually. GDP per
capita increased from around US$300 in early 1980s to more than US$8000 in 2015. Agricultura l
GDP grew by about 4.5 percent annually, and farmers’ incomes by 7 percent. Today, with 10
percent of world’s arable land, 6.5 percent of world’s water resources, China feeds about 20

 Dr. Guo Li is a Senior Agriculture Economist at the World Bank, and Wei Wang is a Research Assistant
at the Brookings Institution, both located in Washington, D.C. The views expressed in the paper are
authors’ only and do not necessarily represent those of the institutions they work in. The authors would
like to thank valuable guidance and comments from Mark Cackler, Robert Townsend, Alan Piazza,
Holger Kray and Samuel Taffesse. The remaining errors are of course authors’ responsibility.

                                                   1
percent of the world’s population (1.3 billion). China has lifted more than 600 million people out
of poverty. China’s agriculture is smallholder-based, with more than 200 million small farms with
an average holding of 0.65 hectares. China’s experience therefore shows that, with the right policy
choices, sustained commitment, and effective implementation, smallholder agriculture can be
transformed into a dynamic economic force.


                       Box 1: Summary of China’s Agricultural Development Experience

  China’s extremely successful development over the past three and half decades started with revitalizing the
  agricultural sector beginning in the early 1980s. Since then, China has always treated agriculture as a
  strategically important sector and continuously provided policy and financial support. In retrospect, the
  following eight areas can be viewed as the major buildi ng blocks of China’s agricultural sector
  transformation in the past 35 years:

        1.   Land reform: dismantling People’s Communes and granting smallholder farms with increasingly
             secure land tenure;
        2.   Price policy changes: agricultu re output prices rose in the first ten years of China’s economic
             reform, while in the rest of reforming world, e.g., central Europe and former Soviet Union, prices
             fell;
        3.   Liberalizing markets: it took about 20 years for the government to fully liberalize domestic
             agricultural output markets and integrate China with the international market;
        4.   Investing in agricultural technology: since 2000, the increase in investment into agriculture
             research in China has been faster than in any other country;
        5.   Investing in rural infrastructure: public expenditure has been mainly used for improving rural
             infrastructure, including roads, irrigation systems, schools, drinking water, and clinics;
        6.   Rural industrialization and off-farm job: at its peak level, rural enterprises accounted for 20
             percent of national employment, 28 percent of industrial output, and 48 percent of exports;
        7.   National poverty reduction program for lagging areas: Since 2010, the central government has
             invested about US$ 8 billion annually in poverty reduction program funding for the lagging areas
             since early 1990s through three-10 year’s plans, continuously fine-tuning targeting; and
        8.   Providing subsidies: focusing on high yield seeds, agriculture inputs, and machinery.

  Source: Author’s summary

Revitalizing Africa’s agriculture must be a priority on the continent. Most African countries
are agriculture-based and the sector is crucial to boosting economic growth, creating more jobs,
eradicating poverty, and tackling food insecurity and malnutrition, while also safeguarding the
continent’s environment. The African agricultural sector employs about 65 percent of the
continent’s labor force, accounts for more than 30 percent of GDP on average, and contributes
about 24 percent of economic growth. Despite the fact that the continent is bursting with vast
agriculture potential, including an inexpensive labor force, abundant unused fertile farm land, and
rich but untapped water resources, Africa as a continent has remained a net importer of agricultura l
products over the last three decades. The region was spending about US$ 45 billion on food
imports annually, with wheat, rice, vegetable oil, and dairy products on the top of the import list.
In addition, agriculture in Africa is increasingly affected by climate change, which further
threatens food production, increases smallholders’ vulnerability, results in food price shocks, and
worsens rural poverty. Therefore, it would be difficult to overstate the importance of agriculture
for Africa.
                                                        2
The importance of agriculture is once again seizing the attention of African governments ,
business leaders, communities, and development partners. In 2003, the Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Program (CAADP) was adopted by the African Union Summit in
Maputo. As the most ambitious and comprehensive agricultural reform effort ever undertaken in
Africa, CAADP is fully owned and led by African governments. The four pillars of CAADP cover
land, water, infrastructure, trade, technology research and extension, and policy measures for
increasing food security and reducing poverty. In 2014, African leaders, through the Malabo
Declaration, recommitted to the goals and principles of CAADP and made further commitme nts
in areas such as agricultural financing, trade, resilience, and mutual accountability. The recently
adopted Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) present Africa with a new opportunity to achieve
agricultural development milestones.

B.      AN EVOLVING AND VOLATILE CONTEXT

Africa’s agricultural sector is facing an evolving and volatile context. Some important changes
and newly emerging trends carry significant implications for the continent’s policy and strategy
choices. These changes and trends include, but are not limited to, globalization, population
increase and urbanization, climate change, growing prevalence of digital technologies, greater
attention to the nutritional aspect of a food system, and political instability. Certainly, it is a
daunting challenge to effectively navigate in this context to mitigate grave risks while seizing
valuable opportunities.

Globalization

Globalization has a complex impact on agriculture. In general, globalization can enhance the
role of agriculture as an engine of growth in low-income countries by making it possible for
agriculture to grow considerably faster than domestic consumption. However, developing
countries should take into account some new features associated with globalization in their policy
making process. First, cost reduction and associated production increase constantly occurs in
agriculture, and the pace is accelerating, partly due to the forces of globalization. 1 Generally,
smallholder farmers, who are more vulnerable to lower price competition, will more likely
experience a decline in income, and could eventually revert to minimum subsistence agriculture.
They could become poorer and more food insecure. Second, cost reductions largely derive from
technological advances. Low-income countries that are not rapidly expanding their agricultura l
research capacity (or improving their access to new technologies) will not experience these cost
reductions and hence as others reduce costs, and as prices decline, incomes of the non-innova tors
will decline. Nowhere is this more dramatic than in Africa, which has suffered from growing
competition from increasingly efficient production of first oil palm, then cocoa, and now coffee
from Asian countries that have been spending on research. Third, WTO rules constrain the extent
to which developing countries can protect themselves through effectively investing more in their
agricultural sector. This is mainly because that the protectionist measures of the past are being
allowed to continue in high-income countries, whilst many low-income countries are opening their

1 As one example, the reduced cost of freight (ocean freight rates fell by 30 percent between 1985 and 2004) have
lowered the costs of international agricultural trade, which has put African farmers in much tighter competition,
even in African markets, with agricultural producers from outside the continent.

                                                         3
borders to imports which are often subsidized. Fourth, a new feature in the globalization context
is the increase of South-South trade. With the world economy slowing down, trade among
developing countries has increased. For example, China is now the biggest trading partner for
Brazil and Argentina in agricultural products. South-South trade will continue to be a robust driver
of agricultural growth in the next few years as compared to a relatively stagnant trade with
developed countries.

Population increase and urbanization

Population increase significantly raising the demand for food. It is projected that by 2050, the
world’s population will reach 9 billion. To feed these people, food production would need to
increase by at least 50 percent (World Bank, 2013). Global demand for crops is also expected to
rise rapidly during the next two decades because of greater per-capita food consumption and
increasing use of biofuels.2 In Africa, it is estimated that food production has to increase 60
percent in next 15 year to feed the continent’s population which is growing at 3 percent per annum,
while the rest of the world is at less than 1.5 percent (World Bank, 2016). However, production
has not kept up with ever expanding demand and the deficit has been filled through increased
imports. As a result, Africa’s imports of food and agricultural products have increased by 15
percent per year since 2000. This diverts considerable resources from domestic investment and
job creation opportunities. It also increases the vulnerability of Africa’s poor and already food-
insecure people to external shock factors (Annan, Conway and Dryden (eds.), 2016).

Africa is also experiencing a rapid urbanization process which puts additional pressure on
agriculture due to changes of food consumption patterns and migration of youth to urban
areas.3 With an average annual rate of urbanization of 1.4 percent between 2010 and 2015, Africa
is the second-fastest urbanizing continent, second only to Asia (Sy (eds.), 2016). The share of
Africans living in urban areas is projected to grow from 36 percent in 2010 to 50 percent by 2030
and 60 percent by 2050 (World Bank, 2015). Depending on policy choices, including those for
agriculture, Africa’s urbanization rate can lead to economic growth and transformation, and
poverty reduction. Alternatively, it could also lead to increased inequality, urban poverty, and the
proliferation of slums (Collier, 2016). Associated with the urbanization process, the migration to
urban centers mainly by the youth could have an impact on the overall supply if a commensurate
rise in productivity is not achieved to fill the gaps created by this potential movement of productive
section of the populace – the situation can be dire when it is only the old and women that are left
in the farm.4




2 World Bank Group, Agriculture Action Plan, 2013-2015.
3 Due to lower activity levels, urbanites tend to consume fewer calories per person than do their rural counterparts.
However, since urban people tend to consume greater quantities of meat, vegetable oil, highly processed foods, and
other higher value food products, urbanization is associated with greater per capita demand for total food
production.
4 However, there are some indications that the youth in Africa are still returning to agriculture for employment due

to the limited absorptive capacity of the other sectors to employ the labor released from the rural areas. (NEPAD,
2015)

                                                          4
Climate change

Climate change poses a major challenge to African agriculture. Drought, change in rainfa ll
patterns, floods, inundation due to sea-level rise (rendering coastal farmlands inaccessib le
including the intrusion of saline water to aquifers which thereby denies adaptive measures) will all
affect agriculture. UNFCC identified four major impacts to agriculture and food security in Africa:
      Agricultural production severely compromised due to loss of land, shorter growing seasons,
        and more uncertainty about what and when to plant;
      Worsening of food insecurity and an increase in the number of people at risk from hunger;
      Yields from rain-fed crops could be halved by 2020 in some countries. Net revenues from
        crops could fall by 90 percent by 2100; and
      Already compromised fish stocks depleted further by rising water temperatures.
The effects of climate change will be mostly daunting in drylands of Africa, which account for
43 percent of the continent’s land surface, about 75 percent of the area used for agriculture, and
are home to about 50 percent of the population, including a disproportionate share of the poor.
Due to complex interactions among many different factors, vulnerability in drylands is high and is
rising, jeopardizing the long-term livelihood prospects for hundreds of millions of people. Climate
change, which is expected to increase the frequency and severity of extreme weather events, will
exacerbate this challenge (Raffaello and Morris (eds), 2015).
Thus the need for adaption to climate change is of paramount importance. According to a
World Bank study, even assuming that the right adaptation measures are taken, some countries
will suffer a huge productivity loss by 2050, estimated at 19.9 percent for Burkina Faso and 30.5
percent for Niger (World Bank, 2007). In 2015, weather extremes associated with El Niño are
already linked to a drought in Ethiopia that has left over 10 million in need of food aid (IFPRI,
2016). The impact differs across the different countries of SSA and sub-regions, but the overall
trend is clear – climate change will be the main challenge facing the future of SSA agriculture.
This entails the need for a substantial investment in adaptation.
Consequences of climate change go beyond just declining yields. The 2015 Global Nutrition
Report estimates that by 2050, climate change will result in additional price increases of 5-25
percent for the most important crops – rice, wheat, maize, and soybeans – and that higher feed
prices will result in higher meat prices. Not only in terms of quantity, the Report suggests that
food quality will also be affected. The elevated levels of CO2 emissions in 2050 are associated
with substantial declines in the zinc, iron, and protein content of wheat, rice, field peas, and soy
beans. In addition, food safety may also be compromised by climate change. High temperatures
and extreme weather conditions create a more favorable environment for food-borne pathogens
such as campylobacter and salmonella that reduces people’s ability to absorb nutrients.
Digital technology-related opportunities
Digital technologies bring new opportunities for African’s agriculture. Like the Chinese
proverb, challenges always come along with opportunities. Utilizing digital technology in
agriculture is both one of the biggest opportunities and the trend for future growth. Currently,


                                                 5
digital innovations are helping agricultural growth in three major ways (World Bank, 2016).5 First,
digital technology enhances agricultural productivity, and digital technology helps to break down
the barriers for new production technologies to reach farmers. In cooperation with agricultura l
research and extension services, organizations such as Digital Green, the Grameen Foundation,
and TechnoServe deliver timely, relevant, and actionable information and advice to farmers in
South Asia, Latin America, and Sub-Saharan Africa, respectively, at a dramatically lower cost than
traditional services can. In Nigeria, government in partnership with mobile operators, use phones
to coordinate the distribution of seeds and subsidized fertilizers in remote areas through e-vouchers.
In China, farmers use an Uber-like app to book machinery services during peak seasons (China
Daily, 2016). Second, digital technology increases market transparency. Traditionally, high
search costs discourage competition and encourage inefficient goods allocation across markets.
Digital technologies have dramatically reduced the search costs incurred by farmers and traders,
and hence overcome an important constraint in the context of limited infrastructure. Third, digita l
technologies improve logistics and quality control. With globalized food systems, ensuring food
safety has become more urgent and complex. New innovations enable digital tacking systems
from producer to consumer, which is important for developing countries that want to expand their
exports. There is a great potential for the internet and digital technologies to improve rural
economies. However, to unleash the potential, it is important to have sustainable business models
to attract private sector investments in small-scale agriculture.
Market volatility
Market volatility exposes smallholders to more risks. Agricultural prices have increased, and
so does the short-term food price volatility. Higher agricultural prices give farmers incentive to
produce more; but the farmers are also easily weakened by frequent price variations and higher
input costs. In the past 10 years, the world experienced two big food price spikes (Figure 1). The
first one happened in 2008, where the food price index rose by nearly 60 percent from 2006 to its
peak in 2008. After a decline of 20 percent in the following year in 2009, it started to grow again
in 2010, and reached the second and biggest price spike in 2011. Broader agricultural prices also
increased in 2011 and 2012 along with food prices, raising the value of agricultural land. Although
the food price index gradually declined in the years since 2011, it is still 50 percent greater as
compared to its base level in 2002-2004. Higher food prices and food price volatility, along with
higher input costs, are likely to continue in the foreseeable future (FAO, 2016).




5   The World Bank. 2016. World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends. Sector focus 1: Agriculture.



                                                         6
                                                  Figure 1: Recent food price spikes, 2000-20156
                                            250




                                            200




                         FOOD PRICE INDEX
                                            150




                                            100




                                            50
                                                  2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015




                                             Source: Food and Agriculture organization of the United Nations (FAO, 2016)

Importance of nutrition aspects
In addition to food security, civil society increasingly pays more attention to the nutritio nal
aspects of food. As the food system supplier, agriculture is highly relevant to nutritio n.
Malnutrition is a staggering challenge and a huge barrier to poverty elimination. It is the
underlying cause of 45 percent of under-5 child deaths each year, and about one in three children
in developing countries are stunted. Stunting can lead to long-term, harmful effects on physical
and intellectual development, as well as lower lifetime income-earning potential, which
compromises future human capital and holds back productivity (including agricultural productivity)
and economic growth. But nutrition is more than just food availability; it also connects to health,
water sanitation, education and social protection etc. (IFPRI, 2015). The significance of nutritio n
in poverty alleviation and human development has long been underestimated. In 2014, out of the
proposed 169 SDG targets, nutrition is mentioned in only one; which shows that this situation has
not changed. Problems with high weight and obesity are not mentioned even once in the entire
new SDG documentation, and none of the three implementation targets to achieve SDG 2 (“End
hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture ”)
mentions nutrition actions. As in agriculture, most agriculturalists do not consider improving
human health as the ultimate goal of agricultural development, “beyond providing suffic ie nt
calories, but rather a broader agenda recognizing the important role that agriculture plays as a
major livelihood and driver of economic growth in countries (Shekar, 2015).” To bridge the
disconnection between nutrition and agriculture, sectors need to work together to create a global
food system that is more nutrition aware.
Political instability and conflicts
Political instability and conflicts in some African countries generate negative impacts on
agricultural development. Political instability and conflicts in Nigeria, Central African Republic,
Somalia, South Sudan – and to a lesser degree in Mali, DRC and Mozambique -- has made it
difficult to continue agriculture through a huge swath of farmland areas. In North-East Nigeria,


6FAO’s world food price index consists of the average of 5 commodity gro ups (meat, dairy, cereal, vegetable oil,
and sugar) indices, weighted with the average export shares of each of the groups for 2002-2004.


                                                                                       7
for example, a 20-30 percent decrease in crop yields and decline in livestock productivity resulted
from the instability caused by Boko Haram. The amount of land being used to grow food in this
region has dropped by almost 70 per cent over the past year. According to WDR 2011, “People
in fragile and conflict-affected states are more than twice as likely to be undernourished as those
in other developing countries…” Continuing conflicts and violence in these countries drew less
attention compared to instability in some other regions, but nevertheless slowed progress in
reducing hunger and food insecurity (IFPRI, 2016). Instability coupled with a dwindled food
supply will further deteriorate stability thereby posing as an additional challenge in feeding the
continent with its own production.
C.     AGRICULTURE STRATEGY WITHIN THE CHANGING CONTEXT
Strategy of Agricultural Development needs to be adapted to the ever-changing context.
Agricultural development has gone through three major phases starting with the Green Revolutio n
from 1960s to the 1980s. Improved productivity in staple crops such as maize, wheat, and rice
doubled the amount of food produced, and saved hundreds of millions of lives. The efforts proved
that large-scale progress against hunger and poverty is possible. The big achievement in the first
phase gave governments and donors a sense that the issue of food shortage had been tackled.
Therefore, their attention shifted to other areas and concerns. From 1980 to 2004, donor countries
cut the percentage of development assistance for agriculture from more than 16 percent to less than
four percent. Developing countries’ public spending in agriculture accounted for only four percent
of total public expenditure. Africa and South Asia were the most affected regions in this second
phase of productivity stagnation and decline. For example, farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa today
harvest only over a ton of cereal per acre, while the average of Indian farmer gets twice the amount,
Chinese famers about five times the amount, and American farmers about seven times the amount.
(Gates Foundation 2011).
In recent years, rising food price and food insecurity are prompting governments and
organizations to better understand the importance of supporting agricultural development.
Five important thematic areas were identified by the World Bank in 2010 for agricultura l
development, namely, a) improving agricultural productivity and climate resiliencies; b)
strengthening smallholders’ links to markets; c) facilitating rural non-farm sector growth to
increase job opportunities; d) reducing risk, vulnerability, and gender inequality; and e) enhancing
environmental services and sustainability (World Bank, 2013). Today, these five thematic areas
are still relevant and important to achieving the targets of reducing poverty and hunger, and
improving environmental sustainability.
Raising agricultural productivity is the most direct and effective way to help farmers ,
especially small farmers, produce more food so they can improve their nutrition, become self-
sufficient, increase their incomes, and build better lives. Evidence from even the poorest regions
such as Sub-Saharan Africa shows that there has been a strong correlation between higher cereal
yields and a higher share of the population above the poverty line (Figure 2). One precondition of
harnessing benefits from the improved productivity is to ensure smallholders’ wide participatio n
in the growth process as observed in Rwanda and Ethiopia. Otherwise, the improved productivity
will not automatically translate into poverty reduction, as observed in the case of Zambia. Many

                                                 8
measures could contribute to productivity improvement, such as support for increased adoption of
improved technology, improved agricultural water management in irrigated and rain-fed areas,
tenure security and land markets, increased access to inputs, and strengthened agricultura l
innovation systems.
              Figure 2: Poverty reduction closely correlated with higher yields in SSA




                                    Source: Townsend, 2015.

Integrating smallholders into marketing and value chains is another powerful tool to
support agriculture. Traditional marketing channels are being replaced by more complex and
coordinated networks linking farmers, processors, retailers and others, and serving both the
export market and local processors and supermarkets. At the same time, with increased incomes,
food consumption patterns are becoming more diversified, with people consuming more meat,
dairy products, fruits and vegetables. Consumers are putting more emphasis on the quality and
safety of food and the demand for convenience foods with safety assurance is increasing too.
New value chains are emerging to meet these changes and demands7 . Active participation of the
private sector is essential in making “value chains approach” work.
But new focus areas have emerged in the evolving and volatile context, in addition to the five
exiting thematic areas. In the World Bank’s Agriculture Action Plan 2013 -2015, six new focus
areas have been identified, namely, climate-smart agriculture, landscape approach, nutrition, long-
term risk management, private sector involvement, and south-south collaboration.
Importance and urgency of developing climate-smart agriculture (CSA) have been
recognized by governments, donors, and the private sector. The increasingly frequent and
intensified extreme weather conditions such as droughts and floods, temperatures rising on a global
scale, and agriculture’s vulnerability to climate change all call for a more climate-smart agriculture.
CSA is an approach that helps to guide the actions needed to transform and reorient agricultura l
systems to effectively support development and ensure food security in a changing climate. CSA
actions should be two fold. One is to increase the resilience of agriculture to climate change,
especially for low-income countries where climate change is projected to have larger impacts on
lowering yields; and the other is to lower agriculture’s net greenhouse gas ( GHG) emissio ns.

7 FAO. “Agricultural Marketing”. Rural Infrastructure and Agro -business Division. Accessed May 30th , 2016.
Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/ag/ags/agricultural-marketing-linkages/en/


                                                        9
Agriculture accounts for at least 14 percent of global GHG emissions (Russell, 2014). Related to
CSA, in response to the increasingly volatile environment, a holistic approach to long-term risk
management that focuses on the interactions between different types of risks, of strategies
undertaken by farmers, and of government policies that impact on risk management is needed.
An integrated landscape approach is an upgraded version of enhancing environmental
services and sustainability. Farms, forests, water bodies and settlements are not isolated elements ,
but part of a wider landscape in which all land uses are integrated. Landscapes should be managed
in a more integrated manner, including restoring the two billion hectares of degraded landscapes
globally. The landscape approach and agriculture are intertwined as the goal of food security and
nutrition improvements cannot be achieved without a well-functioning ecosystem. The Loess
Plateau Watershed Rehabilitation Project in China is one of the best practice examples of utilizing
the landscape approach. The project has returned a devastated area to sustainable agricultura l
production, improving the livelihood of 2.5 million people and food securities in an area where
food was once scarce.
Nutrition and agriculture are strongly correlated as food plays a vital role in both sectors.
Food is the key output of agricultural activities while also serving as the key input into nutritio n.
Without agriculture there is no food or nutrition, but simply increasing agricultural productivity in
agriculture does not automatically translate into improved nutrition for the population, especially
for children under 5. Actions to carry out this strategy will require an enabling policy environme nt
supported by governments to encourage improvements in nutrition through agriculture, and key
investments in agricultural programs beyond just targeting increased income and yield, but
enhancing nutrition outcomes.
Creating a conducive investment climate for private sector’s participation is also key. Private
sector is incentivized by the sufficient returns to investment in African agriculture but Africa’s
poor institutional quality remains the biggest hurdle. Attracting private investment in agriculture
relies not only on a wide set of policies going beyond agricultural policy, but also on the policy
coherence across sectors. Sectoral policies including trade and investment, education, research and
development, infrastructure, financial market, environment and tax policies are all crucial to
creating a sound business climate in agriculture (OECD, 2014). When the policies and laws are in
place, the governments need to make sure they are clear and accessible to all agricultural investors.
The policy framework’s clarity and transparency fosters investmen t through helping businesses to
assess investment opportunities on a more informed and timely basis and reduce transaction costs.
Investor will be more confident when the government is transparent on policy implementation and
predictable on possible regulation changes. The improved policy environment will in particular
support investment by small agricultural investors trying to enter as well as foreign investors who
have to adapt to different regulatory and administrative systems.
South-South Cooperation (SSC) should be continuously strengthened. SSC is the mutual
sharing and exchange of development solutions - knowledge, experience and good practices,
policies, technology and resources - between and among countries in the global South. SSC is
significant in the context of agricultural development in Africa since economic restructuring has
done little to foster agricultural development in Africa. For example, both Chinese approaches to

                                                 10
smallholder agriculture and Brazilian experience in transforming the Cerrado region are highly
relevant to Africa. Successful and fresh experiences, accumulated from addressing similar
challenges at similar development stages, are much more powerful and convincing than outdated
and mismatched prescriptions from standardized textbooks.
D.       INVESTING AFRICA’S AGRICULTURE
A still overall favorable environment
The environment for investing in Africa agriculture is still favorable overall, although some
hurdles have to be overcome. On the positive side, important long-term advantages for
expanding African agricultural sector remain unchanged, such as a booming urban food market,
increasingly improved availability of modern agricultural technologies, abundant key resources
(e.g., land, water, and labor), higher level of interest from development partners and private sector,
and more efficient regional collaboration (NEPAD, CAADP, AGRA 8 etc.). However, due to
domestic and external shocks, the GDP growth forecast is not as encouraging as it was a few years
ago. The global GDP growth rate in 2015 is estimated to be at its lowest since 1998, and a slight
rebound is forecasted in 2016 with high degree of uncertainty (Sy (eds.), 2016).9 Downward GDP
growth means less government revenue and hence it will be more difficult for many governme nts
to reach the CAADP target of 10 percent of public expenditure for agriculture. As IFPRI (2016)
research shows, by 2010, only 10 out of the 47 countries met the CAADP target. 10
Africa is poised for unprecedented growth in food markets. Assuming that the 6 percent
annual growth target set by the New Partnership for Africa’s Development is met t hrough 2030,
and marginal expenditures on food are at 0.5 (down from about 0.6 currently), total food and
beverage markets in Sub-Saharan Africa will reach US$ 1,000 billion by 2030 (Figure 3), up from
US$ 313 billion currently. This market, assuming a net agricultural trade deficit is converted from
US$ 10 billion currently to a US$ 20 billion surplus in 2030, would provide agricultural value
added in the region of US$ 500 billion relative to US$ 150 billion now. The majority of the
increase in food consumption will occur in cities. Based on United Nations projections of
urbanization and assuming that the per capita value of food consumption is 25 percent higher in
urban areas than in rural areas, the urban market is set to expand fourfold in 20 years. In other
words, commercial value chains, including processing, transport, and retail networks, must be in


8 NEPAD stands for New Partnership for Africa's Development, and AGRA stands for Alliance for a Green
Revolution in Africa
9 In 2015 and 2016, however, the continent faces a “triple threat” f rom the changing global environment: (1) prices

of Africa’s main exports, oil and metals, have fallen significantly, driven by robust supplies and low demand, and
are expected to remain low as the commodity super cycle has come to an end; (2) the economy o f Africa’s main
bilateral trading partner, China, is slowing down; and (3) external borrowing costs are increasing as the U.S. Federal
Reserve further raises U.S. interest rates, and the options for borrowing are becoming more limited. One could even
add a fourth threat —climate change —as East and Southern Africa expect to bear the likely brutal effects of El Niño
in 2016 (Brookings, 2016).
10 There is another issue is the structure of agriculture related expenditure, even for those countries which have

achieved the CAADP target. For example, in selected African countries, about 10-15% of agricultural public
spending is on R&D, with the remaining 85-90% on other activities, including a big share on agricultural input
subsidies.

                                                          11
place for an additional urban food and beverage consumption of about US$ 400 billion.                         This
scenario represents an exciting growth opportunity for all types of firms.


                      Figure 3: Retail value of food & beverages, SSA (in US$M)




                      Source: World Bank. 2013. “Growing Africa - Unlocking the Potential of Agribusiness”.

With Africa’s deeper integration into the world’s economy, modern technologies have been
increasingly used in both African agriculture and agribusiness. Technology and innovatio ns
have tremendous potential to increase agricultural productivity, enhance the integration of value
chains, and improve market performance. With the rapid expansion of internet and mobile services
in Africa, a BBC article in 2015 entitled ‘'Telephone farmers' reaping the benefits of agri- tech”
gives vivid examples of how innovations are transforming farmers’ lives in Africa. In Kenya, tech
giant IBM's EZ-Farm project is exploring how sophisticated data analytics can help farmers keep
in touch with what is really happening on their out-of-town smallholdings. In Nairobi, a more
affordable app called MbuguChoise uses location-based GPS to help farmers explore crop
information such as what seed varieties are available, who sells them, and what properties they
have, such as maturation periods and drought tolerance. 11 ICTs also help farmers to sell their
produce. With the rapid expansion of mobile services in Africa, Short Message Services (SMS)
are now more commonly used by farmers to access real-time market information, and have a big
potential in offering mechanisms for linking buyers and sellers and conducting market transactions.
The practices of utilizing ICTs in market transactions has increased prices paid to African farmers
by 10-20 percent, increased traders’ profits, and reduced prices to consumers. Many of the
applications are still in the pilot or development phase, and there is a long way to go. Ensuring
that every smallholder farmer in Africa has access to modern technology in their daily farming
practice will require not only technology advancement, but also policy support and financ ing
assistance from the government to startups, farmers, and stakeholders in the value chain.
Africa has the natural resources to greatly expand agricultural production. Africa is the
continent that has the largest surface area of uncultivated arable land. It has 45 percent of the
world’s land area suitable for sustainable production expansion. Cultivable lands (excluding forest
areas) in Africa are three times larger than the land currently cultivated. Paradoxically, Sub-

11 Jackson, Tom, “'Telephone farmers' reaping the benefits of agri-tech”, July 31, 2015, Accessed May 10, 2016,
retrieved from http://www.bbc.com/news/business -33610593

                                                        12
Saharan Africa’s other asset is the extensive nature of most of its farming systems. This means
that there is significant room for improvement in terms of farmland productivity (NEPAD, 2013).
Africa also has abundant water resources that are greatly underutilized with only 2-3 percent of
renewable water resources are being used in Africa. However, Africa’s natural resource
endowments are unevenly distributed. Around 60 percent of cultivable land still available is
concentrated in seven countries in East and Central Africa, while the central African region
contains almost 50 percent of the continent’s water resources and less than 20 percent of its
population. Political risks concerning the management of transboundary natural resources may
arise and accelerating climate change also has a widespread impact.
Africa’s demography is moving towards an explosion of the working-age population. Africa
is a remarkably young continent at present, with half of its population below the age of 20. The
age distribution of Africa’s population follows a pyramid shape that is typical at an early stage of
industrialization. Fertility remains high, but infant mortality has declined because of modern
medicine and better nutrition and education. It is certain that in the next twenty years the current
group of age 19 and younger will join the labor force and Africa will undergo the kind of explosive
labor-force growth that China experienced after 1980. In particular, the working-age population
in Africa is projected to rise from 536 million in 2015 to 922 million in 2035 (Dollar, 2016). With
the right policy environment, institutions and global support, Africa’s population growth will
become a major driver for its agricultural development as well as for the overall economy.
Enhanced regional collaboration indicate good momentum in Africa’s agricultural
development. CAADP is entirely African- led and African-owned and represents African leaders'
collective vision for agriculture in Africa. Participating leaders agreed to increase public
investment in agriculture by a minimum of 10 percent of their national budgets and to raise
agricultural productivity by at least 6 percent. So far, 30 countries have signed CAADP Compacts
and incorporated them into their agricultural agenda. 12 AGRA is another regional collaborative
scheme that is playing a vital role in the regional agriculture. Formed in 2006, AGRA aims at
“doubling yields and income for 30 million farming households in 2020 .” In the past decade,
AGRA has developed a strong research capacity and has programs successfully implemented all
across the continent. CAADP, AGRA and other regional collaborations deliver a message that a
consensus has been reached among African countries that agriculture is of crucial importance to
the continent’s future.
Investment areas with high returns
The CAADP’s four pillars 13 provide a good guideline to key investment areas in African
agriculture. Instead of broadly discussing all possible investment areas, this paper instead
highlights five specific areas, taking into account their importance and China’s comparative
advantages, including potential Chinese investors’ interest. The five areas are: irrigation, rural

12 http://www.nepad-caadp.net/about-us
13 Pillar 1: Extending the area under sustainable land management and reliable water control systems; Pillar 2:
Improving rural infrastructure and trade-related capacities for market access; Pillar 3: Increasing food supply,
reducing hunger, and improving responses to food emergency crises; and Pillar 4: Improving agriculture research,
technology dissemination and adoption.

                                                        13
infrastructure (e.g., road, storage facilities, marketing places), agriculture technology exchange
and education, farm machinery, and value chains.
Serious lack of irrigation has been identified as one of the main reasons why the Green
Revolution has largely bypassed Africa. Irrigation does not currently play a significant role in
African agriculture; food production in Africa is almost entirely rain-fed. Irrigated area as a share
of total cultivated area is estimated at only 6 percent for Africa, by far the lowest irrigatio n
development rate of any region in the world (e.g., 37 percent for Asia). There is also a large
variation across sub-regions in Africa and the stark contrast in water use between northern Africa
and Sub-Saharan Africa. Whereas only 4 percent of area cultivated in Sub-Saharan Africa is
equipped for irrigation, 28 percent of northern African agriculture is irrigated. Additiona l
irrigation potential remains small in northern Africa, but is significant in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Much of the irrigation development in the north has been implemented through the unsustainab le
withdrawal of groundwater resources (in Libya, for example) or the use of water resources that
were generated elsewhere (e.g., Egypt’s use of Nile water for irrigation). Thus, whereas
agricultural withdrawals as a share of total renewable water resources reach a high of 21.9 percent
in northern Africa, that share is only 1 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa. Among the regions in Sub-
Saharan Africa, only southern Africa, led by South Africa, withdraws 6 percent of total renewable
water resources for agriculture. The average rate of expansion of irrigated area over the past 30
years was 2.3 percent in both Sub-Saharan Africa and all of Africa. Expansion slowed to 1.1
percent per year during 2000–2003 but has since picked up as a result of renewed investments by
multilateral and bilateral donors and foundations. Nearly three-fourths of African countries
showed a zero rate of recent expansion. The value of irrigation is remarkable in Africa: 6 percent
irrigated agriculture accounts for nearly 38 percent of the continent’s agricultural output value.
Therefore, the potential of irrigation development for Africa, and in particular for Sub-Saharan
Africa, is huge. 14
Addressing Africa’s severe infrastructure deficit is another key to revitalizing Africa’s
agriculture. The current state of roads, wholesale and retail marketing channels, and storage
facilities poses a significant hurdle for farmers. For example, the dire state of the continent’s roads
and storage facilities results in a substantial proportion of agricultural production never reaching
the end user. The World Bank reported in 2011 that the amount of grain losses in Sub-Saharan
Africa amounts to US$4bn each year, which in turn is more than the amount of annual food aid
received in the region and equivalent to the annual caloric requirement of 48 million people. The
African Postharvest Losses Information System (APHLIS) estimates that between 10 percent and
23 percent of total cereal production goes to waste in Africa post-harvest. Of this, 2 to 5 percent
is due to farm storage, 1 to 2 percent occurs during the transport to the market phase and a further
2 to 4 percent goes to waste in the market storage facilities. In fact, a study undertaken in Uganda,
Tanzania, and Kenya in 2008, found that transport costs make up about 76 percent of total maize
marketing costs (Teravaninthorn and Raballand, 2008). While the remainder of the losses typically
occur at the farm level, the abovementioned areas present an opportunity for government to make

14This paragraph draws heavily from IFPRI’s paper “ What Is the Irrigation Potential for Africa? A Combined
Biophysical and Socioeconomic Approach”.


                                                       14
a significant contribution by upgrading roads and establishing co-operative organizations which
could result in better storage facilities. However, investments should not concentrate on individ ua l
aspects, but on the integration of all individual components as they are all intertwined (landscape
approach). The returns from investment in one area will only be maximized when the whole value
chain is functioning well. For example, in order to maximize returns from investment in water
management infrastructure, it is also necessary to invest in the development of other infrastructures
such as storage, rural electrification and telecommunications, and roads.
Special attention should be given to agricultural value chains. Value chains are the full range
of value-adding activities required to bring a product or service through the different phases of
production, including procurement of raw materials and other inputs, assembly, physical
transformation, acquisition of required services such as transport or cooling, and ultima te ly
response to consumer demand (World Bank, 2010). There is an increasing adoption of the value
chain approach by development and business communities in the African agriculture and
agribusiness sectors with a belief that it can help design value-added interventions, lower
transaction costs, diversify rural economies, and increase rural household incomes in SSA
countries. The approach also changes the conventional view of viewing agriculture as a means of
survival, but instead as businesses linked to local and global markets. Value chains vary not only
by products but also by country. It is crucial to identify the opportunities and constraints in
different value chains before making investments. For example, rice production in Senegal is
competitive in terms of production cost when being benchmarked against leading rice exporter
Thailand, but the expansion in competitiveness is held back, however, by the difficulty of
accessing secured, tradable land rights, which discourages significant private investments in
irrigation systems.
Agricultural mechanization still remains low and underdeveloped in Africa. Sub-Saharan
Africa remains the region in the world with the lowest power usage (manual, animal and
mechanical) and the lowest level of farm mechanization. Farming systems in SSA are dominated
by small-holder peasant farmers which in most cases are based on subsistence farming. In SSA
the principal power source is humans who cultivate, by hand, between 50 percent and 80 percent
of the area under production. The average number of tractors is about 28 tractors per 10,000 ha,
only about ten percent of the average tractor usages in other regions (FAO, 2012). The use of
manual power dominates in Central Africa whereas in Western and Eastern Africa more use is
made of draught animals. In SSA, tractor usage is highest in Southern Africa. Increasing the
levels of farm mechanization, particularly targeted at smallholders, is one of the major means of
raising agricultural production in many SSA countries. With the current momentum of agricultura l
development in Africa, new opportunities are also occurring for mechanization development. The
major ones include the trend of rural-urban migration of young people which leads to increased
agricultural wages, especially during peak labor-demand seasons. The labor shortage and higher
wages increase farmers’ incentives to invest in machines. While western technologies are less
suited and affordable for smallholder farmers in Africa, new emerging providers such as China
and India, with similar agriculture patterns, have stepped in and have provided new sources of
farm machinery which is continually coming on to local markets. This machinery is often more
suitable for African conditions and is considerably cheaper than machinery manufactured in

                                                 15
Western Europe or North America (FAO, 2013). According to a recent survey among 171
manufacturers of farm equipment conducted by the Agri-evolution Alliance, 43 percent of
manufacturers believe that – already today – Africa is ‘very important’ or ‘absolutely essential’
for their company’s business. Looking at the sales perspective s for agricultural machinery over
the next 5 to 15 years, 3 out of every 4 respondents (73.6 percent) believe the African market to
hold ‘great’ or even ‘very strong’ market potential (The World Bank, 2016) .
Africa agriculture needs significantly better software, such as technologies R&D, agriculture
education and training institutions, and extension system. African farmers need new
technology— higher-yielding, more resilient food crops that deliver bountiful harvests. According
to the World Bank, the heterogeneity of both agro-ecological conditions and crop production
(maize, cassava, millet, sorghum, cassava, yams, sweet potatoes, etc.) suggests that “outside”
technologies are often not directly transferable to improve the Africa’s productivity. In othe r
words, the productivity revolution in Africa needs a tailored approach and a more careful
contextualization to better fit with Africa’s specific agricultural conditions. 15 In addition to
investing in technology research and development, it is also important to have a strong agriculture
education and training (AET) institution for higher human capital levels. The challenges Africa is
facing in its AET are two-fold: First, there is a discrepancy between AET and the skills required
in the industry. The traditional training systems that have been used to produce public servants
for government administrations are outdated and do not fit the current end- users’ needs which are
gradually shifting towards value addition, private sector orientation and market-driven systems,
global challenges on trade, subsidies, climate change and resilience. Second, financing for AET
from private sector and development partners has been decreasing. The current AET system fails
to show agribusiness partners the benefits for investing, and investment- fatigue among
development partners who need a clear understanding of the impact of their actions in this sector
on the improvement of famers’ livelihoods. To facilitate the successful reform of AET requires
more financial support for African institutions to enhance research capacities in agriculture, and
also the strengthening South-South learning and collaboration. In addition, the role of agriculture
extension in national agricultural development is pertinent. In Africa, as in many other regions,
national agriculture extension and advisory systems have undergone major changes during the past
decades, from complete public services to more private sector involvement with different models.
Public-private partnership should be more actively explored and new digital technologies should
be utilized to ensure that services can be sustained and extended to every part of the African
countries.
China has accumulated rich expertise and successful experiences in all of the above identifie d
investment areas over the past three decades. China is therefore in a uniquely advantageous
position to assist African countries in addressing the relevant challenges. It is very encouraging
to see that China-Africa collaboration on agriculture has always been one of themes in the past a
few decades, especially since the establishment of Forum on China Africa Cooperation (FOCAC)
in 2006. China also has committed large amount of financial resources to support the China-Afr ica
agriculture collaboration, such as encouraging both state-owned as well as private-owned

15   Nin-Pratt and McBride 2014; World Bank 2008.

                                                    16
companies to invest in agriculture (e.g., processing, trade), strengthening bilateral cooperation in
agricultural technology (e.g., establishing at least 15 agriculture technology demonstration centers),
conducting joint research to explore seed resources, and engaging in infrastructure constructio n,
including agriculture-related infrastructure. China is also very strong in agriculture education, at
both higher level as well as vocational level. As its economy is increasingly market-oriented,
China also accumulated some good experiences in establishing an extension system through
public-private partnership. In recent years, the World Bank and China have also committed to
work more closely to support African agricultural sector, such as exploring more new and effic ie nt
model of agriculture technology exchange (particularly on dryland agriculture), higher education
on agriculture, as well as possible joint financing agriculture and rural development projects.
E.     CONCLUSIONS
Agriculture remains a strong option for eradicating extreme poverty and promoting shared
prosperity. Agriculture offers great promise in dealing with many of the challenges facing the
21st century including climate change, increasing population, and demand for better food nutritio n.
Throughout history, many countries have successfully demonstrated the tremendous contributio n
that a dynamic agricultural sector can make to its fruitful social and economic transformation; of
which, China is the most recent example.

Africa needs a vibrant, sustainable and resilient agricultural sector to achieve its economic
potential. The sector’s importance is self-evident: it is the primary source of food and income for
Africans; it provides up to 60 percent of all jobs on the continent; it needs to produce 50 percent
more food in next one and half decades to feed the continent’s growing population; poverty is till
mainly a rural phenomenon; and there is a huge food and beverage market by 2030 which calls for
a stronger agricultural sector. At the same time, Africa is endowed with abundant natural resources
(such as land, labor, and water) which are essential for agricultural development. The importance
of the sector is increasingly recognized by the region’s governments, business leaders,
communities, and traditional and newly emerged development partners.
More and better investments in agriculture is needed to unleash virtuous growth cycles for
Africa. Increased investment should target irrigation, rural infrastructure (e.g., road, storage
facilities), agriculture R&D, farm mechanization, value chain development, and agriculture
education and training. African governments should work hard to create an enabling investme nt
environment through evidence-based policy making, sustained commitments to the sector, and
effective implementation of relevant programs in different ways, including public-private
partnerships.     International development partners and investors should actively mobilize
knowledge and financial resource to support Africa’s agricultur al development, since a vibrant,
sustainable and resilient agricultural sector is in both Africa’s and the world’s best interest.




                                                 17
                                         REFERENCES
Annan, Kofi, Sir Gordon Conway, and Sam Dryden(eds). 2016. “African Farmers in the Digital
      Age”, Foreign Affairs, Special Issue (February). Retrieved from
      https://files.foreignaffairs.com/pdf/sponsored-
      anthology/2016/african_farmers_in_the_digital_age_fina l.pdf

Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. 2011. “Agricultural Development Strategy Overview”.
      Retrieved from https://docs.gatesfoundation.org/documents/agricultural-development-
      strategy-overview.pdf

CAADP, About CAADP, retrieved from http://www.nepad-caadp.net/about-us
Cervigni, Raffaello and Michael Morris (eds.). 2016. “Confronting Drought in Africa’s
      Drylands : Opportunities for Enhancing Resilience”. World Bank; and Agence Française
      de Développement. Retrieved from
      https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/23576
China Daily, “今年麦收用上了滴滴打机”(Didi app is used to reserve machinery in this year’s
      wheat harvest), June 11, 2016, retrieved from
      http://world.chinadaily.com.cn/shandong2016/2016-06/11/content_25672211.htm
Collier, Paul. 2016. “African Urbanization: an Analytic Policy Guide ”. World Bank . Retrieved
        from http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/934801453365669120/012216-4th-ticad-seminar-
        paul-collier.pdf
Dollar, David. 2016. “China's engagement with Africa: From natural resources to human
       resources”. John L. Thornton China Center Monograph Series No. 10. Brookings
       Institution. Retrieved from http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2016/07/china-
       africa-natural- human-resources-dollar
FAO. “Agricultural Marketing”. Rural Infrastructure and Agro-business Division. Retrieved
     from http://www.fao.org/ag/ags/agricultural- marketing-linkages/en/

-----, FAO Food Price Index, retrieved from
        http://www.fao.org/worldfoodsituation/foodpricesindex/en/
-----. 2013. Agricultural Mechanization in Sub Saharan Africa: Agricultural Mechanization in
        Sub Saharan Africa: Guidelines for preparing a strategy. Integrated Crop Management
        Vol. 22-2013. http://www.fao.org/docrep/018/i3349e/i3349e.pdf
IFPRI. 2015. Global Nutrition Report 2015: Actions and accountability to advance nutrition and
      sustainable development. Washington, DC. http://dx.doi.org/10.2499/9780896298835
Jackson, Tom, “'Telephone farmers' reaping the benefits of agri- tech”, July 31, 2015, retrieved
      from http://www.bbc.com/news/business-33610593
Johnston, Bruce F. and John W. Mellor, 1961, “The Role of Agriculture in Economic
       Development”, The American Economic Review , Vol. 51, No. 4 (Sep., 1961), pp. 566-593.



                                                18
NEPAD. 2013. “Agriculture in Africa: Transformation and Outlook”. Retrieved from
    http://www.un.org/en/africa/osaa/pdf/pubs/2013africanagricultures.pdf
Nin-Pratt, Alejandro and Linden McBride, 2014, Agricultural intensification in Ghana:
      Evaluating the optimist’s case for a Green Revolution, Food Policy, Volume 48, October
      2014, Pages 153–167
OECD (2014), Policy Framework for Investment in Agriculture, OECD Publishing.
    Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264212725-en
Russell, Nathan. 2014. “New Latin America country profiles open pathways for reaching
       climate- smart agriculture”. Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food
       Security. Retrieved from https://ccafs.cgiar.org/research- highlight/new-latin-america-
       country-profiles-open-pathways-reaching-climate-smart#.V5-4-1YrLcu


Teravaninthorn, Supee and Gaël Raballand, 2008, “Transport Prices and Costs in Africa: A
      Review of the Main International Corridors” Working Paper 14, Africa Infrastructure
      Country Diagnostic, retrieved from
       http://www.infrastructureafrica.org/system/files/wp14_transportprices.pdf

The World Bank, 2007, “The Impact of Climate Change on African Agriculture: A Ricardian
     Approach”, Policy Research Working Paper (4306).
-------------------- , 2008, “Agriculture for Development”, World Development Report 2008.
       Retrieved from http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDRS/Resources/477365-
       1327599046334/8394679-1327614067045/WDROver2008-ENG.pdf
-------------------, 2010. “Building Competitiveness in Africa’s Agriculture - A Guide to Value
       Chain Concepts and Applications”. Retrieved from
       https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/2401/524610PUB0AFR01
       01Official0Use0Only1.pdf?sequence=1
-------------------, 2016, “Boosting African Agriculture: New AGRA-World Bank Agreement to
       Support Farming- Led Transformation”, retrieved from
       http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/04/20/boosting-african-agriculture-
       new-agra-world-bank-agreement-to-support-farming- led-transformation
Townsend, Robert F; Ceccacci, Iride; Cooke, Sanjiva; Constantine, Mark; Moses, Gene.
     2013. “Implementing agriculture for development : World Bank Group agriculture action
     plan (2013- 2015)”. World Bank Group. Retrieved from
     http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/01/17747135/implementing-agriculture-
     development-world-bank-group-agriculture-action-plan-2013-2015
Townsend, Robert. 2015. “Ending poverty and hunger by 2030 : an agenda for the global food
     system.” World Bank Group.
     http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/04/24367067/ending-poverty-hunger-
     2030-agenda-global- food-system



                                               19
Shekar, Meera , 2015, “Nutrition and Agriculture: Bridging the Gap”, World Bank Group.
      retrieved from http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/nutrition-and-agriculture-bridging-gap
Stephen Russell, 2014, “Everything You Need to Know About Agricultural Emissions”,
       retrieved from
http://www.wri.org/blog/2014/05/everything- you-need-know-about-agricultural-emissions
Sy, Amadou (eds.), 2016, “Foresight Africa: Top Priorities for the Continent in 2016”, African
      Growth Initiative, Brookings Institution.
You, Liangzhi , Claudia Ringler, Ulrike Wood-Sichra, Richard Robertson, Stanley Wood,
      Tingju Zhu, Gerald Nelson, Zhe Guo, and Yan Sun, 2011, “What Is the Irrigation
      Potential for Africa? A Combined Biophysical and Socioeconomic Approach”, Food
      Policy, Volume 36, Issue 6, Pages 770-782.




                                               20
