                                  Concept Note
            IEG Results and Performance of the World Bank Group 2016
                        Managing for Development Results
                                            July 28, 2016


Introduction
1. Results and Performance of the World Bank Group (RAP) is the annual review of what recent IEG
   evaluations reveal about the effectiveness of the World Bank Group (WBG), which includes
   IBRD/IDA, IFC, and MIGA, in addressing current and emerging development challenges. The report
   synthesizes evidence from recent IEG evaluations complemented by relevant information from other
   sources (e.g., WBG corporate documents). RAP 2016 will be the seventh in a series that began in
   2010 with the consolidation of separate annual reports that IEG prepared for the World Bank
   (IBRD/IDA), IFC, and MIGA, and it is the fourth one since IEG adopted the approach of focusing on
   a specific theme. RAP 2015 covered gender integration in the WBG, and the theme for RAP 17 will
   highlight “Environmental Sustainability.”

2. The theme for RAP 2016 is “Managing for Development Results” (henceforth referred to as M4R). In
   FY15 and FY16, IEG assessed learning for results within WBG and reviewed the self-evaluation
   systems of the WBG, both addressing core aspects of M4R in the WBG. Other learning products and
   evaluations, such as The Poverty Focus of Country Programs, also touched on key foundational
   components of M4R. RAP 2016 will build on these and other existing IEG evaluations, reports, and
   evidence base and endeavor to provide a more comprehensive picture of the WBG’s M4R by
   contextualizing it within the broader M4R framework as applied to international development. In this
   context, the report will explore complementary issues related to the WBG’s work with its clients in
   M4R.

3. Chapter 2 will report on the results and performance of WBG’s activities closing during FY13-15,
    and the final chapter will be devoted to the Management Action Record (MAR) and review the
    degree to which recommendations based on IEG’s evaluations have been implemented.

4. Using an established approach, this Concept Note outlines the context, objectives, scope, approach,
   and team for the proposed FY16 report. (Appendix A provides a brief summary of the differences
   between RAP2016 and RAP15.)


Context: Managing for Results in a Complex and Changing Context
5. Key developments in the last three years in the WBG and in the development community have
   resulted in a renewed and qualitatively different emphasis on results, placing onus on the WBG to
   manage for those results differently:

           In 2013, the World Bank Group established a new strategy to meet the challenge of
            contributing to the newly established twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting
            shared prosperity;
           The largest to-date IDA replenishment took place in 2014, with a greater emphasis on results
            measured through the IDA results measurement system, and IDA 18, and its measurement
            system, are currently under discussion; and
           The year 2015 drew the Millennium Development Goals to a close, and the development
            community renewed its commitment to a new set of broader and more ambitious Sustainable
            Development Goals (SDGs), agreed upon in September 2015, with a deeper concern for
            sustainability, with implications for countries’ ownership and capacity.

6. Generally defined as a management strategy or approach aligned with achieving organizational
   results, the concepts regarding and approaches to M4R have a long history in both private and public
   sectors, and a vast academic and applied literature exists on the topic (e.g., Government
   Accountability Office, 2015; Kang, 2005). The literature encompasses fields ranging from
   organizational learning and adaptability (e.g., Senge, 2010) to specific frameworks for using metrics
   to drive key decisions such as budget allocations (e.g., Robinson, 2007), to explicitly creating
   learning loops and experimentation in complex situations (e.g., Andrews et al., 2016). Making results
   transparent to the public, and getting citizen feedback, is another notable strand of the literature
   regarding accountability of public programs (Gigler, B. & Bilur, S., 2014). Overall, this literature
   highlights two foundational principles of M4R (see figure 1):

         There is a robust system for measuring and monitoring results in which: i) desired results are
          identified, defined, and communicated clearly; and ii) metrics related to the results and that
          matter for ongoing decision-making (based on a theory of change) are measured and
          monitored on an ongoing basis.
         Adaptive and dynamic management and ongoing learning is instituted, using the specific
          metrics, to understand the drivers of results and to apply data and evidence to different types
          of decision-making for continual improvement to achieve sustained results.


    Figure 1: Principles of M4R




7. The literature integrates concepts regarding measurement, assessment, learning, management, and
   decision-making, but with an emphasis on outcomes, whether it is poverty reduction, student learning,

                                                    2
       or improved health, not simply on inputs, processes, and outputs. Inputs, processes, and outputs are
       measured and acted upon (metrics), insofar as they determine or contribute substantially to the desired
       outcomes. In addition, the literature is increasingly encompassing thinking around how to develop
       institutional and organizational systems and capacities (ultimately culture) that engage people in
       agile, regular learning and adaptation using evidence, in order to best position the organization to
       deliver to the organization’s goals, and not just on specific inputs, process, and output metrics alone.

       In international development, a series of agreements, including the Paris Declaration (2005), the
       Accra Agenda for Action (2008), and, more recently, the Busan Declaration (2011), further
       articulated how principles of M4R (Figure 1) could be operationalized in the context of international
       development, thereby emphasizing that the ultimate results are for and of the client countries (and not
       those of the development agencies’) and are driven through client countries’ M4R (see, for example
       http://www.oecd.org/development/effectiveness/49650173.pdf).

8. In parallel, and in keeping with the evolving thinking in international development, the WBG
   successively refined its approach to the various elements of M4R. The World Bank’s results agenda
   began explicitly in 2003, with an action plan outlined in Better Measuring, Monitoring, and
   Managing for Development Results: Implementation Action Plan (2003), discussed with the
   Committee for Development Effectiveness in December 2002. Recognizing that the principles of
   M4R in the context of international development should be applied to its work as well, the plan
   focused on enhancing countries’ statistical systems, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capacity, and
   knowledge base to manage for results. Internally, it focused on designing and piloting results-based
   Country Assistance Strategies (CASs), improving results reporting, and enhancing staff learning and
   incentives. The Accelerating the Results Agenda: Progress and Next Steps (2006) report to the
   Committee on Development Effectiveness (CODE) outlined further actions along similar dimensions.
   Aspects of the agenda continued through 2013.

9. With the new strategy in 2013, the WBG developed also developed its first institution-wide scorecard
   in 2014 to serve as a key instrument in M4R, clearly articulating its goals and results.1,2

              Tier 1 results – long term outcomes to which countries and development partners contribute.
              Tier 2 results – achieved and reported by clients on operations supported by the WBG.
              Tier 3 indicators – operational and organizational effectiveness measures that are
               hypothesized to affect and contribute to the achievement of results that the WBG seeks to
               accomplish, including independently validated ratings by IEG of development outcomes
               supported through WBG operations.

10. Separately, IFC, whose investment and advisory services clients are in both private sector and public
    sectors (including sub-nationals, municipalities), acknowledged that “a strong focus on managing
    results will be important, and IFC will continue to strengthen and expand its results measurement
    system” in the IFC Roadmap, FY14-FY16. One aspect of IFC’s results system is IFC Development
    Goals (IDGs), which are a subset of the WBG Scorecard and the Sustainable Development Goals
    (SDGs). In addition to tracking the development goals, IFC has in place processes to monitor the
    portfolio performance and management dashboards, project pipeline monitoring, analytical reporting


1   http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/results/corporatescorecard

    1. 2 The current reporting cycle is finishing at the end of FY17 for both the WBG scorecard and IDA RMS;
    both tools are being revised to reflect new global and corporate priorities beginning in FY18.



                                                        3
    and supporting/back office reporting systems. The second subset of the IFC results is laid out in IFC’s
    Corporate Performance indicators and the potential linkage to client results. IFC clients’ results could
    be influenced through standardized approaches and instruments such as IFC Performance Standards,
    Corporate Governance Advisory, to name a few, and other mechanisms that capture private sector
    development results, such as indicators of reach

11. Similarly, in June 2010, MIGA instituted a standardized approach to collecting development outcome
    information from clients, an initiative called the Development Effectiveness Indicators System. For
    private sector interventions through MIGA, adaptive management could contribute to its own results
    as well as client results during underwriting, assessment and monitoring (including Environmental
    and Social aspects) of the projects supported. Some of the key MIGA adaptive management
    measures, including external triggers are as follows: (a) Pre-Claims from Guarantee Holder clients
    (b) Guarantee Cancellation management (c) Sovereign Risk Downgrades and exogenous shocks (such
    as the Financial Crisis) (d) Re-insurance policies and (e) Innovation through new products (for e.g.
    Non Honoring of Sovereign Financial Obligations).

12. Yet, as noted above, M4R poses special challenges in the context of international development, where
    the outcomes are “joint” and typically jointly determined by the client and the development agency
    involved. These challenges are interrelated and may include differences between the clients and
    various development agencies involved in: M4R orientation and capacity; need for attribution of,
    versus contribution to, results; and incentives to achieve sustainable results. .

13. This review will thus explore briefly how the WBG is working with its clients to address some of
    these issues as part of the M4R agenda, and what avenues it may need to consider going forward.




                                                     4
Objectives and Audience
14. The overarching purpose of RAP 2016 is to provide an enhanced understanding of areas of relative
    strength and areas requiring attention in the WBG approach to M4R, as well as to report on WBG
    performance. The specific objectives are to: (i) develop a consolidated overview of the WBG efforts
    aimed at M4R, defined against the M4R framework developed for the report; (ii) provide an
    assessment, based on IEG’s evaluation evidence and select other sources (e.g., Internal Audit
    Department reports, DEC research), of the status and effectiveness of its efforts related to M4R; (iii)
    report on the results and performance of the WBG’s country- and project-level work, as captured in
    recent validation reports, evaluations, and other analytic work; (iv) distill lessons from evaluations to
    support efforts to enhance the WBG’s effectiveness with respect to M4R; and (iv) analyze and report
    on the management actions in response to recommendations of previous IEG evaluations. In addition
    to these broad objectives, the RAP will also report on the extent to which gender is addressed in the
    WBG operations, continuing the trend reported in RAP 2015.

15. As part of this work, the M4R framework will be further articulated using the two key principles for
    M4R (measurement and management) highlighted in paragraph 6. This framework will encompass
    efforts related to data, data systems, monitoring, evaluation, and using evidence for different types of
    decision-making.

16. The primary audience of RAP 2016 are the World Bank Group’s Board of Directors and the CODE.
    Other important stakeholders include WBG’s senior management; the OPCS Vice Presidency;
    management of the Global Practices and Regions; IFC and MIGA Directors and Senior Managers;
    Country Directors and Representatives; and Task Teams of operational projects. WBG clients also
    constitute an important audience for this report, as it will include a preliminary view of WBG’s
    approach to M4R with its clients. RAP 2016 will be released publicly, and therefore the external
    stakeholder groups, including other development agencies and non-government organizations are
    important stakeholders. A preliminary stakeholder analysis, based on document review and some
    discussions with management, is attached as Appendix F.


Scope and Key Questions
17. RAP 2016 will comprise three distinct but interrelated chapters. Chapter 1 will focus on the special
    theme, M4R, to provide an overview of the WBG’s approach. . .
18. The main question to be addressed is as follow: how, and how effectively, did the WBG approach
    M4R? Specifically:

         How and how effectively did the WBG measure development results?
        
         How, and how effectively, did the WBG engage in and support adaptive management and
          learning to achieve the results?

19. In addition to reviewing and summarizing available IEG evidence (and a few external evidence-based
    documents, such as IAD and DEC reports) on the WBG’s approach to M4R, the current report will
    explore briefly WBG’s work on strengthening and institutionalizing clients’ M4R systems and
    capacity through projects, country programs, and instruments, as an integral foundation of WBG’s

                                                      5
    M4R. Because the report is based primarily on existing evidence, this chapter will provide only a
    preliminary view on WBG’s work with clients, and not a comprehensive review of the initiatives and
    processes that focus on client M4R outside of the portfolio routinely evaluated by IEG.

20. Chapter 2 will comprise the standard part of the report and examine trends in country- and project-
    level outcomes, based on IEG’s validations of country and project completion reports, as well as
    country case studies completed for thematic studies. In contrast with RAP 2015, which analyzed in
    detail the factors associated with project-level performance, RAP 2016 will provide analysis of results
    at the country level. The specific questions to be addressed are as follows:

         What are the patterns in the performance of the WBG country strategies/frameworks? What
          factors are associated with these patterns?
         What are the patterns of WBG performance with respect to the country
          strategies/frameworks? What factors are associated with these patterns?
         Are there discernible differences across countries in project-level performance, and what
          factors explain those differences?
         Is the WBG supporting country (organizational and public-sector clients in the case of
          IFC/MIGA) capacity and systems for managing for results? How?

21. At the project level, RAP 2016 will present trends in performance ratings from IEG reviews of the
    WBG’s self-assessments of its projects and financing interventions (including IFC advisory services
    and MIGA guarantees). The analysis will be organized in line with the WBG’s new structure (as at
    the end of FY16), providing information specific to Global Practice groups, regions, and IFC’s new
    categorization for industries.

22. Chapter 3 will report on the Management Action Record (MAR) and the influence of IEG’s
    recommendations on changes in the WBG’s work. MAR serves a record of how the WBG responds
    to and acts upon the recommendations of IEG revaluations. It is a tool for accountability by keeping
    the WBG Board of Directors and the general public informed about the progress of Management’s
    implementation of their action plans prepared in response to the recommendations from IEG’s
    evaluations. It also serves as a tool for learning. The chapter will outline the implementation status
    of Management’s action plans in FY15 and provide an analysis of historical trends of both the
    implementation ratings and Management’s actions. Specifically, this section will examine the
    following key questions:

         What is the progress on the implementation of the agreed Management Action Plans?
         What are the trends in the adoption of IEG’s recommendations?
         What are the trends in the adoption of IEG’s recommendations specifically related to the
          theme of M4R?


Approach and Methodology
23. Consistent with previous years’ approach, RAP 2016 will synthesize findings from existing IEG
    project, country-level, corporate, and thematic evaluations and learning products, analyze existing
    IEG data, conduct desk reviews to draw information from WBG documents, and refer to other
    relevant research and information (e.g., literature on M4R), as needed. Additional data may be
    collected through select interviews with key WBG staff (e.g., OPCS). Where there are evidence gaps


                                                     6
     or information regarding WBG M4R are not clear, the report will so acknowledge and suggest areas
     for future studies to the WBG. More detailed information on methodology is attached at Appendix D.

24. Chapter 1 will build on five approaches, leveraging on IEG available sources and resources (see
    Appendices B and C): (i) review and synthesis of existing IEG evaluation findings as they pertain to
    M4R; (ii) a review of a sample from the portfolio of projects validated by IEG in FY16 to assess the
    focus on M4R, specifically: development of clients’ institutional M4R systems and capacity; (iii) a
    review of country assistance strategy (CAS) reviews and completion and learning report (CLR)
    reviews in FY16 to assess the focus on M4R; (iv) interviews with select WBG staff regarding key
    initiatives to support adaptive management and results focus for clients and staff; and (v) review of
    relevant WBG documents (e.g., the WBG Board papers regarding M4R).

25. Chapter 2 of RAP 2016 will analyze performance of country strategies and country partnership
    frameworks and examine the relationship between performance and other key country-level and
    WBG-related factors (e.g., country income, CPIA scores, Bank performance). Where possible, it will
    also present analysis over a two or three strategy periods.

26. In addition, the report will present performance information on WBG operations by reviewing
    operationally mature projects for IFC and MIGA and recently closed operations for the World Bank,
    based on a three-year rolling average of IEG’s ratings (for projects existing FY13-15). For IFC, the
    report will also attempt to present predictive analysis regarding the development outcomes of more
    recent projects, based on IEG’s established methodology and access to relevant portfolio. Depending
    on the data availability (at the project / industry / country level), IEG will consider analysis on
    relatively newer corporate results indicators such as Mandate-to-Disbursements.3 The information
    will be disaggregated by several variables (e.g., country income, lending instruments, country
    characteristics, such as Fragile and Conflict status).

27. To provide sector-specific or theme-specific insights, recently completed IEG evaluations (FY14-16)
    will be used to identify findings applicable to the current WBG portfolio. The list of recently
    completed evaluations is attached at Appendix C.

28. In the case of MIGA, IEG will assess both, general and sector-specific indicators at the portfolio
    aggregate level, as well as the adaptive measures in place for new product lines with MIGA support
    for sovereign financial obligations, sub-national financial obligations, and state-owned enterprises

29. Chapter 3 will provide an update and analysis on IEG Recommendations to WBG Management and
    follow-up on those recommendations.

30. Following the practice in previous RAPs, the regional and GP updates will be presented in an online
    Appendix to the RAP 2016.


Communication and Dissemination
31. The preliminary stakeholder analysis, attached as Appendix F, will be updated as and when new
    information from the stakeholders is collected. This analysis will provide the foundation for the

3 The time taken between the day when the IFC mandate letter is signed by the IFC prospective client and the day the project’s
financing-related disbursements are executed by IFC, treated as a measure of internal efficiency.



                                                                7
    development of a communication strategy for the RAP. Initial dissemination ideas include
    presentations at international platforms for M4R, such as the Global Partnership for Effective
    Development Cooperation, and at brown bag lunches and knowledge sharing events with OPCS (e.g.,
    at the Results and Measurement and Evaluation Stream).

32. As a complement to the narrative RAP report, an interactive dashboard will be created to enable users
    to view results and trends and do their own analysis. Variables and information related to the analysis
    for this RAP will be included in the dashboard, as appropriate. Thus dissemination and
    communication of this interactive dashboard will be considered for clients in collaboration with
    regional VPUs.


Team and Budget
33. Nick York (Director, IEGHE) and Marie Gaarder (Manager, IEGHC) will provide overall direction
    and guidance for RAP 2016, and Nidhi Khattri (IEGHE) and Raghavan Narayanan (IEGFP) will
    serve as co-Task Team Leaders. A collaborative team drawn from across all IEG departments will
    include: Joy Behrens, Unurjargal Demberel, Katsumasa Hamaguchi, Yun Sun Li, Eduardo
    Maldonado, Bahar Salimova, Anthony Tyrrell, and Yoshine Uchimura. Marie Charles will provide
    administrative support. The team will be supported by short-term consultants and by IEG staff
    responsible for maintaining the Management Action Record. The team will seek inputs from other
    IEG staff and consultants across the VPU on specific aspects of the report preparation and
    dissemination.

34. The peer reviewers for the report are Karen Jorgensen (Head, Division of Peer Review and
    Evaluation, OECD), Margaret Kakande (Head, Budget Monitoring and Accountability, Ugandan
    Ministry of Finance), and Oscar Garcia (Head, Evaluation, IFAD). Consultations with relevant Bank
    Group management and staff will be conducted following the usual practice of IEG’s large-scale
    evaluations.

35. RAP 2016 report will be prepared with an estimated budget of $680,000 (TBC) of which
    approximately 15 percent was spent in FY16. An additional $80,000 (TBC) will be budgeted for the
    regional updates, Summary Sector Highlights and Top Lessons for IFC and World Bank. These
    budget items are comparable to the cost of RAP 2015. Wider outreach and dissemination activities
    upon completion of the report will require an estimated $20,000. The report will be finalized and
    presented to the Board in the third quarter of FY17.




                                                    8
Appendix A: Summary of Key Differences between RAP15 and RAP16, and
between ROSES and RAP16


                                    RAP15                                 RAP16

       Chapters
                                     Gender                        Managing for Results

Chapter 1: Theme
                         Analysis of factors associated   Analysis of factors associated with
                         with project-level performance   country-level performance
Chapter 2: Performance
                         Analysis by type of              Analysis by whether the
                         recommendation: strategy,        recommendations targeted M4R issues
Chapter 3: MAR           policy, program/project,
                         knowledge, M&E, and other        Greater emphasis on a qualitative
                         operational                      assessment of whether and how IEG’s
                                                          recommendations facilitate change in
                                                          the WBG



ROSES and RAP16

                                    ROSES                                 RAP16

       Chapters
                            Self-evaluation Systems       Findings from ROSES

Chapter 1: Theme                                          Review of broader M4R efforts, in
                                                          addition to the focus on self-evaluation
                                                          systems

                                                          Exploratory review of how clients
                                                          M4R is supported

                                                          Summary of M4R-related
                                                          recommendations and the WBG
                                                          progress along those recommendations




                                              9
Appendix B: Principal Sources of Data to be used for RAP 2016
Project evaluations and validations. These products include Project Performance Assessment Reports
(PPARs) for both World Bank-financed and IFC projects; Implementation Completion Report Reviews
(ICRRs) for World Bank-financed projects; Expanded Project Supervision Reports (XPSRs), IEG sector
highlights, and IEG cluster notes for mature IFC investments; Project Completion Reports (PCRs) for IFC
Advisory Services; and MIGA Project Evaluation Reports (PERs). Specifically, the portfolio review
analyses for the World Bank within RAP 2016 will be based primarily on ICRRs for projects exiting the
portfolio in FY13-15 and PPARs prepared in FY14-16; XPSRs for IFC investments reaching early
operational maturity in FY2010-15; PCRs for IFC advisory services operations closed in FY2010-15; and
MIGA PERs for guarantees reaching early maturity by FY2010-15.

Country evaluations, including both Country Strategy and Completion and Learning Report Reviews
(prepared for 54 countries during FY13-15) and more detailed Country Program Evaluations (16 prepared
during FY11-15).
 
Sector, Global Practice, and thematic studies produced by IEG since FY15, including some reports that
are expected to be completed by the second quarter of FY 2017 (see Appendix C).

Learning products produced by IEG since FY15, including some studies that are expected to be
completed by fall 2016 (see Appendix C).

Management Action Records to capture the progress and gaps identified in degree of adoption of past
IEG recommendations and to assess ongoing efforts.

Databases that include IEG’s ICR-R, XPSR-EvNote, PCR-EvNote, PER-EvNote, and CASCR-R
databases, as well as the World Bank’s Business Intelligence data warehouse.

Documents and records on relevant corporate strategies, initiatives, programs, and evaluations, including
the World Bank’s Scorecard, the Country Opinion Surveys, IFC’s Development Goals and institutional
reforms, presentations to CODE on the results framework systems and evaluation strategy, policy
documents and MIGA’s self-evaluation and monitoring initiatives, policies and procedures. Other,
external research will be drawn on as relevant / appropriate.




                                                   10
Appendix C: Major IEG Evaluations and Learning Products Recently
Completed or Expected to Be Completed (FY15-FY17)
Main IEG Evaluations Recently Completed or Expected to Be Completed in FY15-FY17
   Fiscal Year                                             Evaluation
      FY 15      1.   Results and Performance of the World Bank Group 2014 (RAP 2014: Achieving
                      MDGs) (WB, IFC, MIGA)
                 2.   The Poverty Focus of Country Programs: Lessons from World Bank Experience
                 3.   Later Impacts of Early Childhood Interventions: A Systematic Review
                 4.   Financial Inclusion: A Foothold on the Ladder toward Prosperity? An Evaluation of
                      World Bank Group Support for Financial Inclusion for Low-Income Households and
                      Microenterprises
                 5.   World Bank Group Support to Electricity Access, FY2000-2014 (IFC, MIGA, WB)
                 6.   Learning and Results in World Bank Operations: Toward a New Learning Strategy –
                      Evaluation 2
                 7.   World Bank Group Engagement in Resource-Rich Developing Countries: The cases of
                      the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, and Zambia (Cluster CPE:
                      Resource Rich Countries)
                 8.   World Bank Support to Early Childhood Development
     FY 16       1.   Results and Performance of the World Bank Group 2015 (RAP 2015 - Gender Equality)
                      (WB, IFC, MIGA)
                 2.   Accelerating Growth through Skills and Knowledge: An Evaluation of the World Bank
                      Group’s Support for Higher Education
                 3.   Evaluation of the World Bank Group’s Support for Capital Market Development (IFC,
                      MIGA, WB)
                 4.   World Bank Group Industry-Specific Support to Promote Industrial Competitiveness
                      and Its Implications for Jobs
                 5.   Behind the Mirror: A Report on the Self-Evaluation Systems of the World Bank Group
                      (ROSES)
                 6.   Program-for-Results: An Early-Stage Assessment of the Process and Effects of a New
                      Lending Instrument
                 7.   World Bank Group Activities in Situations of Conflict and Violence (Fragile Situations
                      in Non-Fragile Countries)
                 8.   Clustered Country Program Evaluation on Small States
     FY 17       1.   Shared Prosperity in Country Programs (WBG) [AP in April; report in June 2017]
                 2.   Growing the Rural Non-Farm Economy to Alleviate Poverty: An IEG Evaluation of
                      World Bank Group Support 2004-2014 [Report to management Nov. 2016]
                 3.   Process Evaluation of Systematic Country Diagnostic and Country Partnership
                      Framework [September 2016 to CODE]
                 4.   Evaluation of the World Bank Group’s Support for Water Supply and Sanitation
                      Services, FY2007-2016 [Late FY17]
                 5.   Mobile Metropolises: An IEG Evaluation of the World Bank Group’s Support for
                      Urban Transport [Late FY17]
                 6.   Environmental Management of Air & Water Resources [Late FY17]
                 7.   Data for Development [Late FY17]
                 8.   IFC Client Engagement Model [Late FY17]
                 9.   Clustered CPE on Dynamic MICs [Late FY17]




                                                   11
IEG Learning Products Recently Completed or Expected to Be Completed in FY15-FY16
                         Category I                              Category II
FY15      1. Opportunities and Challenges from          13. DPO: Environment and Social
              Working in Partnerships                       Risk Management
          2. Bank-IFC Cooperation at the Country
              Strategy Level
          3. Selectivity in Country Strategies
          4. Results Frameworks in Country Strategies
          5. Additional Financing for Transport and
              Information & Communication
              Technology
          6. Renewable Energy
          7. Microfinance in Africa
          8. Job’s in IFCs Manufacturing Projects:
              Lessons from Project Evaluation
          9. IFC Additionality
          10. DPO: Public Expenditure (LP I)
          11. Quality of Macro-Fiscal Frameworks in
              Development Policy Operations (DPO:
              Macro Fiscal Framework) (LP I)
          12. Quality of Results Frameworks in
              Development Policy Operations (DPO:
              Results Framework and Conditionality)
FY16
          1. Lessons from Joint WBG Projects            8. Maximizing Development
          2. Domestic Resource Mobilization in WBG          Impact in IDA
             Instruments                                9. WBG Transformational
          3. Mobilizing Private Capital for                 Engagements
             Development                                10. DPO: Political Economy
          4. Financial Viability of Infrastructure          Analysis
             Delivery                                   11. Off-Grid Electricity Access
          5. Gender Impacts of CDD                      12. DPO: Poverty and Social Impact
          6. Land Administration                            Analysis
          7. World Bank Group Support for Housing       13. DPO: Environment Sector
             Finance




                                            12
Other Products Completed or Expected to Be Completed in FY15-FY17

                  PPARs                  Validation Products         Systematic Reviews
FY15    Total (World Bank and IFC):   IFC Expanded Project      Electricity Access
        39                            Supervision Reports
                                      (XPSRs): 78               Impacts of Interventions
                                                                during Early Childhood on
                                                                Later Outcomes
                                      MIGA PER: 16

                                      WB Implementation
                                      Completion and Results
                                      Report Reviews (ICRRs):
                                      392

                                      IEG Reviews of
                                      Completion and Learning
                                      Reviews (or of Country
                                      Assistance Strategy
                                      Completion Reports)
                                      (CLRs/CASCRs): 12

                                      IFC Project Completion
                                      Reviews (PCRs): 72
FY16    World Bank: 50                IFC Expanded Project
                                      Supervision Reports
        IFC: 8                        (XPSRs): 40% coverage
                                      (103 projects expected)


                                      MIGA PER: (25 expected)

                                      WB Implementation
                                      Completion and Results
                                      Report Reviews (ICRRs):
                                      100% coverage (340
                                      projects expected)

                                      IEG Reviews of
                                      Completion and Learning
                                      Reviews (or of Country
                                      Assistance Strategy
                                      Completion Reports)
                                      (CLRs/CASCRs): 22
                                      expected

                                      IFC PCR: 51% coverage
                                      (102 projects expected)
FY 17   World Bank: 55
        IFC: 8

                                              13
Appendix D: Detailed Methodology
Chapter 1 methodology will be tailored to the questions posed regarding WBG’s approach to M4R, the
framework for which will be defined as part of the RAP.

       How and how effectively did the WBG measure development results?
This question will be addressed by synthesizing information from IEG evaluations.

       How, and how effectively, did the WBG engage in and support adaptive management and
        learning to achieve the results?
This question will be answered through synthesizing findings from IEG major evaluations and learning
products regarding the WBG’s M4R. Two additional sets of exploratory analyses will be conducted on
existing data regarding how the WBG is working with clients on M4R: a) an identification of projects that
have enhancing clients’ institutional M4R capacity (e.g., statistical systems; government-wide M&E
systems; results-focused reforms) as their main objective and a review of their effectiveness; and b) an
exploratory qualitative review of CAS/CLR reviews and a sample (size to be determined) of ICRRs
conducted in FY16 (total expected to be 340) regarding the degree to which they incorporate
strengthening institutional M4R capacity (results measurement, evaluation, evidence-based decision-
making) as a sub-objective or component, and the evidence regarding the effectiveness of the
interventions to address these sub-objectives or components. The qualitative methodology will comprise
developing search terms and a series of questions related to the M4R framework (as further developed for
the review), conducting text analytics regarding these terms, and classifying the type of M4R supported in
country programs and projects. Next, the review will search for evidence in the CASCR/CLRR/ICRRs
regarding the effectiveness of these interventions. The qualitative analysis will rely on existing evidence;
no new data will be collected. The full methodology will be included in the report.
Information on IFC will be drawn from an upcoming learning product. This will be an exploratory study
to provide preliminary information to the WBG regarding this topic and any limitations will be noted
clearly.
In addition, the report will provide a broad overview of the (new) instruments and approaches (i.e., .g.,
P4Rand IFC’s Corporate Governance instrument) and major initiatives (e.g., Results Measurement and
Evaluation Stream, MIGA’s Environmental and Social Performance Standards), and any evidence
regarding the effectiveness of these approaches.
Chapter 2 of RAP 2016 will analyze performance of country strategies over a two or three strategy
periods. It will also examine the relationship between performance and other key country-level and
WBG-related factors, including:

                a.   Country income/IBRD/Blend
                b.   CPIA scores
                c.   Aggregated project performance within the CAS/CLR period
                d.   Bank performance

In addition, the report will develop a framework for a qualitative assessment of the factors associated with
country strategy performance. (See the paragraph above on the approach to the qualitative assessment.)

Two major caveats should be noted regarding this analysis. First, the number of reviews of country
strategies is small (since 2003, 27 countries with 3 CAS /CLR reviews, 47 countries with 2 CAS/CLR
                                                    14
reviews, and 23 countries with 1 CAS/CLR reviews), and second, the new Country Partnership
Framework was introduced in 2013and the methodology for review and rating was revised accordingly.
Both factors limit quantitative and longitudinal analyses, and will be taken into consideration in
presenting the findings. The focus therefore will be on developing qualitative assessments, with areas
identified for future studies.

Chapter 3 of RAP 2016 will provide an update on IEG Recommendations to WBG Management and
follow-up on those recommendations. The study will look into trends of the adoption ratings and analyze
the relationship between the degree of Management’s acceptance of recommendations and
implementation ratings, based on classifying ratings into two groups: those that are targeted at a particular
organizational unit versus those that are institutionally cross-cutting. In addition, the chapter will consider
specifically the adoption of M4R-related recommendations.

IEG will also conduct in-depth analysis of recommendations from evaluations exiting the MAR follow-up
cycle in FY 2016 (World Bank Country-level Engagement on Governance and Anti-corruption, World
Bank Group Impact Evaluations: Relevance and Effectiveness, and Assessing International Finance
Corporation’s Poverty Focus and Results) to assess whether the recommendations facilitated change and
dialogue in the targeted sectors/areas. It will look within and beyond the MAR process to understand the
degree to which IEG’s recommendations contribute to change. For this purpose, IEG will conduct a
series of interviews and focus groups with a select group of stakeholders, including Bank Group’s
operational staff and IEG’s evaluators who are experts in the subject matter. IEG will also take stock of
Bank literature referencing IEG’s studies.

MAR data and analysis will be also presented in the regional and GP updates, as relevant.




                                                      15
Appendix E: References
Andrews, M., Pritchett, L., & Woolcock, M. (2016). Scaling PDIA Solutions through Broad Agency, and
      Your Role. Center for International Development, Harvard University.
Argyris, C., and Schön, D. (1974). Theory in practice: Increasing professional effectiveness, San Francisco:
        Jossey-Bass.
Argyris, C., and Schön, D. (1978). Organizational learning: A theory of action perspective, Reading, Mass:
        Addison Wesley.
Asian Development Bank. (2011). Framework for Results-based Public Sector Management and Country Cases.
       Asia Pacific Community of Practice on Managing for Development Results. Manila: Asian
       Development Bank
COMPAS. 2011 COMPAS Report: Multilateral Development Banks' Common Performance Assessment System:
     COMPAS.
D.C. Department of State, Office of U.S. Foreign Assistance Resources. (2015). Evaluation of the Office of
       U.S. Foreign Assistance Resources' Implementation of the Managing for Results Framework.
       Washington, D.C.: Department of State, Office of U.S. Foreign Assistance Resources.
Drucker, Peter F. (1964). Managing for Results: Economic Tasks and Risk-taking Decisions. New York: Harper
       & Row.
- - -. (1954). The Practice of Management. New York: Harper & Row.
- - - (1989). "What Business Can Learn from Nonprofits." Harvard Business Review 67.4, 88-93.
Gaarder, M. & Bartsch, U. (2015). Creating a Market for Outcomes: Shopping for Solutions. Washington D.C.:
       World Bank
Garvin, D. A. (2000). Learning in Action – A Guide to Putting the Learning Organization to Work, Harvard:
        Harvard Business School Press.
Gigler, B. and Bailur, S. (2014). Closing the Feedback Loop: Can Technology Bridge the Accountability
         Gap? Washington D.C.: World Bank
Government Accountability Office (2015). Managing for Results: Practices for Effective Agency Strategic
      Reviews. United States Government Accountability Office: Washington DC.
Hatry, Harry P., et al. (DATE)…How Federal Programs Use Outcome Information: Opportunities for Federal
        Managers. Washington, D. C.:
Independent Evaluation Group, World Bank. 2013. Results and Performance of the World Bank Group 2012.
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG), World Bank. 2014. Results and Performance of the World Bank Group
       2013.
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG), World Bank. 2015. Results and Performance of the World Bank Group
       2014.
National Academy of Public Administration. (2003). Managing for Results Series.
Kang, Young Cheoul. (2005). "Strategic Management in the Public Sector." Public Performance and
       Management Review 29.1 (2005): 85-92.
Kiechel, Walter. (2012). "The Management Century." Harvard Business Review November
Lee, Mordecai. (2004). E-Reporting: Strengthening Democratic Accountability. Washington, D.C.: IBM Center
       for the Business of Government. E-Government Series.


                                                       16
MacKenzie, Alexander. (2008). Results Based Management at Country Level: Systemic Issues that Prevent Good
      UNDAF Results and the use of UNDAF Results Information. New York: UNDAF.
Meier, Werner. (2003). Results-Based Management: Towards a Common Understanding Among Development
        Cooperation Agencies. N.p.: Canadian International Development Agency.
Nutt, Paul C. (2005). "Comparing Public and Private Sector Decision-Making Practices." Journal of Public
        Administration Research and Theory 16.2 (2005): 289-318.
OECD. (2009). Managing for Development Results. Paris: OECD.
UNDP. (2011). Results-Based Management Handbook. New York: United Nations Development Group.
Schön, D. (1973). Beyond the Stable State. Public and private learning in a changing society, Harmondsworth:
        Penguin.
Senge, P. (1990).The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization. New York: Doubleday
        Currency.
Sourcebook on Emerging Good Practice in Managing for Development Results. Washington, D.C.: OECD-DAC
        Joint Venture on MfDR, 2008.
UNDP. (2007). Evaluation of Results-Based Management at UNDP. New York: UNDP
United States General Accounting Office. (2002). Managing for Results: Challenges Agencies Face in
        Producing Credible Performance Information. Rept. no. GAO/GGD_00-52. Washington, D.C.: GAO,.
        Performance Information Challenges.
United States General Accounting Office. (1998). Managing for Results: Measuring Program Results that are
        Under Limited Federal Control. Washington, D.C.: GAO. GAO/GGD-99-16.
Wholey, Joseph S. "Managing for Results: Roles for Evaluators in a New Management Era." American
       Journal of Evaluation 22.3 (2001): 343-47.
World Bank Corporate Scorecard. October 2015. Accessed April 5, 2016.
World Bank Group Strategy. (2013). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group, 2013.




                                                     17
Appendix F: Preliminary Stakeholder Analysis (ongoing)
Analysis and grouping of stakeholders comprising audiences for this report is based on experience in previous IEG evaluations.



                                      Stakeholder                   Their interests            Types of decisions this stakeholder
   Stakeholder Group            (or stakeholder Group)      (what they want from RAP2016)      Makes (that RAP2016 could feed)
                          1 WBG Board (as a whole)          Information on how the WBG         Project results’ focus
                                                             is performing – timely             Institutional focus on Results
                                                             feedback                            and Managing for Results
  Board                                                     Project performance in
                                                             countries
                                                            The WBG’s results focus
                                                            Inform “Forward Look”
                          2 WBG Board, CODE                 What works (what contributes       Board on the types of issues to
                                                             to development results?)            consider in approving project/country
                                                            Factors related to the              programs
                                                             performance of country             Topics for future IEG evaluations
                                                             programs                           Priorities for OPCS
                          3 WBG Senior Management           Twin goals: Eliminating            WBG strategy, priorities
                                                             poverty, Boosting shared           Enhancing results focus
  WBG Senior
                                                             prosperity
  Management
                                                            Enhancing development
                                                             effectiveness of the WBG
                          4 GP Senior Management            How this GP is doing vs other      GP strategy, priorities
                                                             GPs                                Enhancing results focus

                          5 Region Senior Management  What results are being achieved  Region priorities
                                                       in this Region?                  Relationships with country clients
                                                      What results are being achieved  Design of country programs, projects
                                                       in particular countries?
                                                      What factors to consider to
                                                       enhance countries’ results’
                                                       focus?
                                Stakeholder                 Their interests            Types of decisions this stakeholder
 Stakeholder Group        (or stakeholder Group)    (what they want from RAP2016)      Makes (that RAP2016 could feed)
                     7 Country Directors            Factors that affect country        Content of country portfolio
                                                     performance
                                                    Attention to results
                     9 IFC Senior Management        Factors that affect performance    Content of portfolio
                                                    Attention to results
                       MIGA Senior Management  Factors that affect development  Prioritization of new product
                                                effectiveness                     Lines and projects by sector
                                               Attention to results
                     1 OPCS                         Reporting on portfolio (e.g. at    Content of operational policies
                     0                               ABCDQ meetings)                     and guidance
                                                    Reporting on corporate             Improvements to systems, tools;
OPCS and other                                       performance (Corporate              simplification
WBG stakeholders                                     Scorecard), including for
                                                     indicators related to gender
                                                     integration
                                                    Management of results
                     1 IEG Senior Management        High quality, credible work        Focus of future IEG evaluations
                     1                              Evidence understandable to         Prioritization around
                                                     stakeholders                        communication of evaluation
                                                    Ability to provide a timely         results
                                                     messages
                                                    Enhancing WBG’s
                                                     effectiveness
Clients                                             WBG work on strengthening          Improving country M4R systems;
                                                     client capacity for M4R            Deciding on WBG support for M4R systems




                                                                      19
