     Structural and Rural Transformation in Africa: Challenges, Opportunities and
                       Implications for Policy and Investments

Structural transformation reflects changes in the relative contributions of agriculture, services,
and manufacturing in an economy. Rural transformation is embedded within structural
transformation, driven by changes in rural occupations, livelihoods and behaviour. Structural
and rural transformation is underway in most African countries and agriculture has an
important role to play in the process. Agriculture is the dominant sector in most countries, and
agricultural value added averages 24 per cent of GDP for Africa as a whole, while agro-industr y
is also predominant in the manufacturing sector. Agriculture is likely to remain central to the
transformation process given that demand for food is growing rapidly, largely as a result of
urbanization and changing dietary habits. The number of African cities with more than 1
million inhabitants is projected to rise to 93 by 2025, urban food markets are expected to exceed
US$400 billion by 2030, the rural poor are increasingly buying processed foods, and private
investment in food systems is expanding quickly along the full range of production functions.

Overcoming challenges to structural and rural transformatio n
For agriculture to successfully drive inclusive structural and rural transformation on the
continent, challenges in five key interrelated areas must be addressed: agricultural productivity,
development of the rural non-farm economy, the youth bulge, limited manufacturing sector,
and factor mobility.

Productivity in African agriculture
Although the agricultural sector is growing rapidly, agricultural transformation in Africa is still
at a relatively early stage. Most agricultural growth can still be attributed to expansion of land
and labour and shifts in the composition of output, rather than productivity. Increased
agricultural productivity is essential if the sector is to realize its potential and meet growing
demand for food, and will require changes agricultural practices, including much better use of
agricultural technology and greater mechanization. .

Dynamics in the rural non-farm economy
The rural nonfarm economy plays a decisive role in both the pace and quality of change in Sub-
Saharan Africa, and in poverty reduction. However, in a number of countries, the rural nonfarm
business environment faces difficulties including lack of basic infrastructure, inadequate credit
and insurance markets, poor tenure security, and ethnic and gender disparities. If Africa's
budding rural nonfarm sector is to offer a ladder to more rewarding work in the local economy,
it must also become a more reliable source of regular liquidity.

Coping with the youth bulge
Demographic trends on the continent demand the creation of economic and employme nt
opportunities, and agriculture and related activities in agri-food systems offer signific a nt
potential. At present, however, young people within smallholder farming communities and
households often find it difficult to access or profitably engage in markets. This is generally
due to age-related barriers in accessing land and other assets, lack of relevant training and
capacity development initiatives and services, and difficulties in accessing financing for
investment. These specific constraints need to be addressed to make agriculture an attractive
and profitable option for youth. As transformation proceeds, it will be necessary to expand
education and training to facilitate entry into different market opportunities.


This paper is based on content of the IFAD 2016 Rural Development Report’s Africa Chapter on
Inclusive Rural Transformation, by Steven Omamo, Rui Benfica, Karen Brooks and David Suttie.
Limited manufacturing base
Countries that underwent structural transformation in the 19th or 20th centuries did so in very
different circumstances to those faced by African countries today, most of which have limited
manufacturing bases or opportunities for expansion. While manufacturing should stay a
priority for development in Africa, agriculture, the rural nonfarm sector, and services will have
to provide jobs for the fast-growing rural labour force. Opportunities to produce and sell into
growing local and regional agriculture markets are increasing, but depend on the
competitiveness of local production. Evidence suggests that in many instances primary
agricultural production is competitive, but competitiveness is lost after the farm gate.
Addressing the policy and logistical constraints that reduce the performance of food processing,
retailing, and exports will be essential.

Barriers to factor mobility
For agriculture, land tenure, use and management, is especially important. With suffic ie nt
capital and good skills, small, intensively worked farms can be efficient and profitable, but in
many instances fragmentation of family holdings has resulted in very small farms that are not
economically viable. At the same time, rapid consolidation of landholding and the move from
traditional tenure to individual freehold has resulted in more medium and large farms where
land is not fully utilized. In some instances, land markets are failing because many potential
participants have limited access, and because gains to speculative landholdings are greater than
the costs of managing rental contracts.

Mobility of labour depends largely on the skills workers possess. Young Africans have spent
more years in school than their older relatives, but the quality of education has not improved
commensurately, meaning that they often still lack the level of education needed for productive
employment. Problems of quantity and quality of schooling are more severe in rural than in
urban areas: about 60 per cent of those under 35 in rural areas have incomplete primary
education and many struggle with basic literacy and numeracy. The least educated remain in
agriculture, and those with slightly better skills gravitate towards nonfarm employment.

Thanks to developments in the banking sector and use of technology, capital mobility is not a
major constraint to transformation in many countries. The difficulties that poor people face in
accessing banking services--distance to branches, high costs of small transactions, absence of
collateral, asymmetries of information, relatively less access to emerging ICT solutions-- are
greater for young people. Technological innovation offers an opportunity to significa ntly
expand financial inclusion.

Implications for investment and policy
Africa’s trajectory of successful long-term structural transformation will start from agriculture,
move through services to a more diversified manufacturing sector, then revert to expansion of
highly skilled services. For agriculture to play its role, it will be essential to attract private
investment, including into the rural non-farm sector, and to integrate market-oriented
smallholders and rural communities into dynamic value chains. Agriculture policy should
therefore address constraints identified above, such as land access and use and poor rural
infrastructure, while also encouraging innovation and creating a conducive environment for
investment.

                                                                                    Sep. 5, 2016


This paper is based on content of the IFAD 2016 Rural Development Report’s Africa Chapter on
Inclusive Rural Transformation, by Steven Omamo, Rui Benfica, Karen Brooks and David Suttie.
