Towards a G20 Strategy for Promoting
   Inclusive Global Value Chains
            Prepared by OECD, the WBG, and the ITC




                              for submission to
                       the G20 Trade Ministers Meeting
                                Shanghai, China
                                9-10, July 2016


(The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily represent those of G20 members.)
      TOWARDS A G20 STRATEGY FOR PROMOTING INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS

                            Prepared by OECD, the WBG, and the ITC


This paper has been prepared further to the first meeting of the G20 Trade and Investment Working
Group, convened by China on 28-29 January 2016, and represents an initial step towards developing a
G20 strategy for promoting inclusive Global Value Chains (GVCs). It was distributed by the G20
presidency at the G20 Trade Ministers Meeting in Shanghai on 9-10 July.

The paper draws on the Inclusive Global Value Chains report submitted by the OECD and the World
Bank Group to G20 Trade Ministers in October 2015, refining and prioritising the options contained
therein. The original report proposed a holistic approach to promoting more inclusive GVCs spanning:
(i) trade, investment and domestic policies both in G20 nations and in trade partner countries; (ii)
investment in expanding the statistical basis and technical analysis of participation in GVCs; and (iii)
sharing knowledge on best practices on rules, policies and programs (see Annex). This paper also takes
into account relevant policy documents published since October 2015, including insights obtained
from recently published reports on Aid for Trade.1

While maintaining this holistic approach, this paper also reflects the focus of the G20 Trade and
Investment Working Group and elaborates priority actions in three key areas:

            Priority policies for improving SME and developing country participation in GVCs
             primarily in the area of trade and investment;

            Targeted capacity building initiatives for better GVC integration in developing countries;

            Priority actions to expand data and analytical capacity.

Concrete actions can be taken by G20 governments to facilitate more inclusive GVCs by removing
current constraints on SME participation in G20 countries themselves, and by further demonstrating
global leadership through political support to a range of technical assistance measures provided by
international organisations for SMEs and for firms in developing countries, as well as new measures to
develop much needed data and analytical capabilities in many countries and across many sectors.




1
 OECD and WTO: Aid for Trade at a Glance 2015 : Chapter 7 ; ITC and WTO (2014): “SME Competitiveness
and Aid for Trade”; ITC (2015): SME Competitiveness Outlook 2015.


                                                   1
                          Draft G20 Strategic Plan for Promoting Inclusive GVCs


1. Priority policies for improving SME and developing country participation in GVCs

 Relax policies on rules of origin in G20 countries

       Consider mechanisms that can be used to alleviate unnecessary costs of RoO with a view to identifying
        priority actions in the G20 countries. For example:
            o Commit to MFN liberalisation of remaining tariffs;
            o Commit to removing all RoO requirements on tariff flows with preference margins of less than
                  then the estimated compliance costs (e.g. 5%) in PTAs involving G20 countries and advocate
                  such reforms in PTAs involving third countries.
            o Consider expanding de minimis provisions;
            o Commit to adopting the most efficient RoO flexibility mechanisms (i.e. cumulation and
                  certification simplification) in existing PTAs involving G20 countries;
            o Commit to take actions on preferential rules of origin for LDCs pursuant to the WTO Ministerial
                  Decisions of 2013 and 2015.

 Further the trade facilitation agenda through completing the ratification process of the WTO Trade
 Facilitation Agreement (TFA) and by complementary improvements in hard and soft infrastructure and in
 logistics services quality

       Ratify the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement and commit to regular reporting on its implementation
        and on progress on complementary improvements in hard and soft infrastructure and in logistics
        services quality;
       Monitor TFA implementation support and its effectiveness, including through reporting to the G-20 on
        the Aid for Trade pledge and through WTO-OECD Aid for Trade Reviews;
       Support the creation of National Trade Facilitation Committees as a vehicle of consultation and co-
        ordination among traders, government and other relevant stakeholders.


 Promote existing efforts to target dedicated technical and financial support to: improve SME information
 about procedures and regulations to be met to export and import; and increase their ability to comply with
 international and national standards (e.g., environmental, labor, and quality), technical regulations and
 conformity assessment procedures

       Promote existing efforts by IOs to:
            o Back Trade and Investment Support Institutions notably by strengthening their capacity to
               provide market intelligence and information on trade-related procedures and regulations to
               SMEs.
            o Facilitate SMEs’ cross-country accreditation of international standards & certifications by
               providing capacity building and financial support to firms. The assistance should be geared to
               ease SMEs’ understanding and fulfilment of international standards, certification programs,
               and skill development. This approach could draw on lessons drawn from the WTO-OECD Aid
               for Trade Review, diagnostic tools like the World Bank NTM Toolkit, the new World Bank GVC
               Firm-level Survey, and the Practical Guides for SMEs on complying with ISO standards jointly
               published by ISO and ITC. [Note: including this recommendation assumes that the WBG or the
               ITC are prepared to implement it.]
            o Enhance transparency on procedures, standards (including private standards) and regulations
               by leveraging existing or new national, regional and global e-platforms and global depositories
               (such as ITC’s Standards Map for the submission of information on private standards)

                                                      2
             o   Consider developing a list of NTMs by G20 countries whose streamlining would have the
                 greatest impact on SME and LIDC participation in GVCs. In this respect, G20 could draw on the
                 on-going OECD project on International Regulatory Co-operation - Better rules for
                 globalisation;
             o   Target dedicated technical and financial support to the strengthening of national laboratories
                 and other institutions involved in compliance demonstration.
             o   Support international collaborative efforts towards mutual recognition agreements among
                 accreditation bodies.

 Consider Eliminating “nuisance tariffs” and establishing customs de minimis levels in G20 countries within a
 set timeline

       Define “nuisance tariff level”;
       Perform sensitivity analysis, study the impact of suspending all nuisance tariffs at MFN and preferential
        levels (at different arbitrarily defined echelons e.g. 3% or less, 5% or less) on goods imported by the
        G20 using a quantitative model-based assessment and review of previous nuisance tariff removal
        initiatives already implemented by G20 and other countries;
       Commit to the elimination of “nuisance tariff levels” in G20 countries within a set timeline;
       Raise customs de minimis levels to enable e-commerce, which could be of particular value for SMEs.


2. Targeted capacity building initiatives for better GVC integration in developing countries

 Promote efforts to better understand how to increase SME and LIDC firms’ productivity and boost
 innovative capacity to facilitate upgrading of these firms in value chains through spillovers from FDI

             Promote ongoing IOs’ investments in strengthening micro-level data collection and country and
              region-specific analysis of firms in LIDCs to identify the factors that foster long-term links between
              MNEs and local SMEs, as well as the channels through which MNEs help SMEs to entry or upgrade
              their participation GVCs (e.g., technology transfer, knowledge sharing, financial support, access to
              inputs, etc.). Relevant work in this area is already being pursued the ITC, World Bank Group, OECD
              and UNIDO;
             Support discussions involving the B20—in particular of its taskforce members, i.e. Accenture, the
              B20 Secretariat, and the World SME Forum —and IOs to: i) lead the discussion on forging links
              between SMEs and MNEs; ii) form value chain MNEs-led consortium and help matching SMEs with
              these potential buyers and suppliers; iii) prioritize reforms in each country; and iv) ask each G20
              country to put in place a strategy based on the two above inputs.

 Increase SME productivity and boost innovative capacity to upgrade in value chains through access to ICT,
 SME-friendly IPR system and addressing informality

             In the context of the already existing digital economy pillar of the G20 Framework for Innovative
              Growth, G20 should establish an action plan to empower SMEs to leverage the digital economy,
              including better ICT infrastructure and services sector efficiency to reduce SMEs’ costs, both
              physical (“hard infrastructure”) and digital (sharing of available information), as well as
              improvement in the regulatory environment for digitally enabled activities;
             Develop a set of good practice polices to make IPR systems overall more SME-friendly;
             Establish a G20 mechanism to improve access to information on IPRs in G20 countries. More
              comprehensive information on IP systems among the G20 could be provided by national IP bodies
              to better inform and assist SMEs seeking to internationalise. This mechanism could also be used
              to raise awareness among SMEs about the variety of IP instruments and their strategic objectives;
             Ask each G20 country to put in place a strategy based on the above inputs.

                                                        3
 Strengthen collaboration and dialogue across countries, with a view to establishing global platforms for
 information exchange, learning, and support to capacity building; and financing instruments well adapted
 to GVCs

         Consider a feasibility study on the applicability of a framework for strengthening collaboration and
          dialogue among countries participating in GVCs. This may take inspiration from the G20 Agricultural
          Market Information System (AMIS) framework and could build on the experiences gathered through
          existing global platforms for policy dialogue and knowledge sharing (e.g. the OECD Initiative on Global
          Value Chains (GVCs), Production Transformation and Development)
         Consider a feasibility study to create customizable knowledge and learning instruments and support
          existing or new global, regional, and local platforms that can facilitate SMEs capacity building and/or
          the dissemination of knowledge and exchange of best practices and relevant information for SMEs.
         Consider preparing a strategy for facilitating financing of firms in GVCs, through promoting financing
          policies that have a multi-pronged approach, including for example, regional connectivity between
          countries engaged in the same GVCs but at different level of development, private-public partnerships
          and engagement, cross-border projects and sectoral coverage, non-punitive provisions for failure and
          bankruptcy, account of intrinsic know-how, pool of talent, distribution channels, business
          relationships, business models, and access to technology in valuation of repayment ability; etc.
         Ask each G20 country to put in place a strategy based on the above inputs.

3. Priority actions to expand data and analytical capacity

 Capitalise on existing, and invest in strengthening, micro-level data of firms in LIDCs and G20 countries

        Support IOs’ efforts to invest in strengthening micro-level data collection and analysis of firms in LIDCs
         and G20 countries to provide granular information for GVC evidence-based policy making.
        Develop an inventory of available firm-level data sources and similarities and differences between them
         with a view to identifying data collection and the associated funding needs that could provide, in
         particular, the basis for developing extended supply-use tables.




                                                        4
Context

Global value chains (GVCs) have become a dominant feature of the world economy, involving
different economic actors and countries at all levels of development. The production of goods and
services increasingly involves sourcing and co-ordinating tasks and inputs originating from multiple
locations and offering the most competitive costs and quality. These activities are typically led by large
multinational enterprises (MNEs) primarily from the G20 countries. Many developing country firms
and SMEs also participate in GVCs but they continue to face various disproportionate challenges and
constraints. Removal of some of these constraints can generate benefits for all: large and small firms
(including innovative start-ups which create the most employment and play an important role for
innovation) in developed and developing countries. This can be particularly true if accompanying
policies that promote responsible business conduct and enable the needed public and private
investments, in particular in people, in innovation, and in strategic physical infrastructure, help ensure
that the benefits are shared widely.

G20 countries have long recognised the potential of trade and competition for boosting economic
growth, living standards and employment opportunities. At the Brisbane Summit in November 2014
they expressly acknowledged that one important way for countries to connect to the global economy
and develop is through GVCs. They also called for identification of “policies that take full advantage of
global value chains and encourage greater participation and value addition by developing countries.”
In response to this request, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and
the World Bank Group (WBG) prepared the Inclusive Global Value Chains report, submitted to the G20
Trade Ministers Meeting in Istanbul in October 2015, which identifies policy options in trade and
investment and complementary areas for GVC integration by SMEs and LIDCs.


Proposed priority actions

1. Priority policies for improving SME and developing country participation in GVCs

Relax policies on rules of origin in G20 countries

Rules of origin (RoO) are key factors shaping trade, foreign direct investment (FDI) and value chain
location decisions in preferential trade agreements (PTA) and trading partners. RoO define the origin
of products for the purposes of their preferential treatment and preventing trade deflection under
PTAs. They are thus critical elements of PTAs. Nevertheless, different RoO can be applied in similar
contexts (i.e. similar objectives for preferential treatment but different methodologies for
determining origin) and some of them can severely narrow the choices firms have for locating
segments of their production abroad, discouraging the use of cheaper parts and materials from third
countries and becoming a significant brake on competitiveness. RoO can increase production and
administrative costs to the point where they exceed the benefit of the preferences conferred by the
agreements thereby reducing their utilisation.

Existing estimates of such RoO compliance costs range from 1.5 to up to 8% ad valorem equivalents,
which suggest that they significantly reduce the take up of preferential schemes. Complications
associated with RoO increase with the number of PTAs signed and the number of exported and
imported intermediate and final products, as firms have to keep track of and work around the


                                                     5
multiple RoO. These costs are of fixed nature in putting together accountability systems and thereby
affect disproportionately those operating on a lower scale, i.e. SMEs and firms in LIDCs.

Recent research shows that while RoO impede trade in general the impact is particularly strong for
trade in intermediate products. Intermediate trade is estimated to be reduced by a presence of at
least one type of RoO by some 20% and trade in final products by 6%. The equivalent average impact
of removal of external tariffs of 8% suggests that for some products RoO more than outdo the effects
of any tariff preferences. Countries which are below the level of GVC participation that would be
suggested by various structural and other policy factors tend to also be those where firms face more
restrictive RoO.

The simplest way of dealing with RoO, especially when preferential margins are small, is MFN
liberalisation of remaining tariffs, which can be undertaken unilaterally or in different negotiating
contexts. If this first best option is not feasible, different flexibility mechanisms such as de minimis,
cumulation schemes and simplification of certification can be adopted to alleviate the RoO burden.
For example, de minimis provisions allow for a specified maximum percentage of non-originating
materials to be used without affecting origin. Importantly, cumulation schemes can help deal with
overlapping sets of RoO. When three countries have three bilateral PTAs but no common PTA they
can trade at reduced costs only between each pair of countries but not within the whole area.

Depending on the level of complication and differences between the RoO in the bilateral agreements,
the so-called diagonal or cross-cumulation schemes can facilitate trade across the overlapping
agreements with positive effects on third countries. Simplification of methods for certifying origin of
goods—including dealing with cumulation schemes where they already exist—can also decrease
administrative costs for exporters, particularly for smaller firms. Adoption of preferential rules of
origin for LDCs (as stipulated in the WTO Ministerial Declarations form 2013 and 2015) could alleviate
some the burdens on the most vulnerable traders.

Proposed actions:

       Consider mechanisms that can be used to alleviate unnecessary costs of RoO with a view to
        identifying priority actions in the G20 countries. For example:
            o Commit to MFN liberalisation of remaining tariffs;
            o Commit to removing all RoO requirements on tariff flows with preference margins of
                 less than then the estimated compliance costs (e.g. 5%) in PTAs involving G20
                 countries and advocate such reforms in PTAs involving third countries.
            o Consider expanding de minimis provisions;
            o Commit to adopting the most efficient RoO flexibility mechanisms (i.e. cumulation
                 and certification simplification) in existing PTAs involving G20 countries;
            o Commit to take actions on preferential rules of origin for LDCs pursuant to the WTO
                 Ministerial Decisions of 2013 and 2015.


Further the trade facilitation agenda through completing the ratification process of the WTO Trade
Facilitation Agreement (TFA) and by complementary improvements in hard and soft infrastructure
and in logistics services quality



                                                   6
The WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), concluded in Bali in 2013 aims at expediting the
movement, release and clearance of goods. By improving the efficiency of border control procedures,
removing duplicative formalities and documentation requirements and clarifying opaque
administrative fees and charges the TFA can reduce the significant deadweight economic costs
incurred by traders at the border. OECD calculations of the potential impact of the agreement show
that these reductions can range between 12% and 14% of total trade costs, depending on the income
group of concerned countries. A more ambitious effort aiming at worldwide best practices could
entail additional cost reductions of between 2 and 4 percentage points compared to a conservative
implementation of just the mandatory provisions of the agreement. The analysis also points to a
strong positive correlation between trade facilitation performance improvements on the one hand
and participation in GVCs on the other, in particular for value-added originating in medium-low tech
industries, such as mining and quarrying or basic metals sectors, or in high and medium-high tech
industries, such as transport equipment, chemicals and electrical and optical equipment.

TFA state of implementation data shows that several provisions of the agreement appear to be
already implemented by several countries across all income groups, while expenses for improving
hard and soft infrastructure and putting in place new measures have benefitted from substantial
technical and financial assistance for trade facilitation over the last decade. The expected entry into
force of the agreement in the coming months should further reinforce this momentum.

Proposed actions:

       Ratify the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement and commit to regular reporting on its
        implementation and on progress on complementary improvements in hard and soft
        infrastructure and in logistics services quality;
       Monitor TFA implementation support and its effectiveness, including through reporting to the
        G-20 on the Aid for Trade pledge and through WTO-OECD Aid for Trade Reviews;
       Support the creation of National Trade Facilitation Committees as a vehicle of consultation
        and co-ordination among traders, government and other relevant stakeholders.




Promote existing efforts to target dedicated technical and financial support to: improve SME
information about procedures and regulations to be met to export and import; and increase their
ability to comply with international and national standards (e.g., environmental, labor, and quality),
technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures

Survey evidence collected in the context of the OECD and WTO Aid for Trade Monitoring and
Evaluation exercise in 2015 suggests that “access to information about procedures to be followed and
regulations to be met in order to export or import” represents one of the most important bottlenecks
to trade for small and medium sized enterprises. While such information costs are not necessarily high
from the point of view of large firms, they can easily be prohibitive for small and medium sized
exporters and firms in low income countries. Access to such information can be improved by
strengthening the role of national and international institutions in the collection and tailored




                                                  7
dissemination of relevant information. At the national level trade and investment support institutions
can play an important role in this regard. 2

Since many SMEs participate in GVC indirectly, through links with larger firms (often MNEs),
compliance with international standards becomes particularly relevant. Consumers and final-good
producers around the world increasingly demand products and services that are simultaneously good
for the economy, for the environment, and for society—the triple bottom line of sustainable growth.
Indeed, low labour and production costs are often an insufficient motivation for lead firms to invest
and source from SMEs. While the need to protect and inform consumers and producers through
appropriate quality standards is clear, the complexity and above all the heterogeneity of such
standards have been identified as one of the main barriers to insertion into GVCs. The ability to
adhere to environmental, labour, and quality standards matters greatly, especially for SMEs, which
typically face more difficulty in meeting them than large companies.

Divergence from international standards, discordant national standards, unnecessary technical
regulations and unduly burdensome conformity assessment procedures impose disproportionate
costs on foreign SMEs. They are often required to test and certify their products in each of the
countries where they export. These tests and certifications are costly and their multiplication
increases costs. Rejection of local certification further adds to the costs, with negative competition
effects. WTO (2012) finds that conformity assessment-related factors have a significant negative
impact on the probability of entering a market. Absence of or weaknesses in the technical
infrastructure at the national level to assess and certify compliance with foreign standards and
regulations are one of the main reasons why compliances procedures represent a bottleneck for
exporters. Increased support to the strengthening of commensurate technical environments and
increased international collaborative efforts in support of mutual recognition agreements among
accreditation bodies can contribute significantly to reducing trade costs.

Streamlining NTMs, and harmonising them between trade partners and within regions, and providing
support to improve information and ability to meet international standard can have a significant
impact in lowering trade costs, and therefore significantly improve GVC participation of SMEs and
LIDCs.

Proposed actions:

       Promote existing efforts by IOs to:
           o Back Trade and Investment Support Institutions notably by strengthening their
              capacity to provide market intelligence and information on trade-related procedures
              and regulations to SMEs.
           o Facilitate SMEs’ cross-country accreditation of international standards & certifications
              by providing capacity building and financial support to firms. The assistance should be
              geared to ease SMEs’ understanding and fulfilment of international standards,
              certification programs, and skill development. This approach could draw on lessons
              drawn from the WTO-OECD Aid for Trade Review, diagnostic tools like the World Bank
              NTM Toolkit, the new World Bank GVC Firm-level Survey, and the Practical Guides for
              SMEs on complying with ISO standards jointly published by ISO and ITC. [Note:




                                                  8
                including this recommendation assumes that the WBG or the ITC are prepared to
                implement it.]
            o   Enhance transparency on procedures, standards (including private standards) and
                regulations by leveraging existing or new national, regional and global e-platforms
                and global depositories (such as ITC’s Standards Map for the submission of
                information on private standards)
            o   Consider developing a list of NTMs by G20 countries whose streamlining would have
                the greatest impact on SME and LIDC participation in GVCs. In this respect, G20 could
                draw on the on-going OECD project on International Regulatory Co-operation - Better
                rules for globalisation;
            o   Target dedicated technical and financial support to the strengthening of national
                laboratories and other institutions involved in compliance demonstration.
            o   Support international collaborative efforts towards mutual recognition agreements
                among accreditation bodies.

Consider Eliminating “nuisance tariffs” and establishing customs de minimis levels in G20 countries
within a set timeline

Nuisance tariffs comprise import duties that are so low that it costs governments more to collect
them than the revenue they generate and those that do not have any protective or other economic
effect. While they are an inefficient source of revenue and may matter little for competition in final
product markets, they can be significant for complex GVCs with intermediate goods crossing borders
many times. In addition, even small non-MFN tariffs have compliance costs which, similar to RoO,
NTMs and other regulations (discussed below), are of fixed nature, thereby disproportionately
impacting on small-scale operations.

Elimination of nuisance tariffs has long been on the trade policy agenda and has been supported on
several occasions by the business community. Some G20 countries have introduced successful
initiatives to eliminate nuisance tariffs but not all. For example, according to WTO data, in some G20
countries the percentage of tariff lines or imports where applied tariff rate lies between zero and 5%
are still as high as 40%.

The impact of suspending nuisance tariffs is likely to be minimal for G20 economies as a whole but
significant for SMEs (including those in G20 countries) and LIDC firms. Defining nuisance tariff levels
with a view to their subsequent abolition may have to take into account country and market
specificities (e.g. the efficiency and organisation of customs and other sources of revenue collection)
and therefore sharing of past experiences in this area across G20 members can be a worthwhile
exercise.

A complementary action that should be considered is raising customs de minimis levels. Customs de
minmis are thresholds for streamlined border clearance and exemption of customs duties and other
taxes. This category of imports typically encompasses large numbers of relatively small shipments
which are costly for customs to process, do not endanger border security and do not generate much
customs revenue. Like nuisance tariffs, they are however disproportionately harmful for e-commerce
and small businesses.




                                                  9
Proposed actions:

       Define “nuisance tariff level”;
       Perform sensitivity analysis, study the impact of suspending all nuisance tariffs at MFN and
        preferential levels (at different arbitrarily defined echelons e.g. 3% or less, 5% or less) on
        goods imported by the G20 using a quantitative model-based assessment and review of
        previous nuisance tariff removal initiatives already implemented by G20 and other countries;
       Commit to the elimination of “nuisance tariff levels” in G20 countries within a set timeline;
       Raise customs de minimis levels to enable e-commerce, which could be of particular value for
        SMEs.


2. Targeted capacity building initiatives for better GVC integration in developing countries

Promote efforts to better understand how to increase SME and LIDC firms’ productivity and boost
innovative capacity to facilitate upgrading of these firms in value chains through spillovers from FDI

The broader challenge for many SMEs is to increase productivity and strengthen internal capabilities
to innovate in order to move up the value chain. Co-operation with partners upstream and
downstream is critical in this respect and can improve the firm’s efficiency via knowledge spill-overs.

Attracting foreign direct investment (FDI), facilitating outward investment with highest spill-over and
forging strong links between MNEs and their local suppliers tends to result in diffusion of knowledge,
technology adoption, and know-how from foreign investors. GVCs generate demand and assistance
effects in the countries in which they are present and these in turn translate into diffusion of
knowledge and technology in the supplier industry and into increases in the availability and quality of
inputs in the buyer industry. The presence of larger MNEs therefore provides (and indeed, often,
means) incentives for local suppliers to upgrade their technology, which may in turn also lead to
knowledge spill-overs to other local firms (e.g. through labour movements).

The ability of SMEs to take advantage of the presence of large MNEs within value chains is affected
importantly by the value chains’ governance structure as well as by the wide range of factors
mentioned earlier in this action plan and in the report Inclusive GVCs (e.g. firms’ managerial capacity,
firm-level access to market information, ability to comply with standards, access to finance, skills and
markets, and ability to innovate). For most of these factors successful integration and strengthening
participation in GVCs have been demonstrated to depend a combination of firm-level characteristics,
geographical and sectoral characteristics, and policy. Hence there is scope for engaging in diagnostic
studies at country and regional level in order to identify which policies actually work and under what
conditions have the highest potential for investment spill-overs.

Maximising the potential for creating links between MNEs and local firms and for the diffusion of the
most up-to-date and productive technology requires also supporting the absorptive capacity of firms
in host countries, as well as improving the business climate and institutions, including financial and
labour markets. To generate spill-overs, policies need to ensure the quality of inputs and outputs, in
particular education, skills development, product standards, innovation, and environmental, social,
and labour standards.



                                                  10
Proposed actions:

           Promote ongoing IOs’ investments in strengthening micro-level data collection and
            country and region-specific analysis of firms in LIDCs to identify the factors that foster
            long-term links between MNEs and local SMEs, as well as the channels through which
            MNEs help SMEs to entry or upgrade their participation GVCs (e.g., technology transfer,
            knowledge sharing, financial support, access to inputs, etc.). Relevant work in this area is
            already being pursued the ITC, World Bank Group, OECD and UNIDO;
           Support discussions involving the B20—in particular of its taskforce members, i.e.
            Accenture, the B20 Secretariat, and the World SME Forum—and IOs to: i) lead the
            discussion on forging links between SMEs and MNEs; ii) form value chain MNEs-led
            consortium and help matching SMEs with these potential buyers and suppliers; iii)
            prioritize reforms in each country; and iv) ask each G20 country to put in place a strategy
            based on the two above inputs.

Increase SME productivity and boost innovative capacity to upgrade in value chains through access
to ICT, SME-friendly IPR system and addressing informality

Improving SMEs’ and LIDCs’ access to and use of ICTs and other digital technologies will also help
boost innovation and upgrading in value chains. This involves fostering good Internet connectivity of
SMEs (e.g. high-speed broadband) and ensuring an open Internet so that SMEs can benefit from the
full breath of digital services and applications. At the same time, the development of policies to
increase ICT adoption within SMEs—for example targeting big companies to increase ICT adoption in
SMEs that are part of big companies’ supply chains—are important, as is the promotion of digital
skills. All of these issues will be covered in the digital economy pillar of the G20 Framework for
Innovative Growth.

Another important dimension for innovating to upgrade in value chains is the ability of SMEs to
manage and protect their intellectual assets. IPRs are important for SMEs to position themselves
competitively vis-à-vis larger firms in global markets; signal current and prospective value to
competitors and partners; and to access knowledge networks. Governments can make the IPR system
overall more SME-friendly by streamlining procedures and reducing application time, adequately
structuring fees and costs, and by improving litigation and enforcement mechanisms. Governments
can also improve access to information on IPRs, including foreign IP systems and raise awareness
about the variety of IP instruments and their strategic objectives.

Addressing informality in the economy is another priority to improve GVC participation. The majority
of firms in most developing countries are informal. Therefore, harnessing the growth potential of
dynamic and innovative firms operating in the informal economy by removing the disincentives from
going to the formal market, particularly for informal businesses that prevail in the downstream parts
of GVCs and in LIDCs, is a pre-condition to making GVCs inclusive.

Proposed actions:

           In the context of the already existing digital economy pillar of the G20 Framework for
            Innovative Growth, G20 should establish an action plan to empower SMEs to leverage
            the digital economy, including better ICT infrastructure and services sector efficiency to
            reduce SMEs’ costs, both physical (“hard infrastructure”) and digital (sharing of available
                                                  11
             information), as well as improvement in the regulatory environment for digitally enabled
             activities;
            Develop a set of good practice polices to make IPR systems overall more SME-friendly;
            Establish a G20 mechanism to improve access to information on IPRs in G20 countries.
             More comprehensive information on IP systems among the G20 could be provided by
             national IP bodies to better inform and assist SMEs seeking to internationalise. This
             mechanism could also be used to raise awareness among SMEs about the variety of IP
             instruments and their strategic objectives;
            Ask each G20 country to put in place a strategy based on the above inputs.

Strengthen collaboration and dialogue across countries, with a view to establishing global platforms
for information exchange, learning, and support to capacity building; and financing instruments
well adapted to GVCs

SMEs and LIDCs need capacity building that they can use to enter into, gain from, and upgrade within
GVCs according to their own development strategies. Effective capacity building in developing
countries requires interventions at the country level to facilitate the national agenda on productivity
and competitiveness and for developing quality national infrastructure. Yet, a collective effort of
relevant multilateral institutions, organisations and initiatives, as well as of the private sector and
development partners is important, in particular in two areas. First, there is a need to establish global
platforms for information exchange and learning. Disseminating best practices is critical for scale-up
and replication across sectors and countries of initiatives that succeed in enhancing countries’
economic and social improvement through integration in GVCs. Second, international coordination
may help developing financing instruments adapted to the reality of GVCs.

Proposed actions (in collaboration with B20 and WSF):

        Consider a feasibility study on the applicability of a framework for strengthening
         collaboration and dialogue among countries participating in GVCs. This may take inspiration
         from the G20 Agricultural Market Information System (AMIS) framework and could build on
         the experiences gathered through existing global platforms for policy dialogue and
         knowledge sharing (e.g. the OECD Initiative on Global Value Chains (GVCs), Production
         Transformation and Development)
        Consider a feasibility study to create customizable knowledge and learning instruments and
         support existing or new global, regional, and local platforms that can facilitate SMEs capacity
         building and/or the dissemination of knowledge and exchange of best practices and relevant
         information for SMEs.
        Consider preparing a strategy for facilitating financing of firms in GVCs, through promoting
         financing policies that have a multi-pronged approach, including for example, regional
         connectivity between countries engaged in the same GVCs but at different level of
         development, private-public partnerships and engagement, cross-border projects and
         sectoral coverage, non-punitive provisions for failure and bankruptcy, account of intrinsic
         know-how, pool of talent, distribution channels, business relationships, business models,
         and access to technology in valuation of repayment ability; etc.
        Ask each G20 country to put in place a strategy based on the above inputs.




                                                   12
3. Priority actions to expand data and analytical capacity

Capitalise on existing, and invest in strengthening, micro-level data of firms in LIDCs and G20
countries

In recent years significant efforts, across a number of fronts, have been made to improve the
statistical evidence needed to interpret and analyse GVCs. Well-known recent examples of
improvements in macro-level measurement and analysis include measures of trade in value added,
such as the Input-Output and Supply-Use tables that underpin the OECD-WTO TiVA initiative, and
other related exercises (including WIOD, EORA MRIO, Asian Development Bank MRIO, IDE JETRO Asian
International Input-Output Tables, EXIOPOL Multi-regional Database, World Bank Export of Value
Added Database) as well as databases such as the World Bank Labour Content of Export (LACEX)
database, which quantify the direct and indirect contribution of labour in different sectors and in
GVCs. Concerning the OECD-WTO database, efforts are on-going to expand the coverage of countries
included, in particular to LIDCs, where coverage remains sketchy, partly reflecting the availability (or
rather lack-of) of national supply-use and input-output tables. WTO is increasingly active in this area,
working to ensure data gathering efforts expand to developing and LDC members. National statistical
institutions should be better involved in these efforts; indeed, the UN Statistical Commission
highlighted in 2015 the importance of improving the coverage and quality of trade and business
statistics. Considering the crucial role of the services sector in GVC upgrading and its potential for job
creation, improving the coverage of services and trade in services in many developing countries
remains a priority. The G20 could play a strong role here in supporting capacity building exercises to
develop these tables.

But improving the quality and availability of macro data only partially responds to the GVC agenda and
it is now readily accepted across the international statistical community that a ‘whole of value chain’
approach to GVC policy making requires a similar ‘joined-up’ perspective at the statistical level, that
can provide the evidence needed for a holistic perspective; one that fully articulates the role of the
different actors involved, including, in particular, MNEs and SMEs. Although, none of the macro-
initiatives described above are currently able to respond to this challenge (as they provide a sectoral
and not necessarily firm-based perspective), progress is being made. In 2013 the OECD launched an
Expert Group to tackle this lacuna head on by developing extensions to standard national supply-use
tables that capitalise on, and integrate, more granular conventional data sets, such as: (Structural
Business Statistics (SBS, with breakdowns of activity by size class); Trade by Enterprise Characteristics
(TEC, showing the activities of importing and exporting firms, again by size class); and Foreign Affiliate
Trade Statistics (FATS). However, in LIDC countries, and even in some G20 countries, data constraints
exist, fundamentally relating to the availability of firm-level data, in particular relating to foreign
owned affiliates.

In this context, the G20 could significantly support investment in strengthening micro-level data
collection that would provide the basis for the development of extended supply-use tables and the
analysis of firms in LIDCs and G20 countries. This includes leveraging existing tools such as the World
Bank Group Enterprise Surveys, or new tools being developed, such the new World Bank Group
initiative to develop firm-level surveys, which will delve deeper into the subject of GVC participation
and upgrading, across all areas of relevance providing more granular information for evidence-based
policy making, including issues such as: (i)sourcing practices to export performance and production
costs; (ii) technology, innovation, and skills; (iii)- compliance with international standards (e.g.,
environmental, labor, and quality); and (iv) links between MNEs and SMEs. Other World Bank Group
                                                   13
surveys on microenterprises, on the informal sector, and sector-specific and ad hoc surveys may also
be leveraged.

Support from the G20 would also be useful in reinforcing additional data developments on services
and trade in services statistics, where coverage is often imperfect, business demography statistics that
would be particularly useful for analysis on SMEs, providing evidence on the prevalence of high-
growth enterprises, gazelles, start-ups and exits across LIDCs (building on the OECD and Eurostat—the
Statistical Office of the European Commission—work in this area), as well as on the development of
new information relating to business functions undertaken within firms and the skills and occupations
of employees within firms—an important component of any dataset that attempts to shed light on
upgrading.

Proposed actions:

       Support IOs’ efforts to invest in strengthening micro-level data collection and analysis of firms
        in LIDCs and G20 countries to provide granular information for GVC evidence-based policy
        making.

       Develop an inventory of available firm-level data sources and similarities and differences
        between them with a view to identifying data collection and the associated funding needs
        that could provide, in particular, the basis for developing extended supply-use tables.

4. Selected references

Cadot, O., Carrere, C., de Melo, J. and Tumurchudar, B. (2005), ‘Product specific rules of origin in EU
and US preferential trading arrangements: an assessment’, CERDI Working Papers, no. 2005-08,
Clermont-Ferrand, France.

Cadot, O., de Melo, J., Estevadeordal, A., Suwa-Eisermann, A. and Tumurchudar, B. (2002), ‘Assessing
the effect of NAFTA’s rules of origin’, Research Unit Working Papers, no. 0306, Laboratoire
d'Economie Appliquee, INRA, Paris.

Cadot, O. Fernandes, A. M., Gourdon, J. and A. Mattoo (2015), “Are the Benefits of Export Support
Durable? Evidence from Tunisia”, Journal of International Economics.

Evenett, S. and J. Fritz (2015), The tide turns? Falling world trade and the G20, VoxEU Column, 12
November 2015.

Ferrantino, M. (2012), “Using Supply Chain Analysis to Examine the Costs of Non-Tariff Measu5res and
the Benefits of Trade Facilitation”, WTO Staff Working Paper ERSD-2012-02.

Gereffi, Humphrey and Sturgeon (2005) : The Governance of Global Value Chains, Review of
International Political Economy, 12,1: 78-104.

Kummritz, V., D. Taglioni, and D. Winkler (2016) “Economic Upgrading through Global Value Chain
Participation: Which Policies Increase the Value Added Gains?”, World Bank.

International Trade Centre (2015) : SME Competitiveness Outlook 2015.
                                                   14
International Trade Centre (2016): “Investing in Trade Promotion Generates Revenue”

Lederman, D., Olarreaga, M., & Payton, L. (2010). Export promotion agencies: Do they work?. Journal
of Development Economics, 91(2), 257-265.;


Meltzer, J. (2015), A New Agenda for Digital Trade, e15-initiative overview paper on digital economy
http://e15initiative.org/publications/a-new-digital-trade-agenda/

OECD (2016) (forthcoming), Cadestin, C., Gourdon, J. and P. Kowalski, “participation in Global Value
Chains in Latin America: Implications for Trade and Trade-related Policy”, OECD Trade Policy Paper,
OECD Publishing.

OECD, WTO, and UNCTAD (2013), “Implications of Global Value Chains for Trade, Investment,
Development, and Jobs.” Report prepared for the G-20 Leaders Summit Saint Petersburg (Russian
Federation). http://www.oecd.org/sti/ind/G20-Global-Value-Chains-2013.pdf .

OECD, WTO, and World Bank (2014), “Global Value Chains: Challenges, Opportunities, and
Implications for Policy.” Report prepared for the G20 Trade Ministers Meeting, Sydney, Australia, July
19.

OECD-World    Bank     (2015),  “   Inclusive   Global   value            Chains”,    available    at:
http://www.oecd.org/trade/OECD-WBG-g20-gvc-report-2015.pdf

Productivity Commission (2004), Rules of Origin under the Australia–New Zealand Closer Economic
Relations Trade Agreement, Research Report, Canberra.

SECO (2013), Cross-Cumulation in Free Trade Agreements Opportunities, Potential and Challenges,
Grundlagen der Wirtschaftspolitik, Nr. 21, Switzerland.

UNCTAD (2013), Information Economy Report 2013 – The Cloud Economy and Developing Countries,
United Nations Publications.

UNIDO (2009), ” Expert Group Meeting: Developing a Value Chain Diagnostics Tool for Common
Practice at UNIDO”, UNIDO, Vienna.




                                                 15
                                                    Annex

Priority areas identified in the 2015 OECD-World Bank report on Inclusive Global Value Chains

 1. Priority areas for trade and investment policy
 What: Establish a trade and investment action plan for inclusiveness defining clear and achievable
 objectives on trade and investment policy and identify the necessary complementary actions on the
 domestic agenda
 Why the G20 can help: The G20 platform could address coordination failures between and within
 countries through a comprehensive action plan focusing on: treating trade and foreign direct investment,
 both inward and outward in an integrated framework; giving as much consideration to imports and
 timeliness as to exports and market access; and by streamlining import tariffs and simplifying export
 procedure. Systems in place in the G20 finance track can be of guidance.
 Items for consideration to be included in the trade and investment action plan            National Collective
 for inclusiveness                                                                         initiative Action
 Further the trade facilitation agenda through completing the ratification process of
 the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) and by complementary improvements                 
 in hard and soft infrastructure, and in logistics services quality
 Better harness the challenges for SMEs to be competitive in GVCs, by relaxing
 policies such as rules of origin, and by agreeing to bring other policies, such as
 competition principles or standards, to the international level of policy; and through                
 dedicated funding to aid for trade or through other capacity building efforts
 supporting SMEs preparedness to comply with regulations
 Reform, nationally and in coordination with other G20, business services sectors in
 key network industries such as logistics, supply chain management services, ICT-
                                                                                                       
 related services, e-commerce, and professional services, by removing barriers to
 entry and improving pro-competitive regulation
 Engage GVC lead firms, turnkey suppliers, global buyers, and SMEs in identifying
 binding constraints and solutions to investment attraction and promotion, for
 improving investment climate and SMEs absorptive capacity, particularly in sectors
                                                                                                       
 known to generate strong upstream and downstream SME linkages, such as services,
 knowledge based industries, and manufacturing sectors where specialization and
 branding are important.
 Establish a G20 platform for identifying and implementing measures for the
 reduction of contractual frictions that act as a disincentive to the outsourcing and
 offshoring of valuable innovative assets. Prioritize minimizing transaction costs for             
 SMEs (both G20 micro-multinationals and investors and LIDCs users of imported
 IP)
 While developing and implementing rigorous IP legislation in G20 countries to
 protect innovative assets and attract foreign owned technology, minimize transaction
 costs for SMEs by streamlining procedures and ensuring high-quality examination to                    
 increase IP signalling value
  Address SMEs and LIDCs competition concerns regarding behaviour of large
  MNEs or anti-SMEs biases in the current functioning of supply chains though                          
  establishing a dialogue on inclusiveness in GVCs with the B20
  Enhance cooperation and coordination between development partners, at the
  multilateral, regional, and bilateral level, with a view to making aid work better for               
  trade, investment, and inclusive growth

                                                      16
Jump-start the trade and investment action plan by few concrete actions
  Establish a trade and investment action plan for inclusiveness
  Commit to relaxing policies on rules of origin in G20 countries
  Aid for Trade and other programs could increase their focus on supporting SMEs preparedness to
   comply with trade and investment regulations
  Establish a collaboration with the B20 to identify key binding constraints and solutions for fostering
   supplier diversity, focusing on efficiency of logistics services delivery, and MNE-SME linkages


2. Priority areas for capacity building
What: Complement trade, investment and complementary domestic policy actions by providing the
needed political leadership and support to collaboration across the public and private sector and
establishment of global platforms for sharing bets practices.
What role for the G20: To help SMEs and LIDCs in developing new areas of growth and to
engage in international markets, a shared strategic vision and greater collective action to target the
major constraints are needed. The G20 can offer the needed political leadership and clout with the
private sector to leverage GVCs for a “race to the top” in participating countries.

Addressing informality                                                    National          Collective
                                                                         initiative          Action
Harness the growth potential of dynamic and innovative firms
operating in the informal economy by removing the
disincentives of going to the formal market, particularly for                              
informal businesses that seem to prevail in the downstream
parts of GVCs in LIDCs.
Policies for improving firms’ productivity through learning, innovation, skill building,
upgrading,
and peer exchange
  Foster the development of managerial skills and the adoption
  of sound managerial practices, vocational training, and                     
  lifelong education.

  Remove regulatory and other barriers to the growth and
  scaling of SMEs, notably young and innovative SMEs,                         
  including barriers to entry, growth and exit of firms.

  Encourage collaboration with lead firms and global buyers to
  train local staff as a more efficient means of knowledge
                                                                              
  transfer; information is up-to-date and corresponds to the
  needs of the lead firms.

  Assist SMEs in the use of freely available technologies or the
                                                                                               
  acquisition of technological licensing agreements.

  Ensure that quality certification, technical regulations,
  standards, and conformity assessment procedures are non-                                     
  discriminatory and do not create unnecessary obstacles to
  trade; aid for trade programs could also focus on building

                                                    17
capacity in LIDCs and for SMEs for the adoption of standards
that lead to quality, productivity, and welfare upgrading;
facilitate public and private sector preparedness to standards
upgrading; promote convergence of public and private
voluntary standards so to reduce costs; inform above processes
through national and international guidelines.

Connectivity

ICT and broadband connectivity: Strengthen broadband
networks and improve access and competition. Foster services
                                                                         
sector efficiency improvements and collective efforts to
facilitate SMEs’ and LIDCs’ access to ICT networks

Provide assistance to SMEs and firms in LIDCs, including
through electronic platforms that help domestic firms acquire            
foreign technology and commercialize their IP

Physical connectivity and logistics: Assist countries in
effectively implementing all aspects of logistics and transport
sector reforms; Support capacity building to customize                   
approaches to meet specific needs, operational circumstances,
and national connectivity priorities

Provide a continuum of potential support activities for both
ICT and physical connectivity, from infrastructure building to
logistics and e-commerce performance assessments, to the
                                                                         
development of practical implementation plans, to the
identification of sources of financing for implementation
plans.

Financing

Enable finance that takes into account intrinsic know-how,
pool of talent, distribution channels, business relationships,
                                                                  
business models, and access to technology in valuation of
repayment ability;

Global platforms for capacity building:

Establish, or support scaling up of global platforms for
sharing best practices, learning, e-learning and exchange;
foster private sector involvement on global platforms and                
use for exchange of goods, services, and for cross-border
financing solutions.

Provide holistic, country-focused, multi-stakeholder
approach to capacity building, sustained over time,
including engagement of local and international private                  
sector (local suppliers, global leads, buyers, advanced
consumers) and of development partners and creation of
private sector supplier base for advisory services on

                                                  18
 capacity building


 Jump-start the domestic complementary measures to the trade and investment action plan
 by few concrete actions
     Establish a collaboration with the B20 to identify key binding constraints and solutions for
      fostering supplier diversity, starting from addressing challenges in the areas of IP protection
      and technology transfer, quality, certification, standards, and efficiency of logistics services
      delivery
     Support mature local, regional, and global facilities in the dissemination and scaling up of best
      practices in the public and private sector sharing knowledge
     Establish an action plan for universal ICT and broadband connectivity and for empowering
      SMEs to leverage the digital economy



3. Priority areas for expanding statistical basis and analytics

What: Provide political support for the establishment of a realistic multi-year plan to expand and
upgrade the statistical foundation necessary to increase the capacity of all countries to identify and
implement policies that can contribute to stronger, more inclusive and sustainable growth and
development, globally.
Why the G20 can help: The G20 is ideally placed to foster and support the generation of improved
evidence-based analysis and policy advice, at national and multilateral levels, through individual
government action and through relevant international and regional organizations.
                                                                                   National     Collective
                                                                                   initiative    Action
Investments in strengthening micro-level data collection and analysis of firms
in LIDCs and G20 countries, including by leveraging existing tools such as the
World Bank Group Enterprise Surveys and the other World Bank Group                                  
surveys on microenterprises, on the informal sector, and sector-specific and
ad hoc surveys.

Improvement in quality and availability of macro data in line with international
standards, including Input-output and supply-use tables for the OECD-WTO                            
TiVA databases well as SBS, FATS, BD and TEC.

Impact evaluations of policy interventions at the firm level                                        


                                       ___________________




                                                  19
