                   Investing in Africa’s Agriculture:                           August 31, 2016
   Solidifying Foundation for Sustainable and Inclusive Development

Agriculture in Africa today offers great promise for economic growth, poverty reduction, and
environmental sustainability.     However, despite vast agriculture potential, including an
inexpensive labor force, abundant unused fertile farm land, and rich but untapped water resources,
Africa remains a net importer of agricultural products. Increased agricultural productivity and

              Box 1: Highlights of China’s Agricultural Development Experience
 China’s extremely successful development started with revitalizing the agriculture sector in the
 early 1980s. Since then, agriculture has been treated as strategically important, and policy and
 financial support provided. Eight areas are key to the transformation of China’s agriculture
 sector in the past 35 years:
  Land reform : dismantling People’s Communes and granting smallholder farms with
     increasingly secure land tenure;
  Price policy changes: agriculture output prices rose in the first ten years of China’s economic
     reform;
  Liberalizing markets: it took about 20 years to fully liberalize domestic agricultural output
     markets and integrate China with the international market;
  Investing in agricultural technology: since 2000, China has increased investment into
     agriculture research faster than any other country;
  Investing in rural infrastructure: public expenditure has been mainly used to improve rural
     infrastructure, including roads, irrigation systems, schools, drinking water, and clinics;
  Rural industrialization and off-farm jobs: at its peak level, rural enterprises accounted for 20
     percent of national employment, 28 percent of industrial output, and 48% of exports;
  National poverty reduction program for lagging areas: the central government has invested
     about US$ 8 billion annually in poverty reduction funding for the lagging areas since early
     1990s through three- 10 year’s plans, continuously fine-tuning targeting;
  Providing subsidies: focusing on high yield seeds, agriculture inputs, and machinery.
 Source: World Bank summary.

production are imperative to the continent’s sustainable development and food security. China’s
experience demonstrates that with the right policy choices, sustained commitment, and effective
implementation, smallholder agriculture can be transformed into a dynamic economic force.

Appropriate policy responses are needed to address issues such as globalization, demographics
and climate change that are affecting agriculture on the continent. These include a) improving
agricultural productivity and climate resilience; b) strengthening smallholders’ links to markets; c)
facilitating agribusiness and rural non-farm job opportunities; d) reducing risk, vulnerability, and
gender inequality; and e) enhancing environmental services and sustainability.

Improving agricultural productivity in African countries is essential to increase rural incomes,
improve food security, and respond to urbanization. The total food and beverage market in Sub-
Saharan Africa is expected to reach $1 trillion by 2030, offering huge opportunities to producers,
provided production can meet demand. But at the same time, adoption and expansion of climate

                                                 1
smart agriculture and a holistic approach to long-term risk and integrated landscape manageme nt
are needed to increase resilience to climate change and lower agriculture’s net greenhouse gas
emissions.

Improved agricultural output          requires strategic prioritization       of agriculture    and
investments in five key areas :

Irrigation. Irrigation for agriculture in Africa, especially Sub-Saharan Africa, is the lowest of any
region in the world, and a main reason why the Green Revolution has largely bypassed the
continent. Yet the value of irrigation is remarkable: 6 percent of irrigated agriculture accounts for
nearly 38 percent of the continent’s agricultural output value. Increasing the cultivated area under
irrigation and ensuring sustainable use of water resources has huge potential for increasing
agricultural productivity and production.

Infrastructure. In addition to water, the continent’s poor rural infrastructure poses a significa nt
challenge to farmers and traders. The African Postharvest Losses Information System estimates
that between 10 and 23 percent of total cereal production goes to waste post-harvest. Of this, 2 to
5 percent is due to farm storage, 1 to 2 percent occurs during transport to market, 2 to 4 percent is
wasted in market storage facilities. In 2011, the World Bank reported that grain losses in Sub-
Saharan Africa amounts to US$4bn each year, more than annual food aid received and equivale nt
to the annual caloric requirement of 48 million people.

Agriculture value chains. Adopting an agricultural value chain approach increases investme nt,
raises productivity, stimulates agribusiness and non-farm employment, and links to local and
global markets. An integrated value chain that offers opportunities at various stages and includes
access to finance is particularly important to attract private investment in agriculture. Given that
value chains vary both by country and product, opportunities need to be identified and constraints
addressed for them to be successfully exploited.

Mechanization. Sub-Saharan Africa has the lowest power usage (manual, animal and mechanic a l)
and the lowest level of farm mechanization in the world. Tractor usage is about 10 percent of the
average usage in other regions. Increasing the levels of smallholder farm mechanization is a major
means of raising agricultural production in many countries. Greater access to affordable farm
machinery produced in China and India that is more suitable for African conditions provides an
opportunity for increased mechanization.

Technology and training. Technology and innovation has tremendous potential to increase
agricultural productivity, enhance the integration of value chains, and improve market
performance. Use of ICT has already increased prices paid to African farmers by 10-20 percent,
increased traders’ profits, and reduced prices to consumers. To take full advantage of technology,
more African-based research and development, and stronger links to extension services are needed.

South-South Cooperation can help African countries benefit from successful experiences in
China and other countries. Through mutual sharing and exchange of development solutio ns —
knowledge, experience and good practices, policies, technology and resources—countries can
learn from each other and build technical networks to further cooperation.

                                                 2
