Structural and Rural Transformation in Africa: Challenges, Opportunities
and Implications for Policy and Investments 1

    1. Introduction

The dominant narrative about social and economic development in Africa - in recent decades
- is one of a fast-transforming continent showing mixed but generally positive performance.
Increasing c ommodity export earnings, fast agricultural growth, better economic policy,
improved governance, and more regional integration, have all underpinned rapid economic
growth in the turn into the 21st century.

Urbanization is proceeding fast, and so are the linkages with rural areas. As incomes grow
and diets diversify, the demand for food generally shifts from basic staples to horticultural
and livestock products, calling for a shift in production structure. But evidence suggests that
while such a shift is occurring in some countries, it is not yet the norm continent-wide.
Agricultural growth, while occurring, is not primarily driven by gains in productivity, not ye t
diversified, and broad-based.

Overall, growth has not had the expected or desired impact on poverty reduction – average
national poverty incidence rates have dropped since the 1990s, but only modestly, from 56%
to 43% in 2012. Alarmingly, during the same period the absolute number of poor people has
actually increased, with the most optimistic scenario showing about 330 million poor in 2012,
up from about 280 million in 1990 (Beegle et al., 2016). Thus, while the generally optimistic
African narrative is justified, it must be tempered by recognition of challenging trends and
enduring gaps that threaten progress in sustainably reducing and eliminating poverty and
generating shared prosperity.

This paper presents an analysis of structural and rural transformation and links to rural
inclusion in Sub-Saharan Africa. It sets out prevailing structural dynamics in African
economies (section 2), before exploring key transformations under way (section 3). With
reference to this context, section 4 describes the key challenges for promoting inclusive rural
and structural transformation in Africa while section 5 summarizes some of the key
implications for investment and policy.


    2. The Dynamics of structural and rural transformation in Africa

Structural transformation (ST) reflects changes in the relative contributions of agriculture,
services, and manufacturing in an economy. Rural transformation (RT) is embedded within
structural transformation, as rural people change their occupations, invest, diversify
livelihoods, and relate differently to each other within their families, communities, and social
institutions. This paper investigates how these two processes are unfolding in Africa today,
the role of agriculture within them, and the prospects for inclusive development.

In this analysis structural transformation is defined by the share of non-agriculture in the
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), the pace of structural transformation is measured as the
average annual percentage change of non-agriculture in GDP over the period 1995-2015.
Rural transformation is defined by the level of agricultural labour productivity and its pace
measured as the average annual percentage change in agricultural value added per worker.
For both, a positive value represents more transformation. Inclusion is defined by the level of
poverty headcount and its pace measured as the average annual percentage change in the
extreme ($1.25/day) rural poverty rate. A larger negative value represents a greater
reduction in rural poverty or increased inclusion. The analysis uses data ranging from the
mid-1990s (circa 1995) to early 2010s (circa 2012).




1
 This paper is based on content of the IFAD 2016 Rural Development Report’s Africa Chapter on Inclusive Rural
Transformation, by Steven Omamo, Rui Benfica, Karen Brooks and David Suttie.

                                                     1
The analysis uses the relative pace of structural transformation, rural transformation and
poverty reduction to test hypothesis such as: (a) are countries experiencing rapid
transformation being more inclusive? (b) Are there countries experiencing rapid inclusion
without transforming structurally, or rurally?

 The performance on these three indicators is tracked for 28 countries in East and Southern
Africa (ESA) and West and Central Africa (WCA) from the mid-1990s to early 2010s.
Performance in each country is analysed relative to averages across all countries in their
respective sub-region. The overwhelming number of countries showing more rapid reduction
in rural poverty (15) shows rapid structural transformation (13), rapid rural transformation
with slow ST (2), or both rapid ST and RT (6). In no Sub-Saharan African country has rural
poverty declined significantly without rapid structural or rural transformation. The
overwhelming majority of countries experiencing slow ST, 7 out of 9, experienced slow
poverty reduction. Figure 1 summarizes the results. Annex Table 1 presents the list of
countries included in this analysis and how they perform with respect to the transformation
and inclusion outcomes.

Figure 1. A view of Africa’s transformation and inclusion outcomes




Source: Authors.

These results confirm the hypotheses that countries experiencing rapid structural and/or rural
change will see rapid reduction of rural poverty, and those with little change in either
dimension will not. Given the role of agriculture as a driver of rural transformation – in
particular driven by productivity improvements initially and then by broader technical change
therein - as well as its role in catalysing structural transformation, a strategic investment
focus in the sector, in addition to related rural non-farm sectors emerging as agriculture
develops, is justified.

Africa’s structural transformation has similarities to historical transformation processes
observed in other regions. The regularity of agriculture’s relative shrinkage as a share of both
GDP and labour is well illustrated for a set of Sub-Saharan African countries in Figure 2. At
low levels of GDP per capita, agriculture’s share is large, and the proportion of the labour
force employed in agriculture is even larger due to low labour productivity. As agricultural
productivity and incomes rise, agriculture’s relative share falls, but that of labour falls even
faster as farm workers exit and the productivity of those who remain rises. Eventually, at
very high levels of GDP per capita, primary agriculture is a small share of the economy
although the agrifood industry as a whole is larger, agricultural labour as a share of the work
force is small, and those employed on farms have about the same productivity per worker as
those employed elsewhere.


                                               2
Figure 2. Shares of agriculture in total employment and GDP, 2010-2013




Source: World Development Indicators.

Attracting private investment into agriculture and the rural nonfarm economy in Africa will be
critical. However, the current policy and business environment in many parts of the continent
actually serve to deter rather than encourage such investment. Reforming the regulations
that limit private entry and investment in value chains that serve smallholders must be a
priority. Innovation in the information and communications technologies must continue,
aiming to deepen access to credit and financial services, and to other information-based
resources – in particular among the continent's bulging youth population.


   3. Transformative trends and patterns in Africa economy-wide structural shifts

Agriculture is the most important sector in most African countries, with agricultural value
added averaging 24 per cent of GDP for the region as a whole. Agro-industry is also
predominant in the manufacturing sector, unlike other regions where light and heavy
manufacturing are more prominent than food processing. While productivity improvements in
agriculture as a whole – and among smallholders in particular - are particularly important at
the beginning of structural transformation, as the latter process unfolds the development of
agro-industry becomes a key element of industrialization and employment generation. Agro-
industry, defined as a component of industrial activity where value is added to agricultural
produce through processing and handling operations, is typically a significant component of
the emergence of industry. As illustrated in Figure 3, this is demonstrated by the tendency of
agribusiness real output per capita, which includes agro-industry and related services, to rise
as GDP progresses during structural transformation, only declining later, at much higher
levels of development (de Janvry, 2009). The importance of agriculture thus exceeds that of
primary production, and is likely to grow with continued transformation of food systems and
lagging growth in manufacturing.

Figure 3. Structural Transformation and Agrifood Industry Trends, 1990/00-2011/12




Source: IFAD calculations, based on UNIDO and World Development Indicators.

                                               3
The service sector is broadly defined and covers much that is “in between” agriculture and
industry, including trade and transport, personal services, machinery repair, tailoring,
carpentry, social services and activities of the nongovernmental organization (NGO) sector,
as well as highly skill-intensive services in finance, insurance, health, and education. Most of
the service jobs are unskilled and informal, and employees of those small-scale enterprises
are often family members. Entry costs are low. Technical change in transportation,
communications, and financial services has allowed productivity to grow. The rise of the
service sector suggests that productivity and earnings must be somewhat higher than in
agriculture, but probably not by much at the entry level. World Bank Living Standards
Measurement Study-Integrated Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA) data confirm that a
positive productivity gradient exists, but it is not very steep (McCullough, 2015).

Developments in food systems

Food systems transformation is a central feature of broader changes. Africa is no exception in
that respect, as major changes are underway in the structure and functioning of food systems
in many countries. Interlocking networks of relationships for production, processing,
distribution, and consumption of food commodities are shifting dramatically. Capacity to meet
quality standards is increasingly crucial to access value chains (Reardon and Timmer, 2012;
Tschirley et al., 2015a and 2015b).

Comprehensive data are not yet available, but several case studies suggest that African food
markets have expanded hugely. Reardon et al. (2015) estimate that between 1970 and 2010,
rural-urban food supply chains in Africa moved about five times more food to the emerging
proliferating cities, the rural market volume of purchases of food expanded eight times, and
the total volume of marketed food expanded six times, with much of the upsurge happening
in the 1990s and 2000s.

The number of cities with more than 1 million inhabitants in Africa rose from two in 1950 to
50 in 2010, and is projected to rise to 93 by 2025. Smaller cities are growing even faster.
The World Bank (2013) estimates that urban food markets will increase fourfold to exceed
US$400 billion by 2030.

Urbanization and new consumption patterns have fuelled a sharp shift in diets beyond grains
into non-grain foods, such as dairy, fish, meat, vegetables, fruit, and tubers, and heavily into
processed foods. Despite the persistence of poverty, average income s have risen and a
middle class is emerging in several countries, further stimulating demand growth and
diversification. The share of Africa's population in the middle class (with an income of $2-$20
a day in 2005 purchasing power parity, PPP, terms) rose from 24 per cent in 1990 to 33 per
cent in 2008. As the population growth of sub-Saharan Africa over the period, from 495
million in 1990 to 822 million in 2010, this suggests an expansion of the middle class from
119 million to 271 million—a more than doubling in two decades (Ncube, Lufumpa, and
Kayizzi-Mugerwa, 2011).

As a result of the fact that women are increasingly working outside the home and have less
time to shop for and prepare food, while men often work far from home, the food-processing
sector and fast-food segment have grown quickly. Evidence suggests that even the rural poor
are buying processed foods. In East and Southern Africa, they spend 29 per cent of their food
expenditures on that food.

Private investment in food systems is expanding quickly (World Bank, 2013). What Reardon
(2015) calls the “quiet revolution” in food supply chains spans retail, wholesale, first - and
second-stage processing, packaging, branding, and logistics. Also targeted for investment is
the full range of product transformation functions— trucking, processing, storage, and
wholesaling. These transformations in food systems are very uneven among and within
countries, with sharp differences in opportunity based on proximity to cities and access to key
assets. Nevertheless, evidence suggests that farmers who are linked to growing urban and
regional markets are investing in soil conservation, building organic matter in their soils,
using productivity-enhancing seeds, breeds, and fertilizers, and investing in irrigation
systems and even sometimes agricultural machinery (WFP, 2015; World Bank, 2013).

                                               4
Productivity in African agriculture

Despite recent improvements in African agriculture (Wiggins, 2014), in part driven by new
market opportunities, generally limited shift in production structure and supply response has
limited African farmers' potential to benefit from opportunities emerging from food system
transformations. This is reflected in relatively flat growth on several measures of agricultural
sector performance. Table 1 report for SSA, GDP and agricultural growth, and four measures
of rural transformation: total factor productivity (TFP); labour productivity; land productivity;
and crop diversification. All four are slower in Africa than in the Rest of the World (ROW),
further affirming the still low levels of productivity and diversification from basic staples. With
a largely poor and relatively quickly growing population dependent on staples in both
production and consumption, agricultural transformation in Africa is still at a relative ly early
stage.

Table 1. Characteristics of rural transformation in Africa and rest of the world
                                                           Sub-Saharan Afri ca (SSA)
         Avera ge Annual Change (%)       Ea s t a nd Southern     Wes t a nd Central Al l SSA     Res t of the
                                          Afri ca (ESA)            Afri ca (WCA)       Countries   Worl d (ROW)
                                                                 Avera ge annual change (%)
Economic Growth
GDP per ca pita                                   1.57                  1.06             1.28         2.66
Agri cul tural GDP                                2.78                  3.68             3.26         2.71
Rura l Transformation
Crop di versification (% non-cereals)             0.04                  0.05             0.04         0.12
Tota l Factor Productivity (TFP)                  1.20                  0.97             1.07         1.75
La bor Productivity                               0.51                  1.71             1.09         2.04
La nd Productivity (cereal yi eld)                1.01                  1.10             1.06         1.76
Extreme rura l poverty a nd i nequality
Extreme rura l poverty ($1.25/pc/day)            -0.64                  -0.91           -0.78         -1.24
Rura l Gini coefficient                          -0.14                  -0.11           -0.13         -0.33
Source: IFAD calculations based on World Development Indicators and USDA.

So the agricultural sector is growing rapidly, but still has weak fundamentals that limit the
needed reductions in poverty and inequality. Extreme poverty and inequality declined more
slowly in Africa than in the ROW in recent decades. Evidence suggests that poverty remained
concentrated in rural areas in 2010 (IFAD, 2016). In both ESA and WCA rural poverty in 1990
was close to 60 per cent, but declined only slowly over the following 20 years, and was still at
56.7 per cent in WCA and 52.8 per cent in ESA.

The contribution of technical change to Africa’s recent agricultural growth, while greater than
in the late 20th century, is now generally less than in other global regions, particularly during
periods of rapid growth in those regions. Most of Africa's agricultural growth can still be
attributed to expansion of land and labour and shifts in the composition of output.

Where agriculture is growing and absorbing labour while TFP is rising, job opportunities grow.
Shifts to better technology could bring even faster growth. There is no inherent trade-off
between TFP growth and job creation as long as demand is strong. Current developments in
food systems point to rapid growth of such demand in the coming years.

Dynamics in the rural non-farm economy

The rural nonfarm economy plays a decisive role in the pace and quality of change in Sub-
Saharan Africa. Rural diversification associated with movement into the rural nonfarm
economy and secondary towns in Africa reduces poverty more than does rural-to-urban
migration, complementing the finding that agricultural growth reduces poverty more than
does non-agricultural growth (Dorosh and Thurlow, 2014).

As is the case with much of Africa's rapidly changing food systems, comprehensive data on
Africa's rural nonfarm economy are still lacking. But case studies and recent analysis of LSMS-



                                                    5
ISA data point to growth that is widespread yet constrained by a range of structural, physical
and institutional factors.

Faced with such risks, and a range of market imperfections, many African house holds are
increasingly diversifying income sources to reduce farming risk through nonfarm
entrepreneurship (Nagler and Naude, 2014). However, productivity varies hugely among
rural non-farm enterprises. Businesses in transport, hospitality, and professional services are
more productive than agri- or sales businesses, but the former have high sunk costs that act
as barriers to entry. Women, often more burdened by household tasks, may be additionally
constrained. Moreover, these types of activities tend to be riskier and would not therefore
attract the large majority of rural households that join the nonfarm enterprise sector to
minimize their agricultural risks. Nonfarm enterprises in rural areas are also less likely than
those in urban areas to operate year-round, and are almost twice as likely to cease
operations owing to death or illness.

The rural nonfarm business environment has many difficulties including lack of basic
infrastructure, inadequate credit and insurance markets, poor tenure security, and et hnic and
gender disparities. Concerns that the push into rural nonfarm activity may merely add the
equivalent of subsistence-level nonfarm activity to a risky and poor agricultural income base
are valid. Even if the nonfarm household enterprise sector can offer an escape from poverty
in the best-case scenario, it may only be able to offer low-paying vulnerable employment. 2 If
Africa's budding rural nonfarm sector is to offer a ladder to more rewarding work in the local
economy, it must also become a more reliable source of regular liquidity (Barrett et al. ,
2015).

      4. Challenges for inclusive structural and rural transformation

Inclusion has many dimensions —gender, race, ethnicity, disability, religion, sexual
orientation, and occupation. Exclusion from economic opportunity along any of these lines
can be costly for society and painful for individuals. Exclusion correlates closely with poverty.
Each dimension is relevant in most parts of Africa.

This section addresses three urgent challenges. One is unique to Africa: coping with the
“youth bulge.” The other two are features of all structural and rural transformation processes
but have peculiarly African dimensions, given the continent's overall early stage of
transformation: coping with small and declining manufacturing sectors, and overcoming
deeply entrenched constraints on factor mobility. Cutting across all three challenge s is
Africa's urgent need for stable and remunerative rural jobs.

Coping with the youth bulge

As a result of demographic trends in Africa, a focus on the inclusion of young people is
warranted. The size of Africa’s cohort of young adults—aged 15-24 and 25-34—is
unprecedented (Figure 4). Further, the youth population will continue to rise in Sub-Saharan
Africa throughout the 21st century, even though it is projected to decline in other regions
(see Figure 5).




2   The WDI on vulnerable employment defines this as unpaid fa mily work and own-account work.

                                                      6
Figure 4. Population age structure in Africa and other regions




Source: Filmer and Fox 2014, based on United Nations, 2011.

Figure 5. Youth Population (15-24) trends and projections to 2100 in key regions
(millions)

 500                                     Projections
 450
 400
 350
 300
 250
 200
 150
 100
  50
   0
       1960    1970 1980 1990 2000 2010             2020 2030 2040 2050 2100
                Eastern Asia                       Middle East and North Africa
                South-Central Asia                 Latin America and the Caribbean
                South-Eastern Asia and Oceania     Europe and Northern America
                Sub-Saharan Africa
Source: United Nations, 2011.

Agriculture and related activities in agri-food systems present important entrepreneurial
opportunities for youth populations, which are particularly important to address in regions
experiencing rural youth population growth. However, within smallholder farming
communities and households, young people often face multiple constraints in accessing
markets and engaging profitably in them. These result from age-related barriers in accessing
land and other assets, lack of relevant training and capacity development initiatives and
servic es, and difficulties in accessing financing for investment, for instance due to lack of
adequate hard collateral and of business experience. All these specific constraints need to be
addressed to enable rural youth to access remunerative market opportunities today and in
the decades ahead.

For young Africans who exit agriculture, the issue is employability and entrepreneurial
capacity. Neither is assured. Basic skills are needed to create opportunities, along with
capabilities to make the right decisions for seizing opportunities and achieving greater access
to credit, financial services, and other resources. The solution for the skills of future young
adults is to raise the quality of education of those now in school while maintaining and raising
enrolment rates. Efforts oriented to technical and vocational training – job skills and business
development - shaped to respond to emerging opportunities and market demand will be
critical. It is worth noting that demand for labour services is essential for absorbing new



                                               7
entrants to the workforce, but such a shift in demand can be achieved only by a dynamic
change in economic structure as transformation proceeds.
Coping with a small and shrinking manufacturing base

Countries undergoing structural transformation in the 21st century face a context that is
quite different from the 19th or 20th centuries. Change has often been initiated by
productivity gains in agriculture that reduces costs of production, raises farm incomes, and
releases resources to other activities. A further driver enters when the non-agricultural sector
boosts labour productivity and creates demand for new workers. Labour moves to higher
productivity sectors in response to higher wages and, in the process, raises aggregate
productivity and growth even more. A transformation that depends not only (or primarily) on
productivity growth within a sector, but also on migration of labour to sectors with higher
productivity, yields rapid change (Rodrik, 2013).

Historically, labour-intensive manufacturing sectors have been the most important
destination of rural-urban migration. The manufacturing sector can achieve high levels of
productivity even if other sectors are lagging. As a latecomer to industrializa tion, Africa has a
very small manufacturing base. Even if it grew quickly, the impact on overall employment
would be relatively small.

Although manufacturing should stay a priority for development in Africa, the fast-growing
rural labour force will have to find jobs in agriculture, the rural nonfarm sector, and services.
The challenges of rapid labour force growth and manufacturing’s weak capacity to absorb
labour lead to tight constraints on inclusive structural and rural transformation.

During the transformation process, whether the growth can be sustained as resources shift
depends on how buoyant demand is in the sectors experiencing the productivity
improvement. If demand is constrained, the supply response will dampen prices, thereby
attenuating new demand for labour, but the innovation will still create jobs in the more
dynamic sectors.

Demand does not appear to be constraining Africa’s agricultural growth, however: food
systems are changing rapidly to meet the rising demand and shifting preferences of middle-
class urban consumers. The opportunity to produce and sell into growing local and regional
markets is increasing. Continued rapid growth of imports shows that space is available for
local farmers if they can produce competitively. Byerlee et al. (2014) estimate that urban
food markets in Africa are set to increase fourfold to exceed US$400 billion by 2030, with
especially rapid growth in demand for rice, feed grains, poultry, dairy, vegetable oils,
horticulture, and processed foods, all of which are (or could be) produced locally.

The ability to sidestep any demand constraints will depend on the competitiveness of local
production. Successful competition with imports will require attention to the logistical and
policy gaps that reduce the performance of food processing, retailing, and exports. Morris et
al. (2009) find that in the vast area of Africa’s Guinea Savannah—agro-climatically similar to
Brazil’s Cerrado zone—primary agricultural production is competitive, but competitiveness is
lost after the farm gate. Uncompetitive production will be blocked by high costs, or
alternatively poor quality. Bypassing demand constraints thus comes back to more rapid
technical change in primary production, coupled with investment in infrastructure for logistics
and policy and regulatory reform in food processing.

Overcoming barriers to factor mobility

When innovation disrupts the established factor proportions in different sectors, whether they
move depends on the costs of mobility. Factors can move within a sector, if technical change
creates opportunities for internal adjustment, or between sectors in response to gradients in
productivity and returns. The critical resources are land, labour (and the skills embodied in
labour), and capital. The mobility of these resources determines whether change occurs, and
their ownership and accessibility determines its inclusiveness.




                                                8
Land is especially important, given the central importance of agriculture to inclusive
transformations. Farm operators who already have land can introduce new technologies and
management to increase productivity. This is common when land is very expensive or
markets function poorly and access to new land is blocked. With sufficient capital and good
skills, small, intensively worked farms can be efficient and profitable, as many studies have
shown.

Less well publicized, but perhaps of greater importance than foreign land purchases, is the
rapid consolidation of landholding and the transfer of ownership from traditional tenure to
individual freehold by nationals, rather than outsiders. Jayne et al. (2014) studied land
transactions in detail in Ghana, Kenya, and Zambia. They found that in each country, the
area recently acquired and now controlled by national medium-sized farmers (with holdings
of 5-100 hectares) is roughly twice that of the large-scale foreign acquisitions. At the same
time, the number of farm households with the smallest holdings has increased in each
country: in Kenya, the number of households with less than 1 hectare doubled from 1 million
to 2 million between 1994 and 2006. Farm structure is changing fast, with growth at both
tails of the size distribution. The number of operators is growing at the lower tail, and
cultivated area is shifting to the higher tail.

The increasing number of very small farms is caused by fragmentation of family holdings as
young adults reach working age and start their families. In contrast, those acquiring medium-
sized and larger farms do so through purchase, although some also started with larger-than-
average holdings and have added to them. One could conclude that the emerging farm
ownership structure in many countries is not inclusive of young people and does not promote
technical change. The smallest farms are more numerous and are unv iable, except as part-
time farms. The large farms could be commercially viable and offer opportunities for waged
employment, but the way they are managed casts doubt on this. Owners of large and
medium-sized tracts could rent out the portions they do not c ultivate themselves, and
thereby create opportunities for young people to enter farming through rental agreements.
Working with LSMS data, Deininger et al. (2015) find that 10-20 per cent of farm operators
rent in at least some land, and that this is most prevalent among those with very small
landholdings. Idle area on medium-sized and large holdings where rental markets function
reasonably well suggests that land markets are not moving land into more productive use.
Land markets are failing because many potential participants have limited access, and
because gains to speculative landholdings are greater than the costs of managing rental
contracts. In the presence of these failures, large areas are already converted and more
conversion is likely.

Mobility of labour depends largely on the workers’ skills. Young Africans of this generation
have spent more years in school than their older relatives. The doubling and tripling of
primary school completion rates since 1990 is a remarkable achievement. The quality of
education, however, has not improved commensurately; with the result that even those who
complete school may have learned little that they can use to better their lives. Problems of
quantity and quality of schooling in rural areas are more severe than in urban areas: about
60 per cent of those under 35 in rural areas have incomplete primary school and many
struggle with basic literacy and numeracy (Filmer and Fox, 2014). The least educated remain
in agriculture, and those with slightly better skills gravitate towards nonfarm employment.
Capital is sufficiently mobile between sectors and over national boundaries . Thanks to
developments in the banking sector and the advent of technological solutions, capital mobility
is not a major constraint to transformat ion in many countries. The difficulties that poor
people face in accessing banking services are well known: distance to branches, high costs of
small transactions, absence of collateral, asymmetries of information, relatively less access to
emerging ICT solutions and more. All of these difficulties are greater for young people.
Recent developments in branchless banking, electronic fund transfers, biometric
identification, and communications provide technical fixes. A number of NGOs and aid
agencies (including IFAD) have piloted approaches to financial inclusion that are relevant for
young people, such as bundling of financial services and skills mentorship, credit and self -
help groups, partial guarantees, and other instruments. Careful monitoring of the succ ess of
different approaches will help identify those that can be scaled up.



                                               9
   5. Implications for investment and policy

Unlike other regions, Africa’s trajectory of successful long -term structural transformation will
start from agriculture and move through services and then to a more diversified
manufacturing sector, thereafter reverting to expansion of highly skilled services. If
expansion of the already small manufacturing sector is blocked by infrastructure gaps and
regulatory interference, transformation driven by that sector will likely stall as the service
sector reaches its expansion limit. In any scenario, however, agriculture will continue to play
a greater role than elsewhere, because factor proportions and comparative advantage favour
it. But how well the sector can realize its potential will depend largely on efforts to accelerate
technical innovation.

Comprehensive rural transformation in agriculturally dependent countries is constrained when
not led by technical dynamism. With few exceptions, such dynamism is weak in African
agriculture despite recent acceleration. In addition, mobility of factors (especially land)
among alternative uses constrains rural transformation. So growth has not been as effective
in reducing poverty, as it would have been had agricultural productivity grown faster. The
impediments to structural and rural transformation are part icularly hard on the young people
who are, and will continue, entering the labour force in record numbers.

Public policy and investment must focus on two elements: leveraging burgeoning demand
emanating from urbanization and dietary diversification to deepen employment in the rural
nonfarm economy, and developing inclusive food supply chains to provision ever-increasing
numbers of consumers. Rural suppliers need to sell to sources of dynamic, growing demand,
especially to domestic urban markets.

Broad objectives and priorities for policy and investment include improving market
performance and meeting new demands, enhancing access to land and tenure security for
smallholders and investors, financing agribusiness, upgrading infrastructure, using public -
private partnerships where possible, building skills and entrepreneurship, particularly among
young people, and making agribusiness inclusive by integrating market -oriented smallholders
and rural communities into dynamic value chains. The many measures required have been
well set out in several recent publications, notably in World Bank (2013), Yumkella et al.
(2011), the African Centre for Economic Transformation (ACET 2014), UNCTAD (2015), and
the UK Department for International Development (DFID 2015).

In summary, attracting private investment into agriculture and the rural nonfarm economy is
vital. But many agricultural regulations in Africa actually serve to deter rather than encourage
such investment (AGRA 2012). Reforming the rules that limit private entry and investment in
value chains that serve smallholders must be a priority, while innovation in the
communications technologies favoured by youth must continue and deepen.



References

ACET (African Center for Economic Transformation). 2014. 2014 African Transformation
   Report: Growth with Depth. Accra: African Center for Economic Transformation.
AGRA (Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa). 2012. Assessment of Agricultural Policy and
   Regulatory Constraints to Agribusiness Investment in Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Ghana,
   Nigeria and Tanzania . Nairobi: Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa.
Barrett, C., L. Christiaensen, M. Sheahan, and A. Shimeles. 2015. “The Structural
    Transformation of Rural Africa: On the Current State of African Food Systems and Rural
    Nonfarm Economies.” Paper Prepared for the African Economic Research Consortium’s
    Biannual Research Workshop, held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.


                                                10
Byerlee, Derek, Andres F. Garcia, Asa Giertz, and Vincent Palmade. 2014. Growing Africa:
   Unlocking the Potential of Agribusiness . Washington, DC: World Bank.
Deininger, K., F. Xia, and S. Savastano. 2015. Smallholders’ Land Ownership and Access in
    sub-Saharan Africa: A New Landscape? Policy Research Working Paper 7285. Washington,
    DC: World Bank.
De Janvery, A. 2009. Agriculture for development: Implications for agro-industries. In: Agro-
   industries for development. Rome: CAB International and FAO.
DFID (Department for International Development). 2015. DFID’s Conceptual Framework on
   Agriculture. London: Department for International Development.
Dorosh, P., and J. Thurlow. 2014. Beyond Agriculture versus Non-Agriculture: Decomposing
   Sectoral Growth-Poverty Linkages in Five African Countries. Draft Paper. Washington, DC:
   International Food Policy Research Institute.
Filmer, D., and L. Fox. 2014. Youth Employment in sub-Saharan Africa. Washington, DC: World
    Bank.
Jayne, T., A. Chapoto, N. Sitko, C. Nkonde, M. Muyanga, and J. Chamberlain. 2014. Is the
   Scramble for Land in Africa Foreclosing a Smallholder Agricultural Expansion Strategy?
   Journal of International Affairs 67:35-53.
McCullough, E. 2015. Labour Productivity and Employment Gaps in sub-Saharan Africa. Policy
   Research Working Paper 7234. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Morris, M., H. Binswanger, and D. Byerlee. 2009. Awakening Africa's Sleeping Giant: Prospects
   for Commercial Agriculture in the Guinea Savannah Zone and Beyond . Washington, DC:
   World Bank.
Nagler, P., and W. Naude. 2014. “Performance and Survival of Nonfar m Entrepreneurship in
   Rural Africa: Evidence from the LSMS- ISA Surveys.” Paper prepared for the Annual Bank
   Conference on Africa/Harnessing Africa's Growth for Faster Poverty Reduction, Paris.
Ncube, M., C. L. Lufumpa, and S. Kayizzi-Mugerwa. 2011. The Middle of the Pyramid: Dynamics
   of the Middle Class in Africa. ADB Market Brief. Tunis: African Development Bank.
Reardon, T. 2015. The Hidden Middle: The Quiet Revolution in the Midstream of Agrifood Value
   Chains in Developing Countries. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 31(1).
Reardon, T., D. Tschirley, B. Minten, S. Haggblade, et al. 2015. Transformation of African
   Agrifood Systems in the New Era of Rapid Urbanization and the Emergence of a Middle
   Class. In Badiane and Makombe (eds), Beyond a Middle Income Africa: Transforming
   African Economies for Sustained Growth with Rising Employment and Incomes.
   Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
Reardon, T., and C. Timmer. 2012. The Economics of the Food System Revolution. Annual
   Review of Resource Economics 14:225-264.
Rodrik, D. 2013. The Past, Present, and Future of Economic Growth. Working Paper 1, Global
   Citizen Foundation.
Tschirley, D., J. Snyder, M. Dolislager, T. Reardon, S. Haggblade, J. Goeb, L. Traub, F. Ejobi,
   F. Meyer. 2015a. Africa’s Unfolding Diet Transformation: Implications for Agrifood System
   Employment. Journal of Agribusiness in Developing and Emerging Economies 5(2),
   September (online).
Tschirley, D., T. Reardon, M. Dolislager, and J. Snyder. 2015b. The Rise of a Middle Class in
   Urban and Rural East and Southern Africa: Implications for Food System Transformation.
   Journal of International Development 27(5), June.
United Nations. 2011. World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision. New York: Department
    of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. http://esa.un.org/wpp/Excel-Data/
    population.htm
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). 2016. UNCTADSTAT.
    http://unctadstat.unctad.org/wds/TableViewer/tableView.aspx


                                              11
UNCTAD. 2015. Transforming Rural Economies. UNCTAD LDC Report for 2015. Geneva:
   UNCTAD.
Yumkella, K., P. Kormawa, T. Roepstorff, and A. Hawkins. 2011. Agribusiness for Africa’s
   Prosperity . Vienna: UNIDO.
WFP. 2015. Purchase for Progress (P4P): Reflections on the Pilot. Rome: UN World Food
  Programme. http://www.wfp.org/content/purchase-progress-p4p-reflections-pilot
Wiggin, S. 2014. African agricultural development: Lessons and challenges. JAE, Vol. 53 (3).

World Bank. 2013. Growing Africa: Unlocking the Potential of Agribusiness . Washington, DC:
   World Bank.


Annex Table 1: Distribution of countries’ outcomes for transformation and inclusion
                 Speed of ST                Rural Poverty reduction
                   and RT                 Fast                    Slow
                                        Ethiopia                 Nigeria
                                         Malawi             Congo, Rep. of
                                       Tanzania
                           Fast
                            RT




                                     South Africa *
                                      Cape Verde
                                       Cameroon
                 Fast ST




                                       Namibia *              Botswana *
                                        Burundi                 Lesotho
                                        Uganda                  Zambia
                           Slow




                                         Guinea                Mauritania
                            RT




                                     Burkina Faso
                                         Mali *
                                        Senegal
                                        Rwanda                  Swaziland
                           Fast
                            RT




                                      Mozambique                  Benin
                                                                  Kenya
                 Slow ST




                                                              Madagascar
                           Slow




                                                                  Togo
                            RT




                                                              Sierra Leone
                                                             Central African
                                                                Republic
Source: IFAD




                                                                                      July 4, 2016




                                               12
