             Finance & Markets Global Practice




            TECHNICAL NOTE:
Institutional Arrangements for
Financial Consumer Protection




                               August 2015
DISCLAIMER

This Technical Note is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the
governments they represent. This Technical Note does not represent legal advice.

                                              ii
Table of Contents

Acknowledgments ................................................................................................................iv
Acronyms ............................................................................................................................ v
1.     Executive Summary ............................................................................................... 1
2.     Importance of Financial Consumer Protection ..................................................... 2
3.     Institutional Arrangements for Financial Consumer Protection ........................... 5
       3.1. Criteria for Distinguishing between Different Models ................................................. 6
       3.2. Models of Institutional Arrangements: Pros and Cons................................................ 8
               3.2.1. Single (Integrated) Agency Model .................................................................. 8
               3.2.2. Multiple (Integrated) Agency Model.............................................................. 10
               3.2.3. Multiple (Specialized) Agency Model ............................................................. 10
4.     Arrangements for Financial Consumer Protection: Challenges .......................... 12
Appendix. Institutional Arrangements in Selected Countries .................................................. 17
References ........................................................................................................................ 22

Table     1:   Examples of Regulatory Interventions in Financial Consumer Protection .......................... 3
Table     2:   Institutional Arrangements in the Surveyed Countries ......................................................... 8
Table     3:   Single (Integrated) Agency Model ............................................................................................ 8
Table     4:   Multiple (Integrated) Agency Model....................................................................................... 10
Table     5:   Multiple (Specialized) Agency Model ...................................................................................... 11
Table     6:   Scope of World Bank Diagnostic Reviews in Selected Countries ....................................... 12
Table     7:   Institutional Arrangements in Selected Countries ................... Error! Bookmark not defined.

Figure 1: Existing Institutional Arrangements for Consumer Protection and Financial Sector
Supervision .................................................................................................................................................. 6
Figure 2: Financial Consumer Protection Tools (Agencies with a Specialized Unit) ....................... 14




                                                                              iii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


This Finance & Markets Global Practice report was prepared by Johanna Jaeger (Financial Sector
Specialist) and Ivo Jenik (Consultant), with inputs from Stephanie Chu (Consultant). Peer review
comments were provided by Ros Grady (Senior Financial Sector Specialist) and Denise Dias
(Senior Financial Sector Specialist). Oversight was provided by Douglas Pearce (Global Lead and
Lead Financial Sector Specialist) and Massimo Cirasino (Practice Manager).




                                               iv
ACRONYMS


ADR        Alternative Dispute Resolution
APRA       Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
ASIC       Australian Securities and Investments Commission
BSP        Central Bank of the Philippines (Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, the Philippines)
CBA        Central Bank of Armenia
CGAP       Consultative Group to Assist the Poor
FCA        Financial Conduct Authority (United Kingdom)
FCAC       Financial Consumer Agency of Canada
FCAG       Financial Consumer Affairs Group (the Philippines)
GPU        Products and User Services Office (Gerencia de Productos y Servicios al Usuario,
           Peru)
IAIS       International Association of Insurance Supervisors
IFC        International Finance Corporation
INDECOPI   National Institute for Protection of Competition and Intellectual Property (Instituto
           Nacional de Defensa de la Competencia y de la Protección de la Propiedad
           Intelectual, Peru)
IOSCO      International Organization of Securities Commissions
NBCI       Non-Bank Credit Institution
NCAC       National Consumer Affairs Council (the Philippines)
NGO        Non-Governmental Organization
OECD       Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OJK        Financial Services Authority (Otoritas Jasa Keuangan, Indonesia)
PRA        Prudential Regulation Authority (the United Kingdom)
SBS        Superintendence of Banking, Insurance and Pensions (Superintendencia de
           Banca, Seguros y AFP, Peru)
WB         World Bank
WBG        World Bank Group




                                            v
1.      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.      The expansion and increasing range of formal financial products and services
around the world has brought significant benefits to many consumer segments. There is
growing evidence that higher financial inclusion levels have a positive impact on financial stability,
various micro- and macro-economic indicators as well as financial well-being of individual consumers.i
This finding is particularly important in countries with low levels of financial inclusion and high levels
of poverty, as the latest Global Findex data shows some correlation between poverty and financial
inclusion with two billion people not using formal financial services and 73 percent of poor people
being unbanked because of costs, travel distances and the often burdensome requirements involved
in opening a financial account.ii

2.       In order for financial inclusion to result in significant economic and societal
benefits, it needs to be promoted in an environment where it is safe for consumers to
use financial services and products.iiiiv In fact, the benefits of financial inclusion can be
neutralized or reduced if consumers: (i) cannot transact in a regulatory environment that provides
sufficient safeguards such as protection of deposits/funds, effective disclosure, and accessible
dispute resolution; (ii) cannot select the financial product or service that is best suited to their needs;
and (iii) are not protected against fraud and other market abuses. Strong consumer protection helps
to ensure that the growing use of financial services benefits consumers and does not create undue
risks for them while also supporting financial stability, integrity, and inclusion objectives. As noted in
the Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection (World Bank, 2012): “[financial] consumer
protection can contribute to improved efficiency, transparency, competition, and access to financial
markets by reducing information asymmetries and power imbalances among providers and users of
financial services.”v Financial consumer protection is also a necessary precursor to building trust in
the formal financial sector and thus in encouraging financial inclusion.

3.       Building upon the fifteen most recent World Bank (WB) diagnostic reviews and
informed by key guidance and relevant researchvi, this note deals exclusively with
institutional arrangements for financial consumer protection. In this context, “institutional
arrangements” refer to the number, organization, and structure of the agencies responsible for
financial consumer protection regulation and supervision of financial institutions, as well as the
capacity, resources and processes of the relevant agency(ies).vii Although institutional arrangements
are only one component of any overall financial consumer protection framework, they are very
important in determining the efficiency and ultimate success of the overall framework for financial
consumer protection. It is hoped that this note will assist policymakers, regulators, and supervisors
seeking to establish institutional arrangements for financial consumer protection or strengthen the
existing ones in their respective countries. By way of guidance, this note aims to address the following
questions: (1) Why is financial consumer protection important? (2) What are the main models of
institutional arrangements for financial consumer protection around the world? (3) What are the
advantages and disadvantages of the different models? (4) What are the principal challenges faced
by the agencies responsible for financial consumer protection?

4.       There is no one-size-fits-all model of institutional arrangements for financial
consumer protection. The effectiveness and actual functioning of institutional arrangements in
any country depends on country-specific characteristics. Relevant characteristics include the size and
structure of the financial sector, its stage of development, specific regulatory and supervisory
initiatives taken, skills and institutional capacity, and prevailing political traditions. In a large number
of countries institutional arrangement is a mix among integrated single or multiple models and a
general consumer protection model.

                                                     1
5.       The 15 WB diagnostic reviews show that one of the main obstacles to introducing
and implementing financial consumer protection is the lack of resources. Particularly in the
lower-income countries, the lack of funds to support the institutional arrangements for financial
consumer protection is a common constraint, despite political willingness and interest in the agenda.
Besides money, experienced and well-trained staff is also frequently missing, particularly because
financial consumer protection is a relatively new field that requires a specific set of knowledge and
skills. A scaled-up focus on financial consumer protection also poses the burden of experimentalism
on policymakers willing to implement consumer protection in their respective countries—new
approaches are being tested (e.g., risk-based supervision, behavioral economics-based regulation)
and new areas addressed (e.g., mobile money). Another frequently experienced challenge is the lack
of a well-articulated and clear mandate for financial consumer protection regulation and supervision.
A related challenge are the overlapping or conflicting responsibilities of multiple agencies involved in
financial consumer protection. Further, opportunities for greater effectiveness by separating
consumer protection supervision and prudential supervision were identified in many countries.
Finally, inter- and –intra-agency cooperation and coordination have proved to be a challenge for
many of the researched countries.

6.      The WB diagnostic reviews provide a comprehensive source of information about
different regulatory approaches and lessons identified during implementation of
financial consumer protection. Among the lessons identified are (i) the importance of a clearly
formulated mandate, (ii) the importance of sufficient capacity, (iii) the value of an independent and
specialized team/unit/agency responsible for financial consumer protection, and (iv) the importance
of mechanisms for cooperation and coordination between multiple agencies (and other
stakeholders). Finally, challenges of building new institutions from scratch vis-à-vis leveraging
existing institutions – in particular in developing countries – need to be taken into account when
considering respective models of institutional arrangements for financial consumer protection.

2.     IMPORTANCE OF FINANCIAL CONSUMER PROTECTION
7.      A proper understanding of the importance of financial consumer protection is
necessary for the establishment of effective institutional arrangements for financial
consumer protection. Although many academic articles, books, and policy notes that make the
case for effective financial consumer protection frameworks, and international good practices have
been published,viii discussions with different stakeholders around the world during the diagnostic
reviews conducted by the WB indicate the need for guidance on: (i) the ultimate objectives and
benefits of financial protection for consumers, the financial sector, and policy makers; (ii) the role of
regulators and supervisory agencies in promoting financial consumer protection, and (iii) the role of
financial capability in the process of strengthening the protection of financial consumers.

8.       The importance of financial consumer protection was evidenced by the global
financial crisis of 2008. Although triggered by the burst of the structured finance bubble, the
financial crisis gradually also started affecting areas of the international economy that had previously
been considered mutually independent. This so-called contagion effect uncovered the complexity
and interdependence of the national and international economies.ix More significantly, at least from
the perspective of financial consumer protection, the financial crisis also revealed the
interdependence between financial stability and consumer protection.x In fact, before the financial
crisis, consumer protection and financial stability had been seen as “only indirectly associated
objectives—and at the margins even potentially conflicting….”xi Since the crisis erupted, this
perspective has been changing, and the number of financial regulators and supervisors dedicating
resources to financial consumer protection increased substantially between 2010 and 2013.xii



                                                   2
9.      Financial consumer protection helps promote consumer confidence in the
financial sector. This is achieved primarily by addressing the vulnerabilities inherent in the financial
system to which financial consumers are exposed: (i) information asymmetries as a result of a lack
of transparency and limited availability of relevant information, and (ii) power imbalances between
the providers and users of financial services.xiii Thus, regulatory interventions aim to raise the
transparency of financial products and services, prohibiting unfair and misleading marketing
practices, promoting fair treatment of consumers, and establishing standards for the handling of
internal complaints and external dispute resolution.xiv Table 1 provides some (limited) examples of
regulatory interventions designed to promote financial consumer protection in the mentioned areas.xv

Table 1: Examples of Regulatory Interventions in Financial Consumer Protection
        Issue            Requirement(s)                               Country Example
 Information          Financial institutions     •   In Armenia, detailed information concerning the
 asymmetry (lack of   are required to disclose       terms of consumer loans must be disclosed on
 transparency of      whatever information           creditors’ websites and be made available through
 financial products   consumers need to be           brochures distributed free of charge on the lenders’
 and services)        able to make informed          premises.xvi
                      decisions about            •   In Australia, banks must publicly disclose a Key Facts
                      financial products and         Statement containing a defined set of important
                      services                       information about each of their home loan programs
                                                     and must also make it possible, through their
                                                     websites, for consumers to generate a more specific
                                                     and personalized version of that information, based
                                                     on the specific amount, loan program, and loan term
                                                     they are interested in.xvii
                                                 •   In South Africa, a credit provider cannot enter into a
                                                     credit agreement unless the credit provider has given
                                                     the consumer a pre-agreement statement and
                                                     quotation in the prescribed form (see Section 92 of
                                                     the National Credit Act).
                                                 •   In the Philippines, a disclosure statement is required
                                                     as attachment to any loan contract.xviii
                                                 •   In Peru, comprehensive information and appropriate
                                                     calculators must be made available online.xix
 Power imbalance      Unfair treatment of        •   In the United States, the Dodd-Frank Act considers an
                      consumer is prohibited         act abusive if it materially interferes with the ability of
                                                     a consumer to understand a term or condition of a
                                                     financial product or service, or if it takes
                                                     unreasonable advantage of: (a) a lack of
                                                     understanding on the part of the consumer of the
                                                     material risks, costs, or conditions of the product or
                                                     service; (b) the inability of the consumer to protect
                                                     his rights in selecting or using a financial product or
                                                     service; and (c) the reasonable reliance of the
                                                     consumer on a covered person to act in the interests
                                                     of the consumer.xx
                                                 •   Some supervisors (e.g., Bolivia, Malaysia, Mexico,
                                                     Pakistan, Peru) require ex ante approval of consumer
                                                     contracts, with the purpose of curbing the use of
                                                     abusive clauses.




                                                     3
       Issue            Requirement(s)                                Country Example
                      Cooling-off period       •    Cooling-off periods for long-term insurance products
                                                    (i.e., life insurances) have been adopted in industrial
                                                    countries and some emerging markets, such as
                                                    Singapore and Malaysia, and cover a relatively wide
                                                    range of insurance products (e.g., Australia).
                                               • A 14-day cooling-off period has been adopted for
                                                    consumer credits by the European Directive on Credit
                                                    Agreements for Consumers.xxi
                      Alternative Dispute      Financial services ombudsman schemes, one of the
                      Resolution               models for alternative resolution of financial consumer
                                               disputes, have been established, for instance, in
                                               Australia,xxii Belgium,xxiii Canada,xxiv Ireland,xxv South
                                               Africa,xxvi and the United Kingdom.xxvii The Financial
                                               Services Mediator in Armenia, the Financial Mediation
                                               Bureau in Malaysia and the Financial Arbitrator in the
                                               Czech Republic effectively have features of a financial
                                               services ombudsman scheme.

10.     If properly established and implemented, a financial consumer protection
regulatory and supervisory framework may have a positive effect on the financial sector
as a whole. The consumer protection framework helps to strengthen consumers’ confidence in the
financial sector, foster financial inclusion, and increase transparency, thereby eventually spurring
competition among financial institutions. Healthy competition may further lead to financial
innovations beneficial to consumers (for instance, m-payments and agent-based distribution
modelsxxviii). Ultimately, better functioning financial markets together with higher financial inclusion
contribute to sustainable economic growth and a healthier economy.

11.      Financial consumer protection frameworks have important limitations that need
to be acknowledged. Of special importance is the fact that even well-informed, legally protected
and educated consumers may still make decisions that lead to suboptimal, and sometimes harmful
results in terms of the consumers’ financial well-being. This phenomenon is largely due to the fact
that consumers’ decision-making process is often influenced by so-called behavioral biases. The
International Association of Insurance Supervisors groups these biases into the following three major
categories:xxix (i) preferences, for instance, “where the urge for immediate gratification values the
present more highly than the future;”xxx (ii) beliefs, where decision making is based on a wrong
assumption about the consumer’s future or capability (e.g., overestimation of future income); and
(iii) decision-making bias, such as “persuasion and social influences,”xxxi where consumers accent
other than purely economic criteria in their decision-making process.

12.     The recent trends in financial consumer protection regulation attempt to address
the behavioral biases through financial consumer protection policies that are informed
by behavioral economics. Behavioral economics provide a good source of information about
consumers’ behavior, behavioral biases, and the interactions between consumers and providers of
financial products and services. Insights from this field may help policy makers to (i) better
understand why consumers sometimes choose suboptimal products or services and (ii) come up with
measures to create incentives for consumers to improve their decision-making process.xxxii




                                                   4
3.      INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL CONSUMER PROTECTION

13.      There is no one-size-fits-all modelxxxiii of institutional arrangements for financial
consumer protection regulation and supervision. On the contrary, different arrangements and
institutional structures exist around the world, each characterized by distinct features. Whether the
institutional arrangements in a given country work well depends on a complex mix of factors including
the model’s specific features, the structure of the national financial sector (among other things, the
degree of the sector’s concentration), the nature of the market participants (e.g., relatively small or
large financial conglomerates, or numerous independent financial institutions), the funding structure,
the political culture, and others. While these factors no doubt affect the way national institutional
arrangements function in practice, it is sometimes difficult to predict exactly how those factors affect
the functioning of institutions—in this context, the financial supervisory agencies—and vice versa.

14.     There is not enough evidence to conclude that any specific institutional
arrangements are better than others. Different models (or structures) of institutional
arrangements are typically associated with specific advantages and disadvantages. Some of these
are exclusive, that is, unique to specific institutional arrangements, but very often they overlap—
different models of institutional arrangements being associated with similar advantages and
disadvantages. Yet, in some instances, an advantage associated with one particular model becomes
a disadvantage in another model (see below). Thus, even in theory there is no optimal solution,
putting aside the practical issues mentioned in the previous paragraph where a disadvantage
associated with a specific model may be substantially mitigated (or amplified) by country-specific
factors (for instance, the turf wars associated with—but not exclusive to—the multiple-agency model
described below, may be avoided in a culture of cooperation).

15.      In practice, a wide range of institutional arrangements exists that combine
features of different models. This note describes the most common models encountered based
on a limited set of criteria (see below). However, a greater variety of models exists in practice. In
fact, the institutional arrangements for financial consumer protection regulation and supervision that
exist in different countries rarely follow the sharp contours of the theoretical models described in this
note. For instance, the Twin Peaks model (in which the prudential and market conduct supervision
roles have been separated and assigned to two distinct agencies) practically does not exist in its pure
form.xxxiv

16.      The 2013 World Bank Global Survey of 114 countries demonstrated the variety of
institutional arrangements.xxxv This Global Survey showed that in 53 countries multiple agencies
are responsible for supervising the financial sector, while there is no specialized financial consumer
protection supervisor, 18 countries (16 percent of the sample) have established a mega-supervisor,
that is, a single agency that is responsible for supervision and oversight of the whole financial sector
as well as for prudential and market conduct supervision. Only four countries had adopted a Twin
Peaks model agency.xxxvi In other countries surveyed, a general consumer protection agency, that is,
an agency responsible for protection of consumers of different sorts of products and services (not
only financial products and services) plays some role in financial consumer protection. For instance,
in about a quarter of the sample’s countries (26 percent), the responsibility for financial consumer
protection is shared among financial supervisors and general consumer protection agencies.xxxvii The
findings from the Global Survey are summarized in Figure 1.




                                                   5
Figure 1: Existing Institutional Arrangements for Consumer Protection and Financial
Sector Supervision




Source: World Bank Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, 2013.

3.1.    Criteria for Establishing Theoretical Models

17.     This note focuses exclusively on agencies responsible for regulation and
supervision of the financial sector. As noted above, in many countries, a general consumer
protection agency, that is, an agency responsible for protection of consumers of different sorts of
products and services, including products of daily consumption such as food, has some role to play
in financial consumer protection as well. However, such general consumer protection agencies and
their specific role in financial consumer protection are not a particular focus of this note, although
they are mentioned marginally where relevant.
18.     This note uses two main criteria to distinguish and describe different models of
institutional arrangements: (i) the number of agencies, and (ii) the level of integration
of supervisory mandates.

19.     The first criterion, as used in this note, refers to the total number of agencies
involved in supervision of the financial sector, regardless of whether their mandate
covers financial consumer protection or not. Based on the number of agencies involved in
supervision, two models may be identified: (i) the single- agency model, and (ii) the multiple-agency
model. The former refers to an institutional setting in which a single agency is responsible for
supervising the financial sector. An example of the single-agency model is the Czech National Bank
in the Czech Republic, which is the sole agency responsible for the supervision of the whole financial
sector.xxxviii Other examples are Malawi (the Reserve Bank of Malawixxxix) and Malaysia (the Central
Bank of Malaysiaxl). In a multiple-agency model, on the other hand, more than one agency is
responsible for supervising the financial sector. Examples of the latter model are Azerbaijan (the
Central Bank of Azerbaijan, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the State Insurance
Supervision Servicexli), Vietnam (the State Bank of Vietnam, the State Securities Commission, the
Insurance Supervision Authorityxlii), and Zambia (the Bank of Zambia, the Pensions and Insurance
Authority, and the Securities and Exchange Commissionxliii).




                                                         6
20.     The second criterion, as used in this note, refers to the level of integration
between the mandate for prudential supervision and the mandate for financial consumer
protection. Based on the level of integration, two models may be distinguished: (i) the integrated
agency model and (ii) the specialized agency model. In the integrated agency model, an agency
responsible for supervision of the financial sector (or segment thereof) has responsibility for both
prudential supervision and market conduct supervision. It should be noted that this classification
disregards the total number of agencies involved in the supervision; in other words, the integrated
agency model as defined above may exist both in countries with a single agency (e.g., the Czech
Republic, where the Czech National Bank is responsible for prudential supervision as well as financial
consumer protection) and in countries with multiple agencies (e.g., Azerbaijan, where the Central
Bank of Azerbaijan, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the State Insurance Supervision
Service are each responsible for prudential supervision and financial consumer protection). In the
specialized model, on the other hand, the mandates for prudential supervision and financial consumer
protection have been separated and entrusted to independent agencies or a specialized financial
consumer protection agency has been established. Countries that have adopted the Twin Peaks
model provide examples of the latter model. Another example is the United States, which has an
agency specialized in financial consumer protection—the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.

21.    When combining the above two criteria, three distinct practical models can be
identified: (i) the single (integrated) agency model,xliv (ii) the multiple (integrated)
agency model, and (iii) the multiple (specialized) agency model. A fourth model, the
single (specialized) agency model, only exists in theory. This classification may sound
complicated, but in practice is really straightforward:
   •   In the single (integrated) agency model only one agency is responsible for supervision of the
       financial sector and this very same agency has a mandate for both prudential supervision and
       financial consumer protection (e.g., the Central Bank of Armenia,xlv the Czech National Bank,
       and the Central Bank of Malaysia);
   •   In the multiple (integrated) agency model, several agencies are responsible for supervision
       of the financial sector and each agency’s mandate covers both prudential supervision and
       financial consumer protection (e.g., in Azerbaijan, the Central Bank of Azerbaijan, the
       Securities and Exchange Commission, and the State Insurance Supervision Service); and
   •   In the multiple (specialized) agency model, more than one agency is responsible for
       supervision of the financial sector, while the mandates for prudential supervision and financial
       consumer protection have been separated or at least one agency exists that is specialized in
       financial consumer protection. Examples of this model are found in all countries that have
       implemented the Twin Peaks model (e.g., Australia, the Netherlands), and in countries with
       multiple agencies that have established a specialized agency responsible for financial
       consumer protection (the United States, Canada).

22.    This classification of three different models of institutional arrangements for
financial consumer protection is useful for the analysis of the advantages and
disadvantages associated with those models, provided in section 3.2.




                                                  7
3.2. Models of Institutional Arrangements: Pros and Consxlvi
Table 2: Institutional Arrangements in the Surveyed Countries

Country                                                         Classification

Armenia                                                         Single (integrated)
Indonesia                                                       Multiple* (integrated)
Kyrgyz Republic                                                 Multiple (integrated)
Malawi                                                          Single (integrated)
Mongolia                                                        Multiple (integrated)
Mozambique                                                      Multiple (integrated)
Paraguay                                                        Multiple (integrated)
Peru                                                            Multiple (integrated)
Philippines                                                     Multiple (integrated)
Rwanda                                                          Multiple (integrated)
Tajikistan                                                      Multiple (integrated)
Tanzania                                                        Multiple (integrated)
Vietnam                                                         Multiple (integrated)
Zambia                                                          Multiple (integrated)
Zimbabwe                                                        Multiple (integrated)
* Indonesia is effectively a single agency model with the OJK as a single supervisor.

3.2.1. Single (Integrated) Agency Model

23.   The single (integrated) agency model whereby one mega supervisory agency is
responsible for supervision of the whole financial sector and its mandate covers both
prudential supervision and financial consumer protection (e.g. Armenia, Malawi, Ireland,
Hungary).
Table 3: Single (Integrated) Agency Model
                      Advantages                                                   Challenges
 Holistic view: A single agency has a more                      This advantage is weakened when the internal
 comprehensive understanding of the whole financial             organization or culture of the agency does not
 sector, since all subsectors ( banking, insurance,             support information sharing, coordination, and
 capital markets, etc.) and all types of activities             collaboration.
 (e.g., lending, payments, investments) are covered
 by the single agency.
                                                                This advantage is weakened when the single
 Economies of scale: A single authority uses a                  infrastructure is not used effectively, systems are
 single infrastructure (buildings, physical assets, IT          not integrated or synchronized, or each
 systems, back office).                                         organizational unit (e.g., department) uses its own
                                                                back office, etc.
                                                                This advantage is weakened when there are not
 Funding: All funds dedicated to prudential
                                                                enough resources, when resources are not
 supervision and financial consumer protection go to
                                                                distributed proportionally among departments, or
 a single agency.
                                                                when resources are not spent effectively.




                                                            8
                   Disadvantages                                                  Mitigation
                                                            This advantage is weakened when gaps and
                                                            overlaps are created due to ineffective internal
                                                            organization leading to a lack of coordination,
No gaps and overlaps: A single agency covers
                                                            information sharing, and cooperation. The gaps
the whole market and thus its powers do not
                                                            may also result from loopholes in the legal and
overlap with those of other supervisors. Nor will
                                                            regulatory framework where some entities,
there be gaps in terms of financial institutions or
                                                            activities, or products are exempted from the single
specific financial products and services not being
                                                            agency’s mandate by legislation (e.g., regulatory
supervised by the agency (e.g., bankassurance).
                                                            arbitrage). Also common is an overlap between the
                                                            mandates of a financial supervisor and of a general
                                                            consumer protection agency.
Level playing field: A single agency is                     As in previous instances, this advantage may be
responsible for the creation and interpretation of          adversely affected by insufficient internal
rules that apply to the entire financial sector —the        coordination as well as loopholes in the legal and
same rules and supervisory benchmarks apply to              regulatory framework.
the same activities (activity-based regulation, see
below).
                                                            Although a single agency does not have “a natural
No turf wars: A single agency cannot engage in
                                                            enemy” in terms of a competing agency, internal
“turf wars” with other agencies.
                                                            turf wars may still arise.
                                                            This advantage is weakened when insufficient
Transparency and accountability: Responsibility
                                                            governance, a complicated legal framework, or the
for any failure in supervision can be attributed to
                                                            political culture undermine transparency and
the single agency.
                                                            accountability.
Financial conglomeratesxlvii and activity-                  As mentioned previously, this advantage may be
based supervision: A single agency is well-                 weakened due to ineffective information sharing,
positioned to supervise financial conglomerates and         coordination, and cooperation.
also cover activities that do not fit the traditional
classification of banking, insurance, and capital
markets (e.g., bankassurance, payments, unit-
linked insurancexlviii).
                                                            First, it needs to be mentioned that focusing on a
                                                            particular area is not necessarily bad—it may reflect
                                                            principles of risk-based supervision (e.g., the focus
One-sided perspective: Within a single agency
                                                            lies on the risky areas). Second, this disadvantage
some expertise, team, practice or benchmark may
                                                            (or rather risk) may be eliminated by implementing
prevail (e.g., banking supervision)
                                                            a proper governance structure (e.g., distribution of
                                                            responsibilities for specific functions or areas of
                                                            supervision among members of the board).
                                                            This potentially important risk should be mitigated
                                                            in the first place through the adoption of proper
                                                            organizational and governance structures. For
                                                            instance, prudential supervision should be
Conflict of interests: Integration of prudential            organizationally separated from financial consumer
supervision and financial consumer protection may           protection. Ideally, there would also be separate
lead to a conflict of interests between the two             reporting lines for the heads of the prudential and
mandates.                                                   consumer protection teams, e.g., to different
                                                            Deputy Governors in a Central Bank who would
                                                            each monitor and coordinate the activities of their
                                                            respective teams as appropriate and seek to avoid
                                                            conflicts of interest.
Concentrated powers: All the supervisory powers             This risk should be mitigated by proper governance
are concentrated in a single agency, thus increasing        structures, public oversight (for instance, through a
the risk of abuse (e.g., forbearance policy,                parliamentary committee), and reporting (e.g.,
regulatory capture).                                        mandatory publication of annual reports).

                                                        9
3.2.2. Multiple (Integrated) Agency Model

24.     The multiple (integrated) agency model whereby multiple agencies are
responsible for supervision of the financial sector and each agency’s mandate covers
prudential supervision and financial consumer protection (e.g. Rwanda, the Philippines,
Zambia, Peru). From the perspective of financial consumer protection, the multiple (integrated)
agency model is similar to the single (integrated) agency model, as prudential and financial consumer
protection supervision are in both models entrusted to a single agency. However, the fact that several
agencies are involved creates new challenges in terms of information sharing, coordination, and
cooperation (see table 4).
Table 4: Multiple (Integrated) Agency Model
                                                  Advantages
 Specialization: Each agency has a narrow focus determined by its mandate (e.g., a banking supervisor
 focuses on the banking sector), which may help the agency build up “deep” expertise in the area
 concerned.
 Budget: Each agency has its own budget, which is spent to fulfill the agency’s narrowly (as compared
 to a mega supervisor’s broadly) defined mandate (e.g., banking supervision).
 Accountability: A specialized agency may be easier to monitor because less activities need to be
 performed and less goals need to be met.
                                                 Disadvantages
 Gaps and overlaps: Some sectors may be subject to oversight by multiple agencies and some may be
 left in the shadow zone due to inefficiently defined responsibilities (e.g., bankassurance, digital delivery
 of financial services).
 Limited information about the whole financial sector: The supervisory agencies may not have a
 holistic view and understanding of the financial system.
 Costliness: Each agency needs an independent infrastructure (office buildings, IT systems, etc.).
 Insufficient cooperation and coordination: Effective cooperation and coordination mechanisms may
 be missing, leading to inefficiencies in the regulatory and supervisory framework.
 Regulatory arbitrage and uneven playing field: Regulatory arbitrage is a situation where financial
 institutions purposively choose and keep their operations within the least regulated (and, hence, less
 costly) sector or under the least strict regulator. Examples of regulatory arbitrage are unit-linked insurance
 products, which are effectively investments, but in many jurisdictions avoid being subject to usually
 comprehensive capital market regulations.

3.2.3. Multiple (Specialized) Agency Model

25.     The multiple (specialized) agency model whereby multiple agencies are
responsible for supervision of the financial sector and the prudential supervision and
financial consumer protection are separated (or at least one agency specialized in
financial consumer protection exists – e.g. Australia, Belgium, the United Kingdom, the
United States). Whereas the models of institutional arrangements described under 3.2.1 and 3.2.2
are both based on integration of the prudential supervision and financial consumer protection
mandates, and thus share the same advantages and disadvantages characteristic of the integration,
the multiple (specialized) model is different in many aspects—most significantly, new advantages
and disadvantages emerge due to the separation of prudential supervision and financial consumer
protection (see table 5).




                                                        10
Table 5: Multiple (Specialized) Agency Model
            Advantages                                                   Challenges
 Mitigation of conflict of              However, a conflict of interests may still materialize between
 interests: potential conflict of       independent agencies. Therefore, there should be a mechanism in
 interests between prudential and       place to resolve such a conflict. For instance, under section 31 of the
 financial consumer protection          Financial Services and Markets Act (United Kingdom), in relation to a
 mandate is mitigated due to            dual-regulated firm, the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) may
 separation of the mandates.            direct the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) not to exercise its powers
                                        or not to exercise the powers in a specified manner if PRA believes
                                        that it would: (i) threaten the stability of the U.K. financial system; or
                                        (ii) result in the failure of a PRA-authorized firm that would adversely
                                        affect the U.K. financial system.
 Specialization: Each agency is         The biggest challenge of specialization is too narrow a focus on a
 specialized in their respective        specific area. This is an important challenge given that financial
 area and at least one agency is        supervisors have a shared goal, which is financial stability.
 specialized in financial consumer
 protection/market conduct
 supervision.
 Holistic view: Within each             This is, however, more of a theoretical advantage specifically in case
 respective mandate, the whole          of an agency responsible for financial consumer protection. In
 market can be covered.                 practice, such an agency often does not cover the whole financial
                                        sector. For instance, the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada only
                                        regulates and supervises financial institutions that are regulated at the
                                        federal level.xlix
 Independent budgeting:                 This does not mean, however, that enough resources are provided to
 Resources are budgeted                 all agencies. In practice, an agency (or agencies) responsible for
 independently for prudential           prudential supervision may be over-budgeted compared to the
 supervision and financial              financial consumer protection agency or vice versa.
 consumer protection.
 Accountability and                     In practice, however, identifying which agency is responsible for a
 transparency: Failures in each         failure may not be easy. This is particularly true because of the
 respective area (prudential            interconnectedness of the prudential aspects of financial businesses
 supervision vs. financial consumer     and financial consumer protection. For instance, if consumers are
 protection) are attributable to the    being charged illegal fees, this may be a sign of failure on the part of
 responsible agency.                    the financial consumer protection agency, although in fact the driving
                                        force behind such mistreatment may well be the need of the financial
                                        service provider involved to solve liquidity (or even solvency) issues.
 Insufficient cooperation and           Mechanisms to address the risk of non-cooperation should be
 coordination: A lack of                embedded in institutional arrangements. For instance, Bank Negara
 cooperation and coordination           Malaysia and the Securities Commission Malaysia signed a
 mechanisms (for regulation,            Memorandum of Understanding to establish an effective collaboration
 supervision, enforcement, and          and cooperation between the agencies.l
 information sharing) may lead to
 inefficiencies in supervision and      The Central Bank of Armenia has a Memorandum of Understanding
 financial consumer protection.         signed both with the Financial Services Mediator and the Competition
                                        Commission (two other authorities besides the CBA with impact on
                                        consumer protection in the area of financial services).li
 “Turf wars:” Fights over more          Similarly to the previous point regarding insufficient cooperation and
 budget, political support, or public   coordination, turf wars should be addressed by adopting mechanisms
 acknowledgement may lead to            for cooperation thus creating a culture of cooperation, or changes in
 inefficiencies in supervision and      the legal and regulatory framework such as clarifying mandates may
 potentially impair activities of       be needed.
 relevant agencies.




                                                        11
4.      ARRANGEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL CONSUMER PROTECTION: CHALLENGES

26.     Although models of institutional arrangements for financial consumer protection
vary across countries, different countries experience some common challenges
regardless of their actual arrangements. Some of these challenges are described below. They
have been identified through the financial consumer protection country diagnostics conducted by the
WB. Although the WB has conducted more than 30 diagnostic reviews around the world up until
now, this note focuses on the 15 most recent examples—six low-income countries (Malawi,
Mozambique, Rwanda, Tajikistan, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe), eight lower-middle-income countries
(Armenia, Indonesia, the Kyrgyz Republic, Mongolia, Paraguay, the Philippines, Vietnam, and
Zambia) and one upper-middle-income country (Peru).lii The 15 diagnostic reviews covered either
the entire financial sector or only selected parts of it (see table 6).

Table 6: Scope of World Bank Diagnostic Reviews in Selected Countries
                                                                    Scope of Diagnostic
     Country              Classification
                                                    Bank      Insurance NBCIs Securities Pensions
Armenia             Lower-middle-income              X            X          X          X
Indonesia           Lower-middle-income              X            X          X          X   X
Kyrgyz Republic     Lower middle income              X                       X

Malawi              Low-income                         X            X      X       X          X
Mongolia            Lowermiddle-income                 X            X              X
Mozambique          Low-income                         X                   X
Paraguay            Lower-middle-income                X            X      X
Peru                Upper-middle-income                X            X      X                  X
Philippines         Lower-middle-income                X
Rwanda              Low-income                         X            X      X
Tajikistan          Low-income                                      X      X
Tanzania            Low-income                         X                   X                  X
Vietnam             Lower-middle-income                X            X      X       X
Zambia              Lower-middle-income                X            X      X       X          X
Zimbabwe            Low-income                         X            X      X       X          X
Source: World Bank Development Indicators (2015) and Diagnostic Reviews.

27.     The most common challenge faced by most (if not all) the surveyed countries is
the inadequacy of resources dedicated to financial consumer protection. In all of the
surveyed countries, the WB diagnostic reports recommended that the resources and capacity to
address financial consumer protection issues be strengthened. Some countries suffered from a
significant shortage in the number of staff needed to undertake the focused and systematic
supervision of financial consumer protection issues. In Armenia, for example, before the Consumer
Rights Protection and Market Conduct Division was established as a standalone unit, the predecessor
team that looked after financial consumer protection issues had only had four staff members and
inadequate resources to achieve the Central Bank’s consumer protection objectives.
28.     Some countries have found ways to address the lack of resources,
notwithstanding the difficulty of this issue. For instance, by obtaining assistance from other
units within an organization, as has been done in Armenia. The Central Bank of Armenia (CBA) hired
more staff to deal with financial consumer protection and established a Consumer Protection and
Market Conduct Division, which leverages the capacity of other units. More specifically, the Division
closely cooperates with the prudential Banking Supervision Department, and the financial consumer
protection supervision functions are partially carried out by the prudential supervisors on the basis
of detailed market conduct manuals and adequate training.liii

                                                       12
29.     One of the frequently experienced challenges is the lack of a well-articulated
mandate for financial consumer protection regulation and supervision. An agency’s
mandate is its legal authority to carry out its assigned functions in order to achieve defined objectives
and therefore it is important that the mandate be clearly defined. This allows the agency to operate
effectively and be held accountable for its performance. Formally laying down the agency’s
objectives, functions, and mandate in legislation provides an agency with the necessary legal
authority to act, and imbues its activities with democratic legitimacy. The mandate should be
appropriately comprehensive so that loopholes that could create regulatory arbitrage are avoided.

30.     In some of the examined countries, an expressly formulated mandate for financial
consumer protection was missing. On the other hand, Indonesia’s principal prudential and
consumer protection regulator and supervisor for the financial sector, the Otoritas Jasa Keuangan
(OJK, Financial Services Authority) has a mandate that expressly includes consumer protection.
Article 4(c) of the OJK Law states that: “The Financial Services Authority is established with the
objectives that the entire activities of the financial services sector: … can protect the interests of
Consumers and the public.” This formulation is consistent with the strong policy focus that the
Indonesian authorities have placed on financial consumer protection.liv

31.     Yet, as the recommendations from the diagnostics show, the WB often concluded
that the mandate for financial consumer protection needed strengthening or
clarification. In the Philippines, at the time of the WB’s diagnostic review in September 2013, the
Bangko Sentral ng Philipinas (BSP) did not have an explicit mandate in relation to financial consumer
protection. Although the Financial Consumer Affairs Group (FCAG) within the BSP provided some
assistance in raising consumer protection issues, it lacked the power to investigate banks, conduct
onsite and offsite supervision, or impose sanctions. Significant progress has been made since then
as BSP adopted a new financial consumer protection framework in May 2014 and reformed the FCAG
into a separate department specifically charged with consumer protection.

32.     Another challenge commonly identified in the diagnostic reviews was overlapping
or conflicting responsibilities of multiple agencies involved in financial consumer
protection. This often resulted from uncoordinated changes in the legal and regulatory framework
and institutional arrangements. A typical scenario is the following: a country with a general consumer
protection law and a general consumer protection agency expands consumer protection legislation
by adopting new rules specifically protecting financial consumers (e.g., by adding provisions
regarding consumer credit); further, the mandate of one or more financial sector supervisors may
be expanded to cover the financial consumer protection agenda without sufficiently clarifying how
the responsibilities for the protection of financial consumers should be split between the general
consumer protection agency and the financial sector supervisor(s), resulting in overlaps in the
mandates and confusion.

33.     The WB has been consistently recommending clarification of mandates in the case
of overlaps or uncertainty regarding a mandate.lv For instance, in Indonesia, the WB
recommended clarifying overlaps that exist between the financial consumer protection regulation
enforced by the OJK and the general Consumer Law, which is implemented under supervision of the
Ministry of Trade and also applies to the financial sector. In Peru, steps have been taken to coordinate
the mandate of the Instituto Nacional de Defensa de la Competencia y de la Protección de la
Propiedad Intelectual (INDECOPI, National Institute for Protection of Competition and Intellectual
Property) and the Superintendencia de Banca, Seguros y AFP (SBS, Superintendence of Banking,
Insurance and Pensions). INDECOPI deals with consumer complaints in the financial sector on the
basis of existing consumer protection laws, which it enforces (such as the Consumer Protection Code
and the General Law), whereas the SBS has the primary responsibility for setting rules for the

                                                   13
supervision of financial institutions, banks, insurance companies, pension funds, and microfinance
institutions. To ensure mutual cooperation, the INDECOPI and SBS have signed a memorandum of
understanding and regularly hold meetings together.

34.     Further, the WB has recommended strengthening the independence of prudential
supervision and financial consumer protection teams—both externally and internally—
and building specific expertise in financial consumer protection supervision. This
independence and expertise may take different forms and reach different levels (for instance, an
independent team, an independent unit, a specialized agencylvi). The Global Survey shows that
agencies with an independent and specialized financial consumer protection unit more frequently
implement supervisory tools that are better suited to financial consumer protection supervision (see
figure 2). Further, such independence may facilitate the management of potential conflicts of
interests, independent budgeting, and supervision planning.

Figure 2: Financial Consumer Protection Tools (Agencies with a Specialized Unit)




Source: World Bank Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, 2013

35.     In Armenia, in line with recommendations from the WB’s diagnostic survey, the
Consumer Rights Protection and Market Conduct Division within the CBA was created as
a standalone unit. This division is specifically charged with regulatory, supervisory, educational,
and complaints handling functions in relation to consumer protection matters, based on the CBA’s
objective “to ensure essential conditions for the protection of rights and interests of the financial
system consumers.”lvii




                                                        14
36.     Peru provides another useful example of internal separation of the financial
consumer protection unit from the prudential supervision. The SBS has the mandate to deal
with both the prudential and market conduct/consumer protection issues with regard to banks,
microfinance institutions, insurers, and private pension funds. In 2006, the SBS created a discrete
unit, the Gerencia de Productos y Servicios al Usuario (GPU, Products and User Services Office),
which was specifically charged with consumer protection functions, including regulation, market
conduct supervision, financial education, and financial inclusion. However, despite the GPU being
charged with the consumer protection and market conduct supervision functions, consumer
protection responsibilities for private pensions (especially supervision, enforcement, and complaints
handling responsibilities) were still being undertaken by the Superintendencia Adjunta de
Administradoras Privadas de Fondos de Pensiones y Seguros (Deputy Superintendency for Private
Pensions and Insurance). Following recommendations of the World Bank’s diagnostic report in
November 2013, the responsibilities for consumer protection of private pensions were transferred
from the Deputy Superintendency for Private Pensions and Insurance to GPU, which means that the
market conduct and prudential supervisory functions are now completely separated across all sectors.
Moreover, the GPU’s legal status within SBS has also been elevated: it is now a deputy
superintendence (that is, a more senior division within the organizational hierarchy) and has been
renamed the Superintendencia Adjunta de Conducta de Mercado e Inclusión Financiera (Market
Conduct and Financial Inclusion Deputy Superintendency).

37.    The final challenge identified through the diagnostic reviews is the need for better
cooperation between multiple agencies and within an agency. Properly established
mechanisms for coordination and cooperation can improve the effectiveness of institutional
arrangements for financial consumer protection in different ways. Most significantly, cooperation
helps bridge gaps in knowledge (information sharing), leverage resources (for example, the
Armenian Consumer Rights Protection and Market Conduct Division that use the capacity of the
prudential supervisors), and reduce gaps, overlaps, and inconsistencies created by the legal and
regulatory framework. Still, many of the surveyed countries have been struggling to establish
adequate mechanisms for cooperation and coordination between the relevant agencies.

38.     There are also examples of different forms of cooperation between agencies. A
common form of cooperation is the memorandum of understanding (MoU). In Armenia, a complex
MoU has been concluded between CBA and the State Commission for the Protection of Economic
Competition, which is responsible for general consumer protection. The proactive approach to
negotiating this MoU has contributed significantly to mitigating any potential conflicts between the
two agencies. Similarly, in Peru, a MoU between SBS and INDECOPI governs the cooperation
between the two institutions in relation to the exercise of their respective powers and functions.
Finally, in Australia, an MOU has been signed by the market conduct regulator (the Australian
Securities and Investment Commission) and the prudential regulator (the Australian Prudential
Regulatory Authority).lviii

39.     A central steering body that coordinates the activities of the different
stakeholders involved in financial consumer protection is another form of cooperation.
In the Philippines, the National Consumers Affairs Council (NCAC) was established to rationalize and
coordinate the activities of all Philippine agencies charged with consumer protection. In Tanzania,
active steps are being taken to achieve coordination between the relevant financial sector agencies
through the Financial Sector Forum. In Malawi, the Consumer Protection Act provides for the creation
of a Consumer Protection Council that is to coordinate the various initiatives in the area of consumer
protection, but it should be noted that this Council has not yet been formed.



                                                 15
40.      The Appendix provides a comprehensive overview of institutional arrangements
for financial consumer protection in the 15 surveyed countries. This overview reflects
institutional arrangements in a broad sense and includes financial sector supervisory agencies, other
public authorities, industry associations, and consumer associations as described in the CPFL
diagnostics.




                                                 16
APPENDIX. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS IN SELECTED COUNTRIES

                              Financial Sector
             Institutional                              Other Public                                                      Consumer
   Country                    Supervisor and                                          Industry Association
                Model                                    Authority                                                        Association
                                 Regulator
                                                   Armenian Motor Insurers                                             Financial Banking
                                                                               Union of Armenian Banks
                                                   Bureau                                                              College Foundation
                                                                                                                       Pension System
                                                   Ministry of Education       Union of Credit Organizations of the
                                                                                                                       Awareness Center
                                                   and Science                 Republic of Armenia
                                                                                                                       Foundation
                                                   National Institute of                                               Protection of
                                                                               Association of Mortgage Market
                                                   Education of the Ministry                                           Consumers’ Rights
                             Central Bank of the                               Participants of Armenia
                                                   of Education                                                        NGO
             Single          Republic of Armenia
Armenia                                            State Inspectorate on
             (integrated)    (CBA)                                                                                     National
                                                   Market and Consumer         Consulting Center of Credit
                                                                                                                       Association of
                                                   Interests Protection of     Organizations of Armenia
                                                                                                                       Consumers
                                                   the Ministry of Economy
                                                   Financial System                                                    Junior Achievement
                                                                               Association of Insurers
                                                   Mediator                                                            NGO
                                                   State Commission for
                                                   the Protection of
                                                   Economic Competition
                             Otoritas Jasa
                                                   National Consumer
                             Keuangan (OJK)
                                                   Protection Council
                             Bank of Indonesia
                                                   (NCPC)
                             (BI)
             Multiple*       Ministry of           Ministry of Trade
                                                                               Multiple industry associations across
Indonesia    (integrated)    Cooperatives and
                                                                               the financial sector
                             SMEs

                             Provincial
                             government
                             authorities




                                                               17
                              Financial Sector
             Institutional                                Other Public                                                  Consumer
  Country                      Supervisor and                                       Industry Association
                Model                                      Authority                                                    Association
                                  Regulator
                             National Bank of the    State Anti-Monopoly                                             Association       for
                             Kyrgyz Republic         Agency (AMA)            Union of Banks of the Kyrgyz            Financial Inclusion
                             (NBKR)                  Deposit Insurance       Republic
                             Ministry of Finance     Agency
Kyrgyz       Multiple
                                                                                                                     A small number of
Republic     (integrated)    State Service for
                                                                                                                     consumer
                             Regulation and          Deposit Insurance       Association of Microfinance
                                                                                                                     protection
                             Supervision of the      Agency                  Institutions (AMFI)
                                                                                                                     organizations
                             Financial Market
                                                     Competition and Fair                                            Consumers
                                                                             Bankers Association of Malawi (BAM)
                                                     Trading Commission                                              Association       of
                                                     Consumer Protection     Malawi Microfinance                     Malawi (CAMA)
                                                     Council                 Network (MAMN)
                                                                             Malawi Union of Savings and Credit
             Single          Reserve Bank of                                 Cooperatives (MUSCCO)
Malawi
             (integrated)    Malawi                                          Insurance Industry Association of
                                                     About 40 Local          Malawi
                                                     Authorities             Life and Pensions Insurance
                                                                             Association
                                                                             Financial Markets Dealers Association
                                                                             in Malawi (FIMDA)
                             Bank of Mongolia
                                                                             Mongolian Bankers Association (MBA)
                             (BoM)                   Agency for Fair
                                                                                                                     Mongolian
             Multiple                                Competition and         Association of Mongolian Insurers
Mongolia                                                                                                             Consumers
             (integrated)    Financial Regulatory    Consumer Rights         (AMI)
                                                                                                                     Association (MCA)
                             Commission (FRC)        (AFCCR)                 Mongolian Association of Securities
                                                                             Dealers (MASD)
                             Bank of Mozambique
                                                     Ministry of Trade and   Mozambican Association of Banks
                             (BDM)                                                                                   DECOM
                                                     Industry                (AMB)
             Multiple
Mozambique                                                                   Mozambican Association of Micro
             (integrated)    Insurance               Public Prosecutor
                                                                             Finance Operators (AMOMIF)
                             Supervisory Institute                                                                   ProConsumers
                                                                             Banking Training Institute of
                             (ISSM)                  Consumer Institute
                                                                             Mozambique




                                                                 18
                               Financial Sector
              Institutional                              Other Public                                                     Consumer
  Country                      Supervisor and                                         Industry Association
                 Model                                    Authority                                                       Association
                                  Regulator
                                                    Superintendencia de
                                                    Bancos (Banking             Asociación de Entidades Financieras
                                                    Superintendency) (BCP-      (Association of Finance Companies)
                                                    SIB)
                                                    Superintendencia de
                                                    Seguros (Insurance          Asociación de Bancos (Association of
                                                                                                                       Asociación de
                                                    Superintendency) (BCP-      Banks)
                                                                                                                       Usuarios y
                              Banco Central del     SIS)
                                                                                                                       Consumidores
                              Paraguay                                          Asociación Paraguaya de Compañía
              Multiple                              Intendencia de Inclusión                                           de Paraguay
Paraguay                                                                        de
              (integrated)                          Financiera (Financial                                              (Association of
                              Comisión Nacional                                 Seguros (Paraguayan Association of
                                                    inclusion Intendency)                                              Users and
                              de Valores                                        Insurance Companies)
                                                                                                                       Consumers of
                                                    Ministerio de Industria y
                                                                                                                       Paraguay)
                                                    Comercio (Ministry of
                                                    Industry & Commerce)        Confederación Paraguaya de
                                                    Secretaría de Defensa al    Cooperativas (Cooperatives
                                                    Consumidor (Secretariat     Cooperation of Paraguay)
                                                    for Consumer
                                                    Protection) (SEDECO)
                                                    National Institute for      ASBANC (The Bank Association)
                              Superintendence of
                                                    Defense of Competition
                              Banking, Insurance                                Association of Microfinance
                                                    and Protection
                              and Private Pension                               Institutions of
                                                    of Intellectual Property
                              Funds (SBS)                                       Peru (ASOMIF)
              Multiple                              (INDECOPI)
Peru
              (integrated)                                                      Peruvian
                              Comisión Nacional                                 Association of Insurance Companies
                                                    National Consumer
                              Supervisora de                                    (APESEG)
                              Empresas y Valores    Protection Council
                                                                                National Federation of Savings and
                                                                                Loans Cooperatives (FENACRE)
                              Central Bank of       National Consumer
                              Philippines (CBP)     Affairs Council (NCAC)                                             Financial Consumer
                                                                                Bankers Association of Philippines
                                                    Office for Competition                                             Affairs Group
                              Insurance                                         (BAP)
                                                    (OFC) at Department of                                             (FCAG)
                              Commission (IC)
                                                    Justice
              Multiple
Philippines                   Securities and        Philippine Deposit
              (integrated)
                              Exchange              Insurance Commission
                              Commission (SECP)     (PDIC)                      Microfinance Council of the            Inclusive Finance
                              Corporative                                       Philippines                            Advocacy Group
                                                    Department of Trade
                              Development
                                                    and Industry (DTIP)
                              Authority (CDAP)

                                                                19
                              Financial Sector
             Institutional                                Other Public                                                  Consumer
  Country                      Supervisor and                                        Industry Association
                Model                                      Authority                                                    Association
                                  Regulator
                             National Bank of                                  Association of Microfinance
                                                                                                                     Rwanda
                             Rwanda (NBR)                                      Institutions in Rwanda (AMIR)
                                                     Ministry of Finance and                                         Consumer’s Rights
             Multiple        Rwanda Cooperative
Rwanda                                               Economic Planning         Rwanda Bankers Association (RBA)      Protection
             (integrated)    Agency (RCA)
                                                     (MINECOFIN)                                                     Organization
                             Capital Market                                    Association des Assureurs du
                                                                                                                     (ADECOR)
                             Authority                                         Rwanda (ASSAR)
                             National Bank of                                  Association of Banks of Tajikistan
                             Tajikistan (NBT)                                  (ABT)
             Multiple                                Antimonopoly Agency
Tajikistan                   State Insurance
             (integrated)                            (AMA)                     Association of Microfinance
                             Supervision Service
                                                                               Organizations in Tajikistan (AMFOT)
                             (SISS)
                             Bank of Tanzania
                                                                               Tanzania Bankers Association (TBA)
                             (BOT)
                             Registrar of
                             Cooperatives in
                                                                                                                     Tanzania Consumer
             Multiple        Ministry of             Fair Competition          Tanzania Association for Micro
Tanzania                                                                                                             Advocacy Society
             (integrated)    Agriculture, Food       Commission (FCC)          Finance (TAMFI)
                                                                                                                     (TCAS)
                             Security and
                             Cooperatives
                             Social Security                                   Savings and Credit Cooperative
                             Regulatory Authority                              Union League of Tanzania (SCCULT)
                             State Bank of the
                                                                               Rotating Savings and Credit
                             Socialist Republic of   Ministry of Finance
                                                                               Association (ROSCA)
                             Vietnam (SBV)                                                                           Vietnam Standards
             Multiple        State Securities                                                                        and Consumers
Vietnam
             (integrated)    Commission (SSC)                                                                        Association
                                                     Vietnam Competition       A number of other industry
                             Insurance                                                                               (VINASTAS)
                                                     Authority (VCA)           associations
                             Supervisory
                             Authority (ISA)




                                                                 20
                             Financial Sector
            Institutional                              Other Public                                                   Consumer
  Country                    Supervisor and                                        Industry Association
               Model                                    Authority                                                     Association
                                Regulator
                                                  Competition and
                            Bank of Zambia                                   Association of Microfinance
                                                  Consumer Protection
                            (BOZ)                                            Institutions of Zambia (AMIZ)
                                                  Commission (CCPCZ)
                            Securities and
                                                  Competition and
                            Exchange                                         Bankers Association of Zambia
                                                  Consumer Tribunal
                            Commission of                                    (BAZ)
                                                  (CCTZ)
                            Zambia (SECOZ)
                                                  Competition and
                                                  Consumer Protection
            Multiple                                                         Insurers Association of Zambia (IAZ)
Zambia                                            Commission of Zambia
            (integrated)
                                                  (CCPCZ)
                                                  Ministry of Finance and
                            Pension and                                      Insurance Brokers Association of
                                                  National Planning
                            Insurance Authority                              Zambia (IBAZ)
                                                  (MOFNPZ)
                            (PIAZ)
                                                                             Zambian Association of Pension
                                                                             Funds (ZAPF)
                                                  Ministry of Agriculture
                                                                             Zambia Cooperative Federation
                                                  (MOAZ)
                                                                             (ZCF)
                                                                             Insurance Institute of Zambia (IIZ)
                            Reserve Bank of       Competition Authority of   Bankers Association of Zimbabwe
                            Zimbabwe (RBZ)        Zimbabwe (CAZ)             (BAZ)
                            Insurance and
                                                  Competition and Tariff     Credit Providers Association of
                            Pensions
                                                  Commission (CTC)           Zimbabwe (CPAZ)
                            Commission (IPEC)
                                                                             Insurance Council of Zimbabwe
                                                                             (ICZ)
                                                                             Life Offices Association of Zimbabwe
            Multiple                                                         (LOAZ)                                 Consumer Council
Zimbabwe
            (integrated)                                                     Zimbabwe Association of                of Zimbabwe (CCZ)
                            Securities and                                   Microfinance Institutions (ZAMBFI)
                            Exchange              Ministry of Finance        Zimbabwe Association of Insurance
                            Commission (SECZ)                                Brokers (ZIBA)
                                                                             Association of Funeral Assurers
                                                                             (ZAFA)
                                                                             National Association of Cooperative
                                                                             Savings and Credit Unions
                                                                             Building Societies Association




                                                               21
REFERENCES

1) Aligning Financial Supervisory Structures with Country Needs (World Bank Institute, 2004),
   available at http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/0-8213-6002-7 (last visited on
   May 13, 2015).
2) Abrams; Taylor: Issues in the Unification of Financial Sector Supervision (IMF, 2000).
3) Applying Behavioral Insights in Consumer Protection Policy (CGAP, 2014), available at
   www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/Focus-Note-Applying-Behavioral-Insights-in-Consumer-
   Protection-Policy-Jun-2014.pdf.
4) Brix, McKee: Consumer Protection Regulation in Low-Access Environments: Opportunities to
   Promote Responsible Finance (CGAP, 2010), available at
   http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/CGAP-Focus-Note-Consumer-Protection-Regulation-
   in-Low-Access-Environments-Opportunities-to-Promote-Responsible-Finance-Feb-2010.pdf.
5) Carmichael, Fleming, Llewellyn: Aligning Financial Supervisory Structures with Country
   Needs (World Bank Institute, 2004), available at
   http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/0-8213-6002-7.
6) Cihak: One Watch-dog Better than Three? International Experience with Integrated
   Financial-Sector Supervision. Finance a úvěr, 2006, 56, č. 3/4.
7) Consumer Finance Protection with Particular Focus on Credit (FSB, 2011), available at
   www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/r_111026a.pdf?page_moved=1.
8) Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy: Lessons from Nine Country Studies (World
   Bank, 2010), available at
   http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTECAREGTOPPRVSECDEV/Resources/WorkingPaper_C
   PFL_Feb10.pdf.
9) Consumer Protection Laws and regulations in Deposit and Loan Services (World Bank,
   2011), available at http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/CGAP-Consumer-Protection-
   Laws-and-Regulations-in-Deposit-and-Loan-Services-Jan-2011.pdf.
10) Consumer protection: Leveling the playing field in financial inclusion (AFI, 2010), available
    at http://www.afi-
    global.org/sites/default/files/publications/afi_policynote_consumerprotection_en128.pdf.
11) Effective approaches to support the implementation of the G-20 High-Level Principles on
    Financial Consumer Protection (G20, 2013 and 2014), available at
    www.oecd.org/finance/financial-education/g20-oecd-task-force-financial-consumer-
    protection.htm.
12) Chien, Jaeger: Establishing a Financial Consumer Protection Supervision Department: Key
    Observations and Lessons Learned in Five Case Study Countries (World Bank, 2014),
    available at
    http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Publications/TechN
    ote-Belarus-FCP-Dept-FINAL.pdf.
13) Duke: The systemic importance of consumer protection (2009).
14) Financial Inclusion and Development: Recent Impact Evidence (CGAP, 2014), available at
    http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/FocusNote-Financial-Inclusion-and-Development-
    April-2014.pdf.
                                                22
15) Financial Inclusion Overview (World Bank), available at:
    http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/financialinclusion/overview#1.
16) FSA to give way to ‘twin peaks’ system (Financial Times, 2013), available at
    www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/32ebdd78-97bf-11e2-97e0-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3a28srzFB.
17) G20 High-Level Principles for Consumer Protection (G20, 2011), available at
    http://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/financial-markets/48892010.pdf.
18) Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy: Oversight Frameworks and
    Practices in 114 Economies (World Bank, 2014), available at
    http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Publications/CPFL-
    Global-Survey-114econ-Oversight-2014.pdf.
19) Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection (World Bank, 2012), available at
    http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/Good_Practices_for_F
    inancial_CP.pdf.
20) Goodhart: The Central Bank and the Financial System. MIT Press, 1995.
21) Implementing Client Protection in microfinance (Center for Financial Inclusion, 2011)
22) Implementing Consumer Protection in Emerging Markets and Developing Economies: A
    Technical Guide for Bank Supervisors (CGAP, 2013), available at
    http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/TG-Implementing-Consumer-Protection-August-
    2013.pdf.
23) Implementing twin peaks model in South Africa (FSB, 2013) available at
    https://www.fsb.co.za/Departments/twinpeaks/Documents/Twin%20Peaks%2001%20Feb%
    202013%20Final.pdf.
24) Innovation in Retail Payments Worldwide: A Snapshot (World Bank, 2012), available at
    http://siteresources.worldbank.org/FINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/282044-
    1323805522895/Innovations_in_retail_payments_worldwide_consultative_report%2810-
    17%29.pdf.
25) Institutional arrangements for consumer protection agencies (2008), available at
    www.consumer.vic.gov.au/library/publications/resources-and-
    education/research/institutional-arrangements-for-consumer-protection-agencies-2008.pdf
26) Institutional Structure of Financial Regulation and Supervision: The Basic Issues, 4 (World
    Bank, 2006).
27) Issues Paper on Conduct of Business Risk and its Management, 12 (IAIS, forthcoming), a
    draft available at
    http://hb.betterregulation.com/external/Draft_COB_risks_Issues_Paper.pdf.
28) Jaeger, Prigozhina: Market Conduct Supervision in Small Countries: The Case of Armenia
    (World Bank, 2013), available at
    http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Publications/Marke
    t-Conduct-Supervision-in-Small-Countries-Armenia.pdf.
29) Llewelyn: Institutional Structure of Financial Regulation and Supervision: The Basic Issues
    (World Bank, 2006), available at
    http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTTOPCONF6/Resources/2057292-
    1162909660809/F2Flemming


                                               23
30) Levitin: The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau: An Introduction, 8 (George Town
    University Law Center, 2013).
31) Martinez de Luna; Rose: International Survey of Integrated Financial Sector Supervision.
    Financial Sector Operations Policy Department, Policy Research Working Paper No. 3096.
    World Bank, 2003.
32) Mwenda: Legal aspects of Financial Services Regulation and the Concept of a Unified
    Regulator. World Bank, 2006.
33) Mwenda: Unified Financial Services Regulation. The Unfolding Debate in USA. Africa
    Institute, 2003, Vol. 1, No. 2.
34) Masciandaro: Central Banks or Single Financial Authorities? A Political Economy Approach,
    2004.
35) Nier: Financial Stability Frameworks and the Role of Central Banks: Lessons from the Crisis
    (IMF 2009), available at www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2009/wp0970.pdf.
36) Parkinson’s Law (The Economist, 1955), available at www.economist.com/node/14116121.
37) Principles for the supervision of financial conglomerates, 5 (BIS, 2012), available at
    www.bis.org/publ/joint29.pdf.
38) Recent developments in supervisory structures in the EU member states (2007-2010) (ECB,
    2010), available at
    www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/report_on_supervisory_structures2010en.pdf.
39) Reform of the Belgian financial supervisory structure, introduction of the Twin Peaks model
    in Belgium (World Services Group, 2011), available at
    http://www.worldservicesgroup.com/publications.asp?action=article&artid=3839.

40) Taylor; Fleming: Integrated Financial Supervision, Lessons from Northern European
    Experience. Policy Research Working Paper. The World Bank, 1999.
41) The Client Protection Principles (the Smart Campaign), available at
    www.smartcampaign.org/about/smart-microfinance-and-the-client-protection-principles.
42) The European Commission’s Discussion Paper for the amendment of the Directive
    87/102/EEC concerning consumer credit, available at:
    http://ec.europa.eu/consumers/archive/cons_int/fina_serv/cons_directive/cons_cred1a_en.p
    df.
43) The Little Data Book on Financial Inclusion (World Bank, 2015).
44) The Global Findex database 2014, Measuring Financial Inclusion around the World (World
    Bank, 2015), available at http://www-
    wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2015/04/15/090224b082d
    ca3aa/1_0/Rendered/PDF/The0Global0Fin0ion0around0the0world.pdf#page=3.
45) The Reorganization of Financial Services Supervision in the UK: An Interim Progress Report
    (University of Cambridge, 2011).
46) The Structure of Financial Supervision: Approaches and Challenges in a Global Marketplace
    (Group of Thirty, 2008), available at
    http://www.group30.org/images/PDF/The%20Structure%20of%20Financial%20Supervision.
    pdf.

                                                24
47) The “Twin Peaks” Regulatory Model: The Future of Financial Regulation? (Banking Today,
    2014), available at http://www.law.hku.hk/aiifl/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Twin-
    Peaks.pdf.
48) Wilmarth, Jr.: The Dodd-Frank Act’s Expansion of State Authority to Protect Consumers of
    Financial Services, 930, 950, 954 (Journal of Corporation Law, vol. 36).
Diagnostic Reviews of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy
1) Armenia: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. I (World
   Bank, 2012), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Armenia-CPFL-Vol-I.docx.
   Armenia: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II (World
   Bank, 2012), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Armenia_CPFL_Vol_II_final.docx.

2) Indonesia Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. I (World
   Bank, 2014), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Indonesia-CPFL-DiagReview-Volume-I-FINAL.pdf.
   Indonesia Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II (World
   Bank, 2014), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Indonesia-CPFL-DiagReview-Volume-II-FINAL.pdf.
3) Malawi: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. I (World
   Bank, 2012), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Malawi-CPFL-Vol-I.pdf.
   Malawi: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II (World
   Bank, 2012), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/MW_CPFL_Vol_II_Final.pdf.
4) Mongolia: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. I (World
   Bank, 2012), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Mongolia-CPFL-Vol-I.pdf.
   Mongolia: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II (World
   Bank, 2012), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Mongolia-CPFL-Diagnostic-review-volume2.pdf.
5) Mozambique: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. I
   (World Bank, 2012), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Mozambique-CPFL-Vol-I.pdf.


                                              25
   Mozambique: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II
   (World Bank, 2012), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Mozambique-Good-Practices.pdf.
6) Paraguay: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. I (World
   Bank, 2015), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Paraguay-CPFL-DiagReview-Volume-I-FINAL.pdf.
   Paraguay: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II (World
   Bank, 2015), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Paraguay-CPFL-DiagReview-Volume-II-FINAL.pdf.
7) Peru: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II (World Bank,
   2013), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Peru-CPFL-DiagReview-ENG-FINAL.pdf.
8) Rwanda: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. I (World
   Bank, 2013), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Rwanda-CPFL-DiagReview-Volume-I.pdf.
   Rwanda: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II (World
   Bank, 2013), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Rwanda-CPFL-DiagReview-Volume-II.pdf.
9) Tajikistan: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. I (World
   Bank, 2013), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Tajikistan-CPFL-Vol-I.pdf.
    Tajikistan: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II (World
    Bank, 2013), available at
    http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
    Reviews/Tajikistan-DiagReview-Vol1-Comparison-with-Good-Practices.pdf.
10) Tanzania: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. I (World
    Bank, 2013), available at
    http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
    Reviews/Tanzania-CPFL-DiagReview-Vol-I-FINAL.pdf.
   Tanzania: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II (World
   Bank, 2013), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Tanzania-CPFL-DiagReview-Vol-II-FINAL.pdf.
11) The Kyrgyz Republic: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol.
    I (World Bank, 2014), available at
    http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
    Reviews/Kyrgyzstan-CPFL-DiagReview-Vol-I-FINAL.pdf.

                                               26
   The Kyrgyz Republic: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol.
   II (World Bank, 2014), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Kyrgyzstan-CPFL-DiagReview-Vol-II-FINAL.pdf.
12) The Republic of the Philippines: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection in the Banking
    Sector, Vo. I (World Bank, 2014), available at
    http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
    Reviews/Philippines-CP-DiagReview-Banking-Volume-I-FINAL.pdf.
   The Republic of the Philippines: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection in the Banking
   Sector, Vo. II (World Bank, 2014), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Philippines-CP-DiagReview-Banking-Volume-II-FINAL.pd .
13) The Republic of Zambia: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy,
    Vol. I (World Bank, 2012), available at
    http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
    Reviews/Zambia-CPFL-Vol-I.pdf.
   The Republic of Zambia: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy,
   Vol. II (World Bank, 2012), available at
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
   Reviews/Zambia-CPFL-Good-Practices.pdf.
14) Vietnam: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. I & II
    (World Bank, forthcoming)
15) Zimbabwe: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. I & II
    (World Bank, forthcoming)




                                              27
Endnotes:
i  See, e.g. Financial Inclusion for Financial Stability (World Bank, 2013), available at
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/16010/WPS6577.pdf?sequence=1 (last visited on July
20, 2015);
Financial Inclusion and Development: Recent Impact Evidence (CGAP, 2014), available at
http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/FocusNote-Financial-Inclusion-and-Development-April-2014.pdf (last visited
on May 14, 2015);
Burgess, Rohini: Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the Indian Social Banking Experiment (2002), available at
www.imf.org/external/np/res/seminars/2002/poverty/rbrp.pdf (last visited on July 20, 2015);
The Economic Impact of Expanding Access to Finance in Mexico (World Bank, 2009), available at www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2010/04/14/000333037_20100414013416/Rendere
d/PDF/540060BRI0Impa10Boc345635B01PUBLIC1.pdf (last visited on July 20, 2015);
From Pawn Shops to Banks. The Impact of Formal Credit on Informal Households (World Bank, 2010), available at
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTFR/Resources/ClaudiaRuiz.pdf (last visited on July 20, 2015).
ii See The Global Findex Database 2014, Measuring Financial Inclusion Around the World (World Bank, 2015),

available at http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2015/04/15/090224b082dca3aa/1_0/
Rendered/PDF/The0Global0Fin0ion0around0the0world.pdf#page=3 (last visited on May 14, 2015).
iii See, Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection (World Bank, 2012), available at

http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/Good_Practices_for_Financial_CP.pdf (last
visited on May 14, 2015);
Making Sense of Financial Capability Surveys around the World – A Review of Existing Financial Capability ad Literacy
Measurement Instruments, World Bank, 2013. Available at
http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Publications/Review-of-Existing-Financial-
Capability;
Consumer protection: Leveling the playing field in financial inclusion (AFI, 2010), available at http://www.afi-
global.org/sites/default/files/publications/afi_policynote_consumerprotection_en128.pdf (last visited on May 19,
2015).
iv
    Financial consumer protection should be further complemented by financial capability initiatives. Financial
consumer protection regulation helps create a framework for interactions between consumers and financial
businesses. However, in these interactions, consumers should play an active role, which is only possible if consumers
understand financial products and services before buying them, understand their rights and obligations as
consumers, and understand how to exercise these rights and obligations.
v Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection (World Bank, 2012), available at

http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/Good_Practices_for_Financial_CP.pdf (last
visited on May 14, 2015).
vi The note builds on findings from the Global Survey, the Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection,

international best practices as formulated by international standard-setting bodies, literature and academic research
on the subject, as well as more than 30 country diagnostics conducted by the WB in recent years. References to all
sources quoted and materials utilized can be found at the end of this note. The report does not intend to suggest or
prove new concepts, nor does it recommend or promote any specific model of institutional arrangements for financial
consumer protection, as there is no one-size-fits-all model. Instead, it combines and synthetizes the available
research material with the diagnostic reviews conducted by the WB as well as lessons learned from technical
assistance provided by the WB to client countries.
vii See, for example, Institutional Structure of Financial Regulation and Supervision: The Basic Issues, 4 (World Bank,

2006). Please note that this is a rather narrow definition of institutional arrangements. In theory, it is also possible to
talk about institutional arrangements in a broad sense—that is, the relations between, and the functioning of, all of
the institutions involved in the implementation of financial consumer protection: financial regulators and supervisors,
a general consumer protection agency, a competition authority, a private data protection agency, a
telecommunications agency, self-regulatory organizations (SROs), industry associations, consumer associations, other
non-governmental organizations such as advisory groups for over-indebted people, educational institutions, judiciary,
and the media.
viii See, e.g., Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection, 29 (World Bank, 2012), available at

http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/Good_Practices_for_Financial_CP.pdf (last
visited on May 14, 2015) and the G20 High-Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection; Effective Approaches
to Support the Implementation of the G20 High-Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection, available at
www.oecd.org/finance/financial-education/g20-oecd-task-force-financial-consumer-protection.htm (last visited on
May 13, 2015).
ix See, e.g., Global Financial Crisis, Financial Contagion and Emerging Markets (IMF, 2012).



                                                           28
x  See, e.g., G20 High-Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection; Effective Approaches to Support the
Implementation of the High-Level Principles (G20), available at www.oecd.org/finance/financial-education/g20-oecd-
task-force-financial-consumer-protection.htm (last visited on May 13, 2015); Consumer Finance Protection with
Particular Focus on Credit (FSB, 2011), available at www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-
content/uploads/r_111026a.pdf?page_moved=1 (last visited on May 19, 2015);
Dias: Implementing Consumer Protection in Emerging Markets and Developing Economies (CGAP, 2013).
xi Dias: Implementing Consumer Protection in Emerging Markets and Developing Economies (CGAP, 2013), available

at http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/TG-Implementing-Consumer-Protection-August-2013.pdf (last visited on
May 14, 2015.
xii See Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy: Oversight Frameworks and Practices in 114

Economies (World Bank, 2014), available at
http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Publications/CPFL-Global-Survey-114econ-
Oversight-2014.pdf.
xiii Consumer Protection Laws and regulations in Deposit and Loan Services (World Bank, 2011), available at

http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/CGAP-Consumer-Protection-Laws-and-Regulations-in-Deposit-and-Loan-
Services-Jan-2011.pdf (last visited on May 14, 2015); Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy: Lessons from Nine
Country Studies (World Bank, 2010), available at
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTECAREGTOPPRVSECDEV/Resources/WorkingPaper_CPFL_Feb10.pdf (last
visited on Monday 14, 2015).
xiv See, e.g., Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection (World Bank, 2012); and

G20 High-Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection (G20, 2011), available at
http://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/financial-markets/48892010.pdf (last visited on May 14, 2015).
xv For more information, see, e.g., Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection (World Bank, 2012);

G20 High-Level Principles for Financial Consumer Protection;E. Duke: The systemic importance of consumer
protection (2009); Implementing Client Protection in microfinance (Center for Financial Inclusion, 2011); The Client
Protection Principles (the Smart Campaign), available at www.smartcampaign.org/about/smart-microfinance-and-the-
client-protection-principles (last visited on May 14, 2015); Consumer Protection Regulation in Low-Access
Environments: Opportunities to Promote Responsible Finance.
xvi Chapter 7 and Chapter 9(48) of the Regulation on Publication of Information by Banks, Credit Organizations,

Insurance Companies, Insurance Brokers, Investment Companies, Asset management Companies, Central Depository
and Payment and Settlement Organizations Implementing Money Remittances.
xvii Article 133AC(2) of the National Consumer Credit Protection Act of 2010.
xviii Philippine Truth in Lending Act, Republic Act 3765.
xix Article 13 and Article 18 of the Regulation on Transparency of Information.
xx Sec. 1031(c) of the Dodd-Frank Act.
xxi See the European Commission’s Discussion Paper for the amendment of the Directive 87/102/EEC concerning

consumer credit, available at: http://ec.europa.eu/consumers/archive/cons_int/fina_serv/cons_directive/
cons_cred1a_en.pdf (last visited on May 14, 2015).
xxii See: www.fos.org.au.
xxiii See: www.ombudsfin.be.
xxiv See: www.obsi.ca.
xxv See: www.financialombudsman.ie.
xxvi See: www.banking.org.za.
xxvii See: www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk.
xxviii See, e.g., Innovation in Retail Payments Worldwide: A Snapshot (World Bank, 2012), available at

http://siteresources.worldbank.org/FINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/282044-1323805522895/Innovations_in_retail
_payments_worldwide_consultative_report%2810-17%29.pdf (last visited on May 14, 2015).
xxix Issues Paper on Conduct of Business Risk and its Management, 12 (IAIS, forthcoming), a draft available at

http://hb.betterregulation.com/external/Draft_COB_risks_Issues_Paper.pdf (last visited on May 14, 2015).
xxx    Id.
xxxi   Id.
xxxii See, e.g., Applying Behavioral Insights in Consumer Protection Policy (CGAP, 2014), available at

www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/Focus-Note-Applying-Behavioral-Insights-in-Consumer-Protection-Policy-Jun-
2014.pdf (last visited on May 13, 2015).
xxxiii This section uses the term “models of institutional arrangements” (rather than simply institutional arrangements)

to emphasize the fact that these are theoretical models that are unlikely to exist in practice in their pure form, as
described in this section.
xxxiv In the authors’ view, the country with a model closest to the pure Twin Peaks model is Australia, followed the

Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and Belgium. While the institutional arrangements in Canada and the United States
have embraced some important features of the Twin Peaks model (specifically the existence of a specialized agency
dedicated to financial consumer protection), in practice they 29 can be labeled hybrid at best.
xxxv   Please note that the Global Survey was conducted in the form of self-assessment, that is, answers to the survey
questions were provided by the queried authorities and only partially verified by the World Bank team. Consequently,
the data may not be exhaustive.
xxxvi In fact, the total number of twin-peaks countries is higher, including Australia, Belgium, Canada, the Netherlands,

the United Kingdom, and (soon) the South Africa. Canada and the United States of America has implemented models
that combine features of the twin peaks: Canada has established a dedicated Financial Consumer Agency of Canada
(FCAC), whose task is “to supervise federally regulated financial institutions to ensure that they comply with federal
consumer protection measures”. The U.S. has established a Consumer Financial Protection Bureau “to protect
consumers by carrying out federal consumer financial laws”. See, for example, The “Twin Peaks” Regulatory Model:
The Future of Financial Regulation? (Banking Today, 2014), available at http://www.law.hku.hk/aiifl/wp-
content/uploads/2014/09/Twin-Peaks.pdf (last visited on May 13, 2015); Reform of the Belgian financial supervisory
structure, introduction of the Twin Peaks model in Belgium (World Services Group, 2011), available at
http://www.worldservicesgroup.com/publications.asp?action=article&artid=3839 (last visited on May 13, 2015); The
Structure of Financial Supervision: Approaches and Challenges in a Global Marketplace (Group of Thirty, 2008),
available at http://www.group30.org/images/PDF/The%20Structure%20of%20Financial%20Supervision.pdf (last
visited on May 13, 2015); Recent developments in supervisory structures in the EU member states (2007-2010) (ECB,
2010), available at www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/report_on_supervisory_structures2010en.pdf (last visited on
May 13, 2015); FCAC’ s website: www.fcac-acfc.gc.ca/Eng/about/Pages/OurManda-Notreman.aspx; CFPB’s website:
www.consumerfinance.gov/the-bureau/.
xxxvii Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy: Oversight Frameworks and Practices in 114

Economies (World Bank, 2014), available at
http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Publications/CPFL-Global-Survey-114econ-
Oversight-2014.pdf.
xxxviii See the Czech National Bank’s website: www.cnb.cz/en/supervision_financial_market/index.html.
xxxix See the Reserve Bank of Malawi’s website: www.rbm.mw/default.aspx
xl See the Central Bank of Malaysia’s website: www.bnm.gov.my/index.php?ch=en_about&pg=en_intro&ac=641&

lang=en.
xli See Azerbaijan: Technical Note on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II (World Bank, 2009),

available at http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-Reviews/
AZ_CPFL_VolII_EN.pdf (last visited on May 15, 2015).
xlii Vietnam: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II (World Bank, forthcoming).
xliii See The Republic of Zambia: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II (World

Bank, 2012), available at http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
Reviews/Zambia-CPFL-Good-Practices.pdf (last visited on May 15, 2015).
xliv The single agency model is, by definition, integrated because no other agency is involved in supervision of the

financial sector and financial consumer protection. This also explains why the single (specialized) agency model does
not exist in practice, since specialization implies multiple agencies.
xlv See the Central Bank of Armenia’s website: www.cba.am/EN/SitePages/Default.aspx.
xlvi Please note that the list of advantages and disadvantages associated with a particular model of institutional

arrangements is not exhaustive; it has been compiled based on previously published research studies, informal
interviews with different stakeholders, and the authors’ judgment. Also, please note that the advantages and
disadvantages associated with one particular model are not exclusive to that model, that is, there is an overlap of
advantages and disadvantages associated with multiple models. Finally, it is essential to note that in practice there
may be exceptions, due to the multiplicity of factors that affect the actual functioning of supervisory agencies, as
pointed out earlier. For instance, a disadvantage described for a particular (theoretical) model may not materialize in
practice, once the model has been implemented. This can be due to different factors such as the adoption of
mitigating policies (e.g., measures to strengthen governance structures), specific elements of the political culture
(e.g., a strong preference for collaboration rather than competition), or external factors (e.g., the influence of large
international corporations and their corporate culture).
xlvii A financial conglomerate is “any group of companies under common control or dominant influence, including any

financial holding company, which conducts material financial activities in at least two of the regulated banking,
securities or insurance sectors.” See Principles for the supervision of financial conglomerates, 5 (BIS, 2012), available
at www.bis.org/publ/joint29.pdf (last visited on May 15, 2015).
xlviii
       Unit-linked insurance is an insurance policy that combines features of a collective investment product. Typically, a
policyholder purchases an insurance policy together with units that represent investment value and act as an
investment vehicle—that is, the value of units may appreciate or depreciate over time.
xlix See the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada’s website: www.fcac-acfc.gc.ca/Eng/about/Pages/Whowereg-

Entitsrg.aspx.
l See http://www.bnm.gov.my/index.php?ac=2694&ch=en_press&pg=en_press_all.



                                                            30
li  Armenia: Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Vol. II, 5 (World Bank, 2012), available
at http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Diagnostic-
Reviews/Armenia_CPFL_Vol_II_final.docx (last visited on June 11, 2015).
lii The Little Data Book on Financial Inclusion (World Bank, 2015).
liii Jaeger, Prigozhina: Market Conduct Supervision in Small Countries: The Case of Armenia (World Bank, 2013),

available at http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Publications/Market-Conduct-
Supervision-in-Small-Countries-Armenia.pdf (last visited on May 18, 2015).
liv Five Pillars of Indonesia’s National Strategy for Financial Inclusion.
lv For instance, Indonesia, Peru, the Philippines, Rwanda, Vietnam, and Zambia.
lvi See, e.g., Implementing Consumer Protection in Emerging Markets and Developing Economies: A Technical Guide

for Bank Supervisors (CGAP, 2013), available at www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/TG-Implementing-Consumer-
Protection-August-2013.pdf (last visited on May 15, 2015).
lvii www.cba.am/en/sitepages/achfinancialbankingsystem.aspx.
lviii http://www.apra.gov.au/AboutAPRA/Documents/ASIC-MoU.pdf.




                                                          31
