Needs Assessment of the Commercial Courts in Serbia




    1. Background




The purpose of this assessment is to identify the specific needs of the Commercial Courts and
identify future programing for the MDTF-JSS1 Work Plan 2016-2018. The assessment was conducted
from September to December 2015 based on consultations with representatives of Supreme Court of
Cassation (SCC), Appellate Commercial Court (ACC) and Commercial Court in Belgrade, IFC and
Ministry of Justice (MOJ).2

There is a traditional distinction in Serbia between Commercial Courts and courts of general
jurisdiction. Commercial Courts have original jurisdiction over disputes arising from commercial
activities (disputes involving business organizations, business contracts, foreign investment, foreign
trade, maritime law, aeronautical law, bankruptcy, economic offenses, copyright matters,
misdemeanors of commercial legal entities). Their jurisdiction extends to both legal and natural
persons engaged in commercial activities, in cases where both parties are economic operators. When
only one of the parties is an economic operator and the other is not, such disputes are decided by
courts of civil (general) jurisdiction and not by Commercial Courts. As an exception, in bankruptcy
proceedings, Commercial Courts have jurisdiction over all disputes where an economic operator is in
bankruptcy in relation to other economic or non-economic operators.

The commercial jurisdiction in Serbia is organized on two levels: Commercial Courts hear first
instance cases; and the Appellate Commercial Court decides on appeals against lower court
decisions. According to the Law on Court Organization, there are 16 Commercial Courts with
specifically defined territorial jurisdiction. The Appellate Commercial Court generally has appellate
jurisdiction over lower Commercial Courts, decides on conflicts of jurisdiction and provides legal
opinions. The judgments of the Appellate Commercial Court may be subject to an appeal for revision
before the Supreme Court of Cassation (except for bankruptcy cases). The Belgrade Commercial
Court is competent for intellectual property rights disputes for the entire Serbian territory.


1
  The MDTF-JSS is a multi-donor initiative aimed to support strengthening the performance of the Serbian
justice sector in order to facilitate EU integration. For more information about the MDTF-JSS, see
http://mdtfjss.org.rs/en/about-us#.Vkx5S3arTIU
2
  This assessment builds on the Serbian Judicial Functional Review 2014, which provided a comprehensive
assessment of the functioning of Serbia’s judicial system with options and recommendations to inform Serbia’s
justice reform initiatives in view of requirement of the Chapter 23 EU negotiation process. The Serbia Judicial
Functional                Review               Report               is            available              here:
http://www.mdtfjss.org.rs/archive//file/Serbia%20Judicial%20Functional%20Review-Full%20Report.pdf

                                                                                                             1
The main findings presented in Serbian Judicial Functional Review apply more or less equally to
Commercial Courts. The demand for court services has significantly decreased during the last five
years. Production and productivity are more than 100 percent. Caseloads are distributed unevenly
among courts. Average case disposition per judge have declined, yet judges and court staff reported
feeling overburdened with work. Congestion rates are high. The time to case disposition in
commercial litigations is reasonable and in line with EU averages. The poor quality of legislation
causes problems in case processing. There is markedly inconsistent application of the law across the
country. Potential court users often cannot afford to go to court, and mediation has failed to live up
to its promise due to a range of implementation challenges.3

Related to the internal operation of the Serbian judicial system and its contribution to service
delivery, the Serbia Judicial Functional Review finds that: Commercial Courts collect the highest
amount of fees that amounted to 285 percent of their executed budget in 2013; there are significant
ranges of staff ratios in the Commercial Courts; the Commercial Courts have an adequate number of
computers, at a ratio of one desktop or laptop per authorized position. However, courts report that
the use of many older, slower computers impedes the effective use of systems and efficient service
delivery; there is no remote backup of systems or data; related to the infrastructure, the Nis
Commercial Court is in bad condition as well as the Belgrade Commercial Court and the Sombor
Commercial Court.




    2. Demand for justice services – caseloads and workloads



The number of incoming cases in Commercial Courts has decreased significantly, by more than 40
percent from 2011 to 2014.4 Private bailiff reforms influenced significantly the number of
enforcement cases but that is not the sole cause5. Additional causes likely include the economic crisis
and the lack of affordability of justice services reported by the business in the Multi-stakeholder
Justice Survey.6 Amendments to the Law on Enforcement and Security that will enter into force in
December 2015 will remove even more enforcement cases from the courts and transfer the
overwhelming majority of enforcement cases to private bailiffs.7

Figure 1: Demand for justice services in commercial matters


3
  http://mdtfjss.org.rs/archive//file/Serbia%20Judicial%20Functional%20Review-Full%20Report.pdf
4
  Caseload data is based on the SCC Annual Reports, the Serbia Judicial Functional Review 2014 and data
provided by the Commercial Courts during consultations.
5
  Private bailiffs are introduced in 2011. Enforcement cases present more than 50 percent of Commercial
Courts cases.
6
  See:
http://mdtfjss.org.rs/archive//file/Serbia%20Perceptions%20of%20the%20Judiciarys%20Performance%20FINA
L%20EN.pdf
7
  According to the Law parties will have 60 days to decide if they want to transfer cases to private bailiffs or will
stay with court bailiffs. If parties do not decide within the 60 days, than their enforcement case will be
dismissed.

                                                                                                                   2
    Year     All Commercial         All Commercial Courts      BG Commercial Court        BG Commercial Court
             Courts                 Total Cases in Work        No. of incoming cases      Total Cases in Work
             No. of incoming
             cases
    2011                  150.431                  242.408                    65.516                   105.914


    2012                 121.082                   227.972                    44.571                    88.271

    2013                  94.417                   177.188                    35.245                    65.616

    2014                  82.495                   159.707                    31.866                    61.822

    Jan-                  44.817                   121,504                    16.075                    35.768
    June
    2015



On the whole, the commercial jurisdiction is adequately staffed. There are 158 judges, 133 judicial
assistants and 549 non-judicial staff in all first instance Commercial Courts and 27 judges, 32 judicial
assistants and 31 non-judicial staff in the Appellate Commercial Court. The Belgrade Commercial
Court, with 45 judges, 50 judicial assistants and 176 non-judicial staff, is the largest court in the
Commercial Court system. Also, the Commercial Court in Belgrade is the busiest court in the country
and more than 60 percent of all cases are in the Belgrade Commercial Court.

The number of bankruptcy cases has increased significantly in 2015, due to the mandatory
deadline for the implementation of privatization that was introduced in the new Law on
Privatization. This trend will likely remain during the next two to three years, as these cases work
their way through restructuring. Privatization for the entities with socially-owned capital must be
finalized no later than 31 December 2015. If a privatization entity with majority socially owned
capital has not been privatized within the mandatory deadline, the Agency shall file a motion for
bankruptcy of the privatization entity. As a result, there is a need to address this challenge by
adapting the organization of court’s work.

Figure 2: Number of incoming cases in Commercial Courts by case type8
Case type                 No of incoming       2012                   2013                  2014
                          cases 2011

Misdemeanors      of                   4.735                  4.521               3.953               4.278
commercial entities

Bankruptcy                            11.837                 12.958                654                  767

Enforcement                           93.988                 70.902              61.065              53.043

Payment order                          1.614                  1.024                678                  499

Litigation                            31.678                 23.151              22.689              19.564



8
    Annual reports of the Supreme Court of Cassation.

                                                                                                                3
Non-Contentious                        6.579                    8.472      5.378            4.344

Total                               150.431                   121.028    94.417            82.495




Chart 1: Number of incoming cases in Commercial Courts by case type in 2014

              Number of incoming cases by case type in 2014

                                                                        Misdemeanors of commercial
                                                 1%
                                                                        entities
                                  5%    5%
                                                                        Bankruptcy
                 24%

                                                                        Enforcement


                                                                        Payment order
        1%                                              64%

                                                                        Litigation


                                                                        Non-Contentious




On a per judge basis, workloads have fallen. Incoming caseloads per judge fell dramatically in
Commercial Courts and the Appellate Commercial Court. The decrease on average incoming
caseloads per judge is caused by decline in incoming cases.

Chart 2: Number of incoming cases per judge9




9
    Annual reports of the Supreme Court of Cassation.

                                                                                                     4
                                Number of incoming cases per judge
                                              180
                                              160
                                              140
                                              120
   Axis Title




                                              100
                                               80
                                               60
                                               40
                                               20
                                                0
                                                            2011              2012              2013                2014
                   Appellate Commercial Court               61.01             48.31             41.73               36.77
                   Commercial Courts                        99.1              77.48             55.38               47.47


In Commercial Courts the average caseload is 47,47 cases per judge. However, there are
substantial differences in workloads among Commercial Courts in Serbia. In 2014, the busiest
Commercial Courts had three times the number of incoming cases as the least active Commercial
Court. Judges in some small courts are also very busy, while others are less busy. For example, the
Požarevac Commercial Court has the second highest workload of 63,32 incoming cases on average
per judge. The busiest Commercial Court is the Belgrade Commercial Court with 64,38 incoming
cases on average per judge. The two least busy courts in 2014 were Sremska Mitrovica with 22,56
incoming case per judge, and Leskovac with 23,71 incoming cases per judge.


                                Incoming cases per judge per court
 70             64.38 63.32
 60                           52.82
                                      48.84 48.13 46.53
 50                                                       46.03 45.57 43.67
                                                                              41.72 39.85
                                                                                            38.78 36.8
 40                                                                                                      33.31
 30                                                                                                              23.71 22.56
 20
 10
  0




                                                                                                                               5
These findings highlight that caseloads and workloads are highly uneven, despite various reforms
and reorganizations of work. There lay opportunities to improve the quality and efficiency of work
through more equitable distribution of workloads.




     3. Efficiency in the delivery of justice services in Commercial Courts

The performance of Commercial Courts in terms of resolving cases has been mixed. Commercial
Courts reached a peak in total dispositions in 2012, but declined in 2013 and 2014, likely due to the
decrease in incoming cases. Despite lower caseloads in 2014, Commercial Court judges appear not to
have turned their attention to backlog reduction, as they had in 2012.

Commercial Courts average results are 47,77 dispositions per judge in 2014. This is merely half of
the 92,98 dispositions per judge in 2012. There is much variation across Commercial Courts. Belgrade
has a huge impact on the Commercial Court average, receiving nearly half of all commercial incoming
cases and delivering over one-third of the dispositions. However, despite an especially large drop in
incoming cases in 2014, the higher clearance rate was not maintained for that year. Again Belgrade
played a critical role. Although very few courts scored under 100 in either of the last two years, with
falling workloads, higher rates and thus a reduction of backlog should have been expected. A key
question for Court Presidents in Commercial Courts is why this didn’t happen.

At the end of 2014, 76.686 cases were pending at the Commercial Courts, a reduction of more than
30.000 cases compared to 2011. Enforcement cases accounted for more than 75 percent of these.
Once enforcement is set aside as a special issue with special remedies, there remains 18.687 pending
cases in Commercial Courts, 13.577 of which are litigious cases.

Congestion in Commercial Courts has been erratic and the current congestion ratio of 0,77 is of
concern.10 This is particularly puzzling in light of the substantial decrease of incoming cases, and a 20
percent increase in additional judges in 2012. With lower incoming cases and a higher number of
judges, Commercial Courts could reasonably have reduced congestion and attended to their backlog.

Service of process is not a significant problem in the commercial jurisdiction, according to the
Commercial Courts since businesses are not avoiding it. New legislation allows electronic service of
process, however Commercial Courts are lacking IT resources for electronic service of process, so it is
only a “theoretical” possibility.11 Some Commercial Courts, like the Zajecar Commercial Court, have
possibility of electronic filling (USAID SPP support).

Rate of court fee collection is better in the Commercial Courts than in the courts of general
jurisdiction and is around 70 percent. Rate of court fee collection is important since the judicial


10
   The congestion ratio is the number of unresolved cases at the end of one year/the number of resolved cases
during the same year. It helps avoid the mistaken impression that a larger number of carry-over cases is
intrinsically bad. The congestion ratio does not reveal the age of stock. Still, a lower rate is most probably the
natural result of cases received later in the year having to be attended in the next year.
11
   There is a need to upgrade case management system to ensure that courts receive information that delivery
was “successful”.

                                                                                                                6
system is partly funded by court fees. The Commercial Courts collect the highest amount of fees that
amounted to 285 percent of their executed budget in 2013.

Communication between Commercial Courts and other institutions is almost entirely manual,
resulting in the inaccuracies and inefficiencies. Commercial Courts also face the particular problem
of lack of electronic linkage to the National Bank of Serbia, resulting in delay of blocking funds.12 This
results in lost revenue to the courts and the government.




     4. Quality of Justice Services delivered in Commercial Courts


The poor quality of laws causes problems for Commercial Courts, especially overlapping of laws
and conflicting laws. New laws are passed without previous impact analysis and followed by limited
outreach and training.

Poor quality laws also lead to unfair outcomes. More than one-third of judges and prosecutors, and
45 percent of lawyers named the poor legal provision as a source of unfairness. In particular, biased
laws were identified as a cause of unfairness, and a significant number of judges, prosecutors, and
lawyers in the reported that unfair and biased laws negatively affected the fairness of the judiciary
system.

According to the Serbian Judicial Functional Review, more than 80 percent of judges, prosecutors
and lawyers express concerns about inconsistent or selective interpretation of laws and
inconsistent jurisprudence. In order to address this challenge, the Appellate Commercial Court and
its President are organizing sessions of the departments and sessions of the case law department of
the Appellate Commercial Court. In order to involve the first instance Commercial Courts, the
Appellate Commercial Court is organizing two periodic meetings (counseling) per year. However
Commercial Courts have reported that there was a need for more meetings in order to exchange
views among judges to improve the consistency of commercial jurisprudence.

In order to improve the quality of jurisprudence, the Appellate Commercial Court has established
specialized chambers for intellectual property cases, bankruptcy cases, cases with international
elements, banking and finance cases. The specialization should be established in the first instance
Commercial Courts, especially the Belgrade Commercial Court, since it is the biggest Commercial
Court in the country. Extension of jurisdiction provided in the case of bankruptcy13 presents a
challenge for specialization in the Commercial Courts, since Commercial Courts could deal with any
type of disputes related to the legal entity like labor disputes, property disputes, etc.

Appeals are an important mechanism for accountability and control and a good indicator of the
quality of justice services. According to the Annual Report of the Supreme Court of Cassation, appeal

12
   Thousands of enforcement orders to block company accounts issued by Commercial Courts are submitted
manually to the Bank, which then re-enters these data in its system.
13
   All cases and disputes related to the legal entity against which the bankruptcy procedure is initiated are
transferred to the competent Commercial Court.

                                                                                                           7
rates in Commercial Courts are lower than average in civil cases.14 From 83.021 cases decided in 2014
appeals are lodged against 8.827 (10,6 percent) cases and reversal rate is 19,85 percent of cases. This
is a good indicator regarding the certainty of decision making in Commercial Courts.

The work of the case-law department of the Appellate Commercial Court is of great importance for
the harmonization of jurisprudence. Decisions of the ACC chamber cannot be published before the
case law department confirms that decision is in line with the case law. In the situation that the case
law department identifies that the decision is not in line with existing case law, the decision has to be
returned to the chamber to reassess if it stands on the same position or amends the decision in
question. If the chamber stands by its decision, the ACC calls the general session of all judges to
analyze decision and decide if it should be send again to the chamber for reassessment. Even if the
general session decides that decision should be reassessed the chamber could keep the original
decision and change court practice, nevertheless, reasoning has to be strengthen. This mechanism of
jurisprudence harmonization control presents good practice for other courts in the system.

The ACC has a case law database of sorts, but help is needed to improve it. The first version of the
database was built in 1987.15 Currently, the system comprises 10.552 decisions, the oldest dating
from 1987. However, the database platform has not been updated since mid-1990's and is based on
an Windows 3.11 application that can no longer operate on modern computers. As a result, the
system is not user friendly and only a couple of specialized ICT staff can access it. Its use is now
limited to when judges come directly to the IT administrator or case-law department when they are
looking for texts of “older” decisions (from 1990s or 2000s). In order to increase the value of the
database it is needed to migrate decisions to a newer, modern case-law database system. Given that
existing practices among judges and staff are good, there could be much benefit from this upgrade.

Commercial Court presidents, heads of case law departments of Commercial Courts and
commercial judges are meeting in order to discuss relevant common legal issues, but assistance is
needed to organize these regularly. The number of those meetings mostly depends on allocated
financial resources to courts.

Integrity and perceptions of integrity link directly to the quality of decision-making by courts. A
majority of the court users agreed that during court proceedings judges showed integrity.
According to the Perceptions of the Judiciary’s Performance in Serbia 69 percent of businesses with
recent court experience report that their judge was impartial, and 60 percent reported that the judge
engendered trust.




14
   According to the available data and the Serbian Judicial Functional Review, the appeal rates in courts of
general jurisdiction are very high on average, as are reversal rates on appeal. Appeals against Basic Court
decisions in civil litigious cases are high, with an appeal rate of around 22,84 percent, where the appeal rate
against merit decisions is estimated to be around 45 percent.
15
   The old case-law database comprised selected decisions of the federal court, military court, and all lower
level courts in the country. All the decisions officially published by the case-law bulletin/gazette were also
stored in the searchable electronic database. Starting from year 2000, they stopped storing other courts’
decisions in the database and focuses only on decisions of their own court.

                                                                                                             8
Comparing to the widely stated opinions that corruption is present in the judiciary, a relatively
small percentage of the business sector with experience with court cases reported that they
personally resorted to informal means to influence the court.16

A considerable percentage of the members of the business sector reported that companies are
unequally treated. More than half reported that treatment varies dependent on the ownership
structure of the company, and almost half think that company size makes a difference. Almost one
third reported that treatment varies dependent on the company’s activity and its geographical
location.

The overall condition of Commercial Courts infrastructure is poor which affects service delivery.
Poor working conditions are identified by many stakeholders as a significant reason for reduced
quality of court services. Courts commonly occupy buildings designated as cultural heritage sites,
which makes maintenance and renovation difficult and expensive. In addition to maintenance
challenges, some buildings were not designed to be courts and do not provide a functional space.



Picture 1 Belgrade Commercial Court Building        Picture 2 Belgrade Commercial Court Archive




      5. Access to Commercial Court Services



Access to justice is a drag on business climate. Around one-third of business sector representatives
with experience with court cases reported the judicial system to be a great obstacle for their
business operations and 30 percent as moderate obstacle.


16
     4 percent reported to have resorted to informal means in the course of court proceedings.



                                                                                                  9
According to the Serbian Judicial Functional Review, financial access to the court system is the
largest barrier to access to justice for most small to medium enterprises. However, in comparison
to the general population, a smaller percentage of members of the business sector think that the
judicial system is inaccessible to their company due to expenses either related to lawyer or to court.
38 percent of business with recent court experience reported that costs of their court case were too
big or their budget.

Attorney fees create a barrier to access to justice for business, particularly small businesses. 52
percent of companies with 3 to 10 employees cite that attorney-related fees make the judicial
system inaccessible, while 47 percent cite that court fees make the system inaccessible. Although
these percentages decreased with size of the company, they remained obstacles even for larger
companies.

Access to laws and information is also challenge for commercial justice system. Businesses report
that frequent changes in laws and regulations create problems for their operations.17 In order to
provide sufficient information to parties that are not represented by attorneys and to increase legal
certainty and predictability, the Appellate Commercial Court regularly invites parties to send
disputable legal issues. Upon collection of requirements Appellate Commercial Court adopts legal
positions on common legal issues that are published each November in the Appellate Commercial
Court Bulletin.18 Companies would welcome free access to practical guidelines, authoritative
interpretations, and commentaries following new legislation as well as court decisions (case law data
base).

Mediation remains under-utilized. The Multi-Stakeholder Justice Survey reported that 46 percent of
business representatives that had a dispute prefer to negotiate with the other side or resolve it
informally somehow. However, mediation in Serbia was never fully embraced. The Commercial
Courts reported that there is a need for legislative amendments (e.g. law on civil procedure) in order
to give incentive to business representatives to use alternative dispute resolutions.




     6. Existing donor support to the Commercial Courts


     a. The Commercial Courts in Serbia benefited from the USAID support provided through
        Commercial Court Administration Strengthening Activity (CCASA) in the period 2003-
        2008.19

CCASA equipped Commercial Courts in Serbia with a modern IT infrastructure, including computers,
printers and scanners, and a virtual private network; and introduced a statistics gathering system
called Case Data Collection Instrument (CDCI) that collects statistics from all Commercial Courts on
case activities such as case filings and case duration as a key caseload management tool.


17
   NALED tracks 30 laws important for businesses and reports that over the last five years, these laws have
been amended or overhauled 98 times in total.
18
   It is available only though Paragraf commercial data base.
19
   Project budget was $ 13,7 million.

                                                                                                        10
In addition, the project installed a Case Management System (CMS) in all Commercial Courts and
the High Commercial Court20, which introduced a more efficient, on-line, paperless CMS with
random case assignment that resulted in greater transparency and accessibility for the public to the
courts.

A USAID-designed web portal enabled electronic information sharing between the courts and the
public. For the first time, the public has full-time access to a complete listing of all case events
occurring within a Commercial Court case, including hearing schedules, court case statistics - all via
the internet, saving time for the parties involved, as well as court staff.

Due to this support, Commercial Courts developed a reputation as high performers and IT-savvy.
However for that same reason, other donors and also the Ministry of Justice took their attention
elsewhere. Without adequate sustainability mechanisms in place, lack of access to helpdesk,21
support to the commercial jurisdiction declined over time. As a result, equipment and ICT in
Commercial Courts is old and the CMS is not in line with legislative amendments and current needs.22
Only the Appellate Commercial Court updated CMS with internal capacities using court ICT staff.
Some courts indicate that scanning clogs their system’s servers. This is specially problem for the
Belgrade Commercial Court, which requires scanning of huge amount of documents more frequently
and relies more on electronic copies in daily work, so it greater server capability is now critical. The
previous experience of Commercial Courts suggests that improving server capability can improve
document management.

Picture 3 and 4 Belgrade Commercial Court - Server room




     b. GIZ – Legal and Judicial Reform Program

     Rule of Law and Enforcement (RoLE)


20
   In the period of CCASA project court network and name of the courts were different (Appellate Commercial
Court was established in 2010).
21
   ICT vendor agreement with Commercial Courts did not provide access to helpdesk.
22
   Around 80 percent of servers and 60 percent of scanners are more than 8 years old.

                                                                                                        11
Since the autumn of 2013, GIZ has been implementing the “Rule of Law and Enforcement” project
(RoLE) within its Legal and Judicial Reform Program in Serbia. The project focuses entirely on
improving the system of enforcement of civil claims in Serbia. It is financed by the EU under IPA 2012
and will last until the end of 2015.

RoLE has been launched in order to assess the entire enforcement system – both old and new
elements – and propose, as well as implement, solutions to make it more effective. As integral part
of the GIZ Legal and Judicial Reform Program, RoLE follows the same logic of legislation,
implementation, and popularization:

       During its initial phase, RoLE considered improvements to primary and secondary legislation
        in close cooperation with the Ministry of Justice. It produced a comprehensive assessment of
        the current situation and make recommendations. RoLE also was involved in drafting new
        provisions of the Law on Enforcement and Security;

       To ensure proper implementation, the project also strives to enhance the capacity of the
        main beneficiaries: the Ministry of Justice and the Chamber of Enforcement Agents,
        especially in view of securing monitoring and control of the enforcement system.
        Enforcement Agents will also undergo several cycles of training in professional and ethical
        standards as well as legal and business skills;

       The project also has a strong emphasis on raising public awareness of individual duties and
        rights, in order to increase confidence in the system.


    Implementation

Second GIZ Legal and Judicial Reform program has in focus putting laws into practice. Serbia has long
had problems arising from conflicting legislation and a lack of appropriate sub-legislation.

For the implementation phase of the program, the following outcomes are sought:

       introduction of reformed systemic laws, particularly in the civil and commercial areas, and
        the reconciliation of these laws with the European standards;
       support to establishing of an effective and efficient public notary system in Serbia;
       professionalization of insolvency administrators;
       stable institutional support for the Judicial Academy and the Ministry of Justice of the
        Republic of Serbia;
       enhanced capacity of the judiciary and the public administration, especially with regard to
        the implementation of the national reform strategies; and;
       enhanced organizational and administrative capacity of the principal institutions and other
        stakeholders taking part in the Negotiation process in Chapters 23 and 24 of the acquis
        communautaire.



    c. IFC

                                                                                                   12
      Support in organization of education for judges processing bankruptcy proceedings

The Judicial Academy working group has drafted education program for Commercial Court judges.
When drafting the program, the commercial law program group specially prioritized education
related to bankruptcy issues.

Over 70 judges dealing with bankruptcy issues have been identified. To that number should be added
advisors, who are providing more efficient judges’ daily work. The IFC supports the Academy in
delivering 10 one-day seminars, with approximately 20 participants per seminar, according to already
developed program of regular education in this area (by the end of the year 10 will be delivered).

In addition to that, an advanced education program will be developed for bankruptcy issues, which
should be realized as two-day workshop, where judges and advisors, in small groups, could discuss
examples from case law and solve more concrete hypothetical cases. 5 two-day workshops (one for
each appellate territory respectively and two workshops in Belgrade) will be delivered in 2016.

Further, an advanced training program focusing on economic and financial aspects of reorganization
plans and bankruptcy sales will be developed and 5 two-day seminars will be delivered in 2016.



      Support to joint sessions of the Appellate Commercial Court and Commercial Courts for case
      law harmonization

The Appellate Commercial Court has been organizing controls of Commercial Courts in order to
monitor the regularity and effectiveness of the overall work of Commercial Courts. During the visits,
the Appellate Commercial Court identified areas where harmonization of case law is needed. The
Appellate Commercial Court in that sense would receive support for organization of at least 4 such
joint sessions. The IFC will provide support by September 2017.




     7. Identified needs and recommendations for the MDTF-JSS to support



Based on the needs assessment of Commercial Courts in Serbia, there is a list of needs for donor
support in order to improve efficiency, quality and access to the Commercial Courts justice system. It
is not expected that the MDTF would fulfill all needs, however the menu below provides a basis for
Serbian authorities to prioritize requests for MDTF support. Below is a list of the recommendations
and next steps:


A.     Efficiency


     a. Analyze caseloads and workloads and make recommendation for more equitable distribution
        of workloads across the commercial jurisdiction


                                                                                                   13
        Support to the Appellate Commercial Court in establishment of the equal distribution of
        judges and cases among the system. Special attention should be paid to equal distribution of
        bankruptcy cases.

                      Analyze existing caseloads based on managerial reports in the CMS. Provide
                recommendations to equalize workloads, e.g. transfer files from busier courts to
                neighboring less busy courts, when appropriate and preferably during the early
                phases of case processing. (SCC, ACC – short term)

     b. Conduct a functionality assessment of the CMS system in Commercial Courts

         CMS for Commercial Courts was developed in 2005. Since then, legislation has been
         amended significantly as well as operation and organization of courts work so there is an
         urgent need for improvement of the system which would further contribute to efficiency and
         quality of Commercial Courts.
               Develop a cost estimate for identified improvements in CMS that do not require a
                complete overhaul of the system. (MOJ – medium term);
               Assess functionality of CMS to include electronic document flows. (MOJ – medium
                term)

     c. Upgrade the CMS in Commercial Courts and link with the Appellate Commercial Court23

               Based on the assessment, the CMS system would be upgraded, aligned with the new
                legislation and would include new options. (MOJ – medium term)
               The upgrade would also include a training program on case management
                functionality for judges, judges’ assistants and court staff. Provide specific training on
                data entry for court staff (MOJ – medium term);
               Upgrade of the system will require purchase of the limited amount of the equipment
                – data storage and big scanners for the busiest courts;
               Upgrade of the CMS should enable establishment of links between Commercial
                courts and the National Bank, Commercial Registry, Cadaster, Privatization Agency,
                etc.; Development of data exchange protocols and ensure interoperability of ICT
                systems; (ICT Governance Group – medium term)

     d. Support the roll-out of the e-filling and e-archiving mechanisms
        Presidents and court managers of Commercial Courts would have tool for improvement of
        the efficiency within the court.

               Evaluate the e-filing pilot from the Zajecar Commercial Court (ACC, MoJ – short term)

               Make changes as needed, and expand to other Courts (ACC, MoJ – medium term)




23
   The Appellate Commercial Court already upgraded CMS with the internal resources so their system differs
from CMS in Commercial Courts.

                                                                                                       14
                 Upon expansion, shift resources in courts from data entry to tasks which support the
                  modest costs of implementing e-filing. (ICT Governance Group – medium term)

     e. Support the use of court managers and provide training on court management

                        Establish standard job description - duties and qualifications for a Court
                  Manager in certain locations and seek to convert a position under the
                  Systematization Act to a court manager. (ACC, HJC – medium term)

                        Organize court management training for court managers and court
                  presidents (JA – medium term)



B.      Quality

     a. Develop a case law data base (scanning of court decisions and development of the data base
        as the one of the Administrative court)
         The case law data base will present easily-searchable internal electronic register of court’s
         decisions and legal opinions that will enable Commercial Court judges to draw upon model
         cases, sentences and legal opinions when making their rulings, as well as to streamline and
         unify their practices.

                 The Appellate Commercial Court should dedicate one judge and judicial assistant
                  who will assist in selection of cases. The MDTF-JSS will provide assistance in
                  redaction of the case law in line with the Law on personal data protection. The
                  redacted decisions and cases will be made available to the general public and the
                  judicial community through the Appellate Commercial Court’s website (ACC - short
                  term).
                 Training for the use of the database will be provided for the staff of the Appellate
                  Commercial Court (ACC – medium term).
                 The plan for full sustainability for the Case Law Data Base will be agreed with the
                  Appellate Commercial Court. The court leadership should appoint one full-time
                  employee to maintain and feed the data base with new cases (ACC – medium term).

     b. Support training and capacity building for Commercial Court judges and staff

                 Trainings are based on interactive approach and with guest lecturers and limited
                  number of study visits, including peer exchange with colleagues from region). (JA –
                  short term)
                 Adopt a skills-based training program for court staff to enhance performance in their
                  current roles. (JA, HJC – medium term);
                 Organize CMS training for court staff (JA, HJC – medium term).

     c. Upgrade operation of the registry in the Belgrade Commercial Court
         Having in mind that the Commercial Court in Belgrade is the busiest court in the country,
         with high number of users coming to the Court building there is a need to upgrade operation

                                                                                                    15
         of the registry office and increase efficiency of administrative services. Also registry office is
         in the poor condition because of problems with humidity, moisture and mold in the walls.

                Assess the current operations of the Belgrade registry office and make
                 recommendations based on best European practice. (SCC, HJC, Appellate Commercial
                 Court – short term)

     d. Support the organization of periodic meetings for Commercial Court presidents, commercial
        judges and heads of case law departments of Commercial Courts
              Convene more regular counseling (ACC, SCC – short term)


     e. Support the organization of periodic meetings for Commercial Court IT staff and heads of
        registry office
              Convene more regular meetings (ACC, SCC – short term)




C.      Access


     a. Support the implementation of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms

                Create incentives for court users and practitioners to opt for mediation, and monitor
                 the results. (MOJ, SCC – short to medium term)
                Raise public awareness of mediation through websites, brochures, and public service
                 announcements. Introduce a Mediation Self-Help Test, applying lessons from the
                 Netherlands, so that parties can determine whether mediation would benefit them.
                 (MOJ, SCC, ACC – short term)
                Establish a formal Court-annexed mediation program in all Commercial Courts and
                 standards for determining which cases are appropriate for mediation. Strengthen
                 mediation confidentiality requirements, requiring that judges serving as mediators
                 cannot serve as trial judge in the same case and providing trial judges only with
                 confirmation that mediation was unsuccessful rather than the reasons no settlement
                 was reached. (MOJ,HJC – medium term)




                                                                                                        16
